* 1450496
* U.S. Young Observer Program for the 2015 Congress and General Assembly of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC)
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2014,02/29/2016
* Kathryn Hughes, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/29/2016
* USD 49,990.00

Kathryn Hughes and Katherine Bailey Mathae of the National Academy of Sciences
are supported in an award from the Division of Chemistry to support the Young
Observer Program for the 2015 Congress and General Assembly of the International
Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). The objectives of the IUPAC Young
Observer Program include providing networking and mentoring opportunities that
foster interactions of the participants with leading scientists in their field,
helping to nurture a future generation of chemistry leaders, providing
opportunities for sharing research in a global forum from across the chemical
sciences, and fostering international collaborations between U.S. chemists and
their international peers. The Young Observer program will enable those who
might not otherwise be able to attend the Congress and General Assembly to do
so, encouraging the participation of a strong pool of U.S. chemistry talent at
these meetings and in IUPAC activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 12
early-to-mid career scientists (under the age of 45) will attend the 45th IUPAC
Congress and 48th IUPAC General Assembly. The Young Observers will obtain travel
grants as well as associated mentoring, networking and career development
opportunities. The IUPAC Young Observer program has been in operation since 1977
and has introduced approximately 200 scientists to the international issues and
progress in the field of chemistry.