* 1450967
* Collaborative Research: BRAIN EAGER: Stretchable graphene transistors for high signal, high channel count neural recording
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Ethan Minot, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

This award is jointly made by two programs the Instrument Development for
Biological Research program (IDBR) and Emerging Frontiers (EF) in the
Directorate of Biological Sciences (BIO).

A key roadblock to expanding our knowledge of the brain is that existing tools
to probe its function are simply not up to the enormity of the task. Techniques
for recording neural signals allow at most signals from tens or hundreds of
neurons to be recorded, when thousands or even millions are needed. To address
this challenge, improved types of sensors are required that record neural
activity with greater signal quality and are more suited to parallel recording
than current approaches. This collaborative project will develop a new type of
sensor based on flexible graphene transistors. Graphene is an atomically thin
sheet of carbon atoms that exhibits desirable physical, chemical, and electrical
properties for interfacing with biological systems. However, the use of graphene
transistors for single neuron sensing is largely unexplored. Open questions
include the nature of the contact between the neuron and the graphene, the
ultimate strength of electrical signals, and the long-term biocompatibility of
graphene-based electrodes in the brain. Our proposed work will address these
fundamental questions. If successful, this project will ultimately lead to
societal benefits such as better neural prosthetics and new treatments for
neurological disorders. Training opportunities at the interface of nano- and
neuroscience, a key area of need for America?s technological future, will be
available for graduate students.

Graphene can be nanofabricated into arrays of conformable, stretchable
transistors using techniques borrowed from the Japanese paper art of kirigami.
Prior work of this research team has shown that unlike traditional electronic
devices, such graphene transistors are both extremely flexible and can stretch
by > 100% without degrading their electrical properties. The current project
will investigate the electrical and mechanical interactions between kirigami
graphene and individual neurons. Graphene will be cut into different patterns to
optimize the mechanical contact between graphene and single neurons. Wrapping of
graphene on the neuron will be maximized and the graphene will be used to
measure voltage spikes produced by individual neurons, both in vitro and in
vivo. With optimized conformal contact between graphene and neurons it will be
possible to measure a large fraction of the intracellular potential (~ 70 mV).
The semiconducting properties of graphene will also be used to amplify the
bioelectronic signals to robust levels to facilitate multiplexed detection of
thousands of neuron signals.