* 1450427
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of a Novel, Low-Energy Homogenizer Technology for Algal Oil Extraction
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Jeremiah Mpagazehe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 05/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Biodiesel is a renewable energy source that can be used as a drop-in fuel
supplement and replacement for petroleum diesel. Though many biodiesel
production facilities have been constructed, increases in the cost of the
feedstock oil (such as soy oil), from which some biodiesel is made, have created
a significant market need for a low-cost oil alternative that is suitable for
biodiesel production. This team plans to meet this need by using oil extracted
from algae. Algae are small photosynthetic microorganisms which convert sunlight
into oil and other high-value products. Algae can produce more oil per acre than
any other conventional biodiesel feedstock and does not compete with food
production. Though others have looked into producing algae oil on a large scale,
their efforts were largely unsuccessful due to processing costs when extracting
oil from algae. This team has developed a technology to extract oil from algae
at a low cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed innovation is a novel technique
to rupture and extract oil from algae cells that has widespread application to
the dairy/food, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic industries. The technology uses
knowledge about the biomechanical response of algae cells which is input into an
in-house computational framework that optimizes the design of our system to
extract oil from algae. The oil will then be used as a feedstock for biodiesel
production. The technology can also be used as a low-energy homogenization
device which can serve the dairy/food, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic industries.
The proposed project is transformative as the approach described in this
proposal aims to revolutionize algal oil extraction based on first-principles
understanding of fluid mechanics, cellular mechanics, and particle-fluid
interactions.