* 1450509
* Workshop on Advancing Direct Potable Reuse as a Sustainable Water Supply by Engaging the Environmental Community
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Jeffrey Mosher, Orange County Coastkeeper
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 49,973.00

1450509&lt;br/&gt;Brown&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop on Advancing Direct
Potable Reuse as a Sustainable Water Supply by Engaging the Environmental
Community&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The drought in Southern California and in fact
the US Southwest has stimulated people to start to discuss alternative water
supplies. One of the most sustainable supplies is the use of wastewater for
direct potable reuse (DPR). DPR is the process of treating wastewater to
drinkable standards and returning it into the potable supply. It is gaining
attention as a supply alternative with multiple environmental benefits,
particularly for arid and drought-ridden communities. However, DPR is not widely
implemented in the U.S. due to gaps in technical knowledge and insufficient
protocols for achieving public acceptance. The environmental community, which
holds a prominent role in advocacy and public outreach, supports the development
of safe, reliable, and cost effective water supply projects; however, they need
more information to better understand DPR and approaches to support the
implementation of DPR as a sustainable community resource. Armed with this
knowledge, the environmental community can become a strong proponent of DPR
within the broader community. The proposed workshop will provide an overview of
current DPR research, address challenges, and recommend strategies for
successful community outreach. The workshop will be held in the fall of 2015 in
Southern California. Possible topic areas include DPR research and applications,
regulatory issues, public health concerns, outreach challenges, and enhancing
public acceptance. Invited speakers will include academics and water
professionals with expertise and experience in these topic areas. Attendees will
include executive directors and public outreach managers of environmental
nonprofit organizations from arid states such as Arizona, California, Nevada and
Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives and methods for the workshop include:
(1) Organizing a forum for environmental groups to learn more about DPR and its
role as a sustainable water supply; (2) Providing presentations by research
experts on the technical and social aspects of DPR and representatives from
regulatory agencies; (3) Dividing attendees into working groups to identify
challenges, strategies, and solutions to help environmental groups support and
advance DPR as a sustainable water supply; (4) Producing a final workshop report
for dissemination among the environmental community, water agencies, and policy
and decision makers. The workshop is designed to address the question, "What
approaches can the environmental community implement to advance DPR as a
sustainable water supply?" A final workshop report that includes summaries of
the presentations, working group reports, and recommendations will be developed
by Coastkeeper and NWRI and disseminated by the two groups to their respective
networks within the environmental community and water industry. The workshop
will bridge a gap between the scientific community (academic researchers), the
engineering community (water treatment and supply agencies), the environmental
community (nonprofit organizations), and policymakers. While there have been a
number of recent outreach initiatives designed for academia and water
professionals working in potable reuse, there has been a lack of resources
designed to specifically address the environmental community's interest in
sustainable communities and role in advancing DPR. The proposed workshop and
final report, which will be disseminated to the environmental community, will
enhance the technical and social understanding of DPR, giving practitioners and
proponents the tools and knowledge necessary to achieve public acceptance and
support appropriate policy measures. The societal benefits of DPR include
providing a water supply resource that is locally controlled, requires less
energy than other supply options (such as ocean desalination and imported
deliveries), and protects oceanic and inland surface water quality by reducing
wastewater discharge. The final report will enhance outreach, education, and
advocacy efforts by the environmental community.