* 1450726
* 2014 NSF Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation (EFRI) Workshop: Interdisciplinarity and Innovation
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Gilda Barabino, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 07/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Recent reports from the National Academies speak to the weakening of U.S.
competitiveness and the need for a diverse workforce to drive innovation.
Federally funded university research is a proven driver of innovation, and
minorities and women remain an insufficiently tapped talent source. This
workshop, targeted towards women and underrepresented minority engineering
faculty, will be conducted at NSF on August 21-22, 2014. It will provide
participants with opportunities for professional development and a chance to
gain a better understanding of how to identify, conduct and fund transformative
research carried out by interdisciplinary teams. In doing so, the workshop
addresses strategic goals of the National Science Foundation and critical needs
of the nation related to our global competiveness and an improved national
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon past professional development models
employed in previous workshops led by the PI and incorporating programming that
addresses interdisciplinarity and research innovation, this EFRI funded workshop
is uniquely positioned for success. Faculty participants will gain a better
understanding of interdisciplinarity and what constitutes cutting-edge
transformative research, how to bring a team together to define an important
research problem/challenge and develop a strategy to address it, how to lead
interdisciplinary teams and manage large complex projects, and how to network
and exploit opportunities. The workshop format will consist of a series of
informational and interactive sessions over a 1 ½ day period. It is organized to
specifically address professional development, leadership and innovation along
with project management in support of transformative research. Participants will
be recruited from institutions across the country with a special emphasis on
minority serving institutions and presenters will be drawn from the academy of
engineers, federal agencies, senior faculty and administrators, NSF program
officers, and successful EFRI awardees.