* 1450625
* EAGER: Privacy in Citizen Science: An Emerging Concern for Research and Practice
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Jennifer Preece, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 181,047.00

Citizen science is a form of collaboration where members of the public
participate in scientific research. Citizen science is increasingly facilitated
by a variety of wireless, cellular and satellite technologies. Data collected
and shared using these technologies may threaten the privacy of volunteers. This
project will discover factors which lead to, or allieviate, privacy concerns for
citizen science volunteers. The findings could support citizen science by
exploring the privacy protection practices utilized by citizen science
coordinators and volunteers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through interviews conducted
with project coordinators and volunteers, this research explores contextual
factors - including data types, project types, roles, relationships, power
structures, norms, motivations, and values - which may prevent participants from
identifying and articulating privacy violations, or encourage them to contribute
despite identifying privacy concerns. Understanding contextual privacy concerns
provides insights into why and how participants decide to participate, share,
and opt out of citizen science. Additional focus groups with project
coordinators would transform findings into actionable policy and technical
guidelines. The results of this research will include best practices and policy
guidelines for supporting privacy in citizen science. They will be published in
a whitepaper distributed by the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars
and the United States Citizen Science Association, ensuring that broad audiences
in public policy and in the citizen science community benefit from this work.