* 1450562
* Developoment Of A New Subsistence Adaptation In Middle America
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Gerardo Gutierrez, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 84,992.00

Dr. Gerardo Gutiérrez, of the University of Colorado-Boulder, in collaboration
with an interdisciplinary team of US and Mexican scholars, will investigate the
economic and ideological changes that human groups underwent during their
transition from highly mobile hunter and gatherers to settled agriculturalists
in permanent villages, between 3500 to 600 BC in southern Mexico. This is a key
moment in the human history of the Americas because many of the plants that
comprise our present food production economy (such as maize, or corn) were
domesticated during this period. Because ancient foods do not preserve well,
this cultural transition is not effectively understood for the North American
continent. Why did some forager groups experiment with early cultigens and begin
to rely on cultivated plants? How were economic changes reflected in or
encouraged by their beliefs and social structures? Archaeological exploration in
a cave in southern Mexico should provide a better understanding of the adoption
of maize as the primary cereal crop of the New World (and today, a significant
crop in many parts of the Old World). Much of the cave is covered with mural
paintings from this transitional period (Late Archaic and Olmec style) probably
painted between 3500-600 BC. These paintings provide a remarkable opportunity
for insight into what people perceived about the transition from simple
societies in which everyone was more or less equal to much larger societies in
which a few people held sway over many.

Dr. Gutiérrez and his team will explore a dry cave that offers evidence of human
occupation during the transition from a foraging to an agricultural economy.
Sediments in this cave will be analyzed to uncover plant remains which are known
to preserve well in dry caves and evaluate their importance in the changing diet
of the people who inhabited the area. The researchers will also obtain
scientific dates for the mural art and determine the chemical composition of the
ancient paints to assess the sources of their pigments, the application of
colors, and the styles represented. When fully studied, these murals will offer
an unusual window into the ideologies and social beliefs of humans making the
transition to agriculture. This research will be conducted in the Balsas River
Basin of southern Mexico, the region of the Western Hemisphere with the earliest
evidence of corn domestication. A team of archaeologists, paleobotanists,
geomorphologists, art historians and restorers will undertake surface survey,
mapping with unmanned aerial vehicles, x-ray fluorescence analysis, excavation,
obsidian sourcing, and the study of micro- and macro-botanical remains. These
studies will generate new quantitative and comparative data to investigate
changes in landscapes, food production, resource consumption and the formation
of exchange networks to evaluate rigorously the emergence of agriculture and
social complexity in the New World. This research will provide opportunities for
US and Mexican students to be trained in scientific methods, while promoting
cooperation and understanding between academic communities of Mexico and the US.