* 1450791
* Acquisition of a superconducting rock magnetometer
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Julie Bowles, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 440,819.00

1450791&lt;br/&gt;Bowles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports acquisition of
superconducting rock magnetometer (SRM) at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
(UWM). The SRM will support research and research training in mineral and rock
magnetism and paleomagnetism. Fundamental studies in rock magnetism address the
physical mechanisms responsible for the acquisition of magnetism by natural
mineral phases and the processes through which that magnetism is either recorded
with high fidelity or altered by environmental factors. Mineral magnetic
investigations have implications for the development of improved materials for
use in many industrial applications. Paleomagnetism studies address the behavior
of the Earth?s magnetic field through geologic time and have application to
understanding the former positions of continents on Earth, the dynamical
behavior and evolution of the geomagnetic field and for interpreting past
environmental conditions to better constrain the full spectrum of Earth?s past
range of climate conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental studies of how
magnetic phases acquire magnetization and studies of the historical dynamics of
the Earth?s magnetic field based on paleointensity observations as recorded in
magnetic phases in rocks and natural volcanic glasses will be supported. The SRM
will allow studies of weakly magnetized materials and very small synthesized
phases given to the high sensitivity of direct current superconducting quantum
interference device (DC-SQUID) on the requested SRM. Such investigations cannot
be accomplished with an extant but much less sensitive spinner magnetometer in
the investigator?s laboratory. The instrument will be the first of its kind in
the state of Wisconsin and will support regional and international
collaborations. The investigator will develop instrument control software that
will allow for all SRM measurements to be archived and output in a format
compatible with a community mineral, rock and paleomagnetism database (MagIC).
The SRM will support student research training with a focus on attracting
underreprestented students to the geosciences. This support is congruent with
NSFs mission of promoting the progress of science and may advance the national
prosperity and welfare through promoting student training for careers in the
physical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***