* 1450413
* Collaborative Research: SS2-SSI: The Agave Platform: An Open Science-As-A-Service Cloud Platform for Reproducible Science
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Gwen Jacobs, University of Hawaii System
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 804,045.00

In today's data-driven research environment, the ability to easily and reliably
access compute, storage, and derived data sources is as much a necessity as the
algorithms used to make the actual discoveries. The earth is not shrinking, it
is digitizing, and the ability for US researchers to stay competitive in the
global research community will increasingly be determined by their ability to
reduce the time from theory to discovery. Over the last 5 years, the open source
commercial sector has greatly outpaced the academic research world in its growth
and adoption of programming languages, infrastructure design, and interface
development. Problems that were primarily academic in nature several years ago
are now common in the commercial world. Terms like big data, business
intelligence, remote visualization, and streaming event processing, have moved
from the classroom to the board room. However, academic projects are largely
unable to take advantage of many today's most popular and widely used open
source technologies within the context of their campus and shared research
infrastructure. The recently completed, NSF funded, Science Gateway Institute
planning project revealed just how far behind many communities are. In a survey
of over 26,000 NSF-funded PIs, science gateway developers, and leaders in higher
education (i.e., CIOs, CTOs, and others), over 85% of respondents said they
needed help adapting existing technologies to realize the needs of their
gateway. Another 80% said they needed help simply understanding what
technologies were available to them. The research community doesn't just see the
gap, they live it. This project seeks to quickly close the capability gap
between academic and commercial infrastructure by extending and making robust
the Agave Platform, an open, Science-as-a-Service cloud platform for
reproducible science. Essentially, this project will allow scientists to focus
their energies on their science rather than so much on the computing
technologies they use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Agave Platform will
build upon the success of the existing Agave Developer APIs which currently
serve over 20,000 users in the plant biology community. This project includes
three well-defined efforts which will synergistically evolve the current
technology into a sustainable Science-as-a-Service platform for the national
research community. First,it will extend the Agave Developer APIs with
additional services and management interfaces to create a cohesive, self-
provisioning Agave Platform which will enable Science-as-a-Service to the
developer community. Second, the project team will partner with commercial and
academic institutions to create a community driven Application Exchange (AX)
based on Docker container technology to facilitate application transparency,
portability, attribution, and reproducibility. Third, the project will
consolidate existing open source contributions from projects already with the
Agave ecosystem into Agave ToGo, a collection of reference science gateways in
multiple languages and web frameworks. The Agave Platform will democratize
access to software and infrastructure across all areas of science and
engineering by modernizing the mechanisms with which the research community can
utilize and access academic research infrastructure. This will bridge the gap
between industrial and academic research infrastructure and allow researchers to
use a new generation of open source software and technologies. The AX will
enable greater interoperability and accountability in the way computational
science results are published and reviewed. Through the matching investment of
industrial partners, reproducibility, best practices, and rigorous scientific
review will be brought to the mainstream and promoted as a fundamental aspect of
the scientific process in an open, sustainable way. Agave ToGo will make custom
gateways readily available to end users and developers alike. For end users, it
will empower them to focus on domain science rather than computer science. For
developers, it will stimulate innovation and increase the opportunity for
discovery. When combined with the Agave Platform and Application Exchange, Agave
ToGo will enable novice users to create scalable, reproducible, digital labs
that span their office, commercial cloud, and national data centers in a matter
of minutes.