* 1450755
* CAREER SBP Creating Equitable STEM Environments: A Multi-Method Contextual Approach to Mitigating Social Identity Threat Among Women in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2023
* Mary Murphy, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 2,387,089.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty
who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research,
excellent education, and the integration of education and research within the
context of the mission of their organizations. Why do women thrive in some STEM
classrooms and drop out of others, and how does this impact whether they will
continue on in a STEM major? While much previous research focuses on the role of
overt prejudice and stereotyping, the ways in which subtler, situational cues
within STEM classes shape women's experiences have remained largely unexplored.
This CAREER research project begins with premise that STEM professors' beliefs
about students' math and science abilities (termed faculty mindsets) serve as
situational cues that are communicated in STEM classrooms and significantly
influence women's experiences in these fields. By examining how fixed and growth
mindsets are communicated to students and how they shape the learning climate of
STEM classes, this project will integrate research and teaching by creating and
evaluating feasible and practical pedagogical strategies that stoke women's
persistence and performance in STEM. This project is poised to shape best
practices about how STEM faculty could communicate better with students in their
classrooms to support the motivation and performance of all students--improving
STEM education and educator development. Based on the experience-sampling,
longitudinal, and experimental research that comprise this research plan, the
research team will create and evaluate empirically based recommendations and
intervention materials. These faculty tools and videos will be broadly
disseminated and made publically available to multiple stakeholders including
researchers, educators, practitioners, and lay
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this multi-method proposal uses 2
longitudinal and experience-sampling studies, 6 experiments, and a growth
mindset intervention with STEM faculty to identify the cues that connote faculty
mindsets and shape women's interest, aspirations, persistence, and performance.
The experience-sampling and longitudinal studies provide essential, ecologically
valid data about women in natural classroom settings, while the lab experiments
provide rigorous tests of the causal mechanisms underlying the findings. Most
notably, the proposed research is the first to conceptualize and directly
examine the messages that signal faculty mindsets, their influence on women's
science and math outcomes, and to design and evaluate an intervention aimed at
facilitating growth mindset messages in STEM learning environments. The research
extends the idea of mindsets from an individual difference to a contextual,
structural factor in classroom environments. The research is transformative in
that it identifies a new, structural barrier to women's full participation in
STEM fields (fixed ability cues in STEM classrooms), investigates the processes
by which those cues stifle the motivation and performance of women in STEM, and
evaluates an intervention aimed at mitigating that barrier by introducing growth
mindset cues that support the motivation and performance of all students.
Together, these studies press forward the frontier of knowledge as they provide
novel insights about how equitable and inviting STEM environments can be
created.