* 1450807
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing the Regional Fluid Flow System of the Wyoming Salient, Sevier Fold-Thrust Belt: Implications for Orogenic Wedge Deformation and Propagation
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Mark Evans, Central Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 01/31/2019
* USD 76,941.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the role that crustal fluids have
played in deformational processes that created the classic Wyoming salient of
the Cordilleran fold and thrust belt of the western United States. The
Cordilleran orogenic belt is a major tectonic feature consisting of folds and
faults that resulted from convergent margin tectonic activity due to subduction
of the Farallon plate beneath the North American plate about 140 to 50 million
years ago during the Sevier Orogeny. The Wyoming salient is considered to be an
ideal place for this study given that it has been extensively studied and is of
the best characterized fold and thrust belts in the world. The results of the
project will provide insights into how fluids contribute to large-scale
deformation associated with mountain building events, fault zone processes, and
the results will have implications for a variety of disciplines that have
societal relevance, including mineral exploration, hydrocarbon exploration,
hydrology. In addition to the research goals of the project, the project will
contribute to training of graduate and undergraduate students in a STEM
discipline; collaboration between three universities; contributions to research
infrastructure at at Ph.D. granting and primary undergraduate institutions;
incorporation of research results into classroom curricula; and dissemination of
research results via peer-reviewed publications, presentations at professional
geoscience meetings, and by web accessible digital data sets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will innovatively integrate detailed
structural, fluid inclusion, stable isotope, and geochronologic studies along
transects across the curved Wyoming salient into the foreland and along
traverses of key large-scale folds and major fault zones, providing extensive
new regional data sets that relate fluid flow with progressive deformation.
Although previous laboratory studies have provided insights into deformation
micromechanisms and previous field and modeling studies of thrust belts have
revealed the importance of fault zones and evolving topography on fluid flow
systems, quantitative interrelations between regional to local fluid flow and
progressive deformation within propagating fold-thrust wedges remains poorly
understood. This project will build on previous structural studies in the
Wyoming salient, with results synthesized to improve our understanding of
feedbacks between fluid flow and thrust wedge mechanics. The project will test
models of fluid-flow systems within curved fold-thrust belts, including nature
of micro-, meso-, and megascopic fluid pathways; changing contributions of
meteoric-, formation-, and metamorphic-waters during progressive wedge
propagation and development of topography; evolving stratigraphic and structural
compartmentalization of fluid flow as deformation changes style from distributed
layer-parallel shortening to concentrated thrust slip; and propagation of
detachment faults and early layer-parallel shortening in front of the fold-
thrust wedge related to enhanced fluid flow and burial. This project will build
on previous structural studies in the Wyoming salient, with results synthesized
to improve our understanding of feedbacks between fluid flow and wedge
mechanics. The project will combine a variety of methodologies, including
mesoscopic structural analysis and sampling of veins/fracture sets, cleavage,
and minor faults that provided fluid pathways,