* 1450506
* Collaborative Research EAGER: Reliable High Current Density Vacuum Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Saeed Mohammadi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 08/31/2016
* USD 130,000.00

Vacuum electronic devices and systems, which are based on the control of
electron motion through vacuum, have numerous applications including plasma
displays, microwave and terahertz radiation sources for communications and
imaging, scanning electron microscopes, and electronics for extreme
environments. However, devices that efficiently and reliably emit electrons into
vacuum have been challenging due to their low current density and poor
reliability. The proposed project, a collaboration between Purdue University and
Ohio State University, aims to demonstrate new designs for vacuum emitters to
enable them to operate reliably at high current densities. Two complementary
approaches involving two different semiconductors - Silicon and Gallium Nitride
will be used to demonstrate vacuum emitters, guided by detailed electronic and
thermal modeling techniques. The proposed work will enable realization of high-
performance vacuum electronic devices that can be integrated on semiconductor
chips at the micrometer scale. These microscale high current density emitters
would surpass the current state-of-art and could enable a large array of new
applications that exploit vacuum electronics for display, high data-rate
communications, high-temperature electronics, and imaging. The project will lead
to training and education of graduate students in a highly interdisciplinary and
novel area of semiconductor technology, and could lead to several new
commercially relevant applications for vacuum electronic circuits and systems.

This collaborative project will combine the complementary expertise in Si
fabrication and vacuum electronics at Purdue University, and III-nitride
heterostructure and polarization engineering at Ohio State University to
demonstrate reliable high current density emitters. A new approach to Si field
emitters will be investigated to take advantage of current saturation effects in
Silicon with fairly low carrier concentration, The Si emitters will be designed
to control current density through lattice and ionized impurity scattering
limited transport. A parallel approach using heterostructure and polarization
engineering will be pursued to achieve highly efficient field emission in planar
III-nitride semiconductor structures. III-nitride semiconductors have intrinsic
polarization that enables large voltages to be dropped across nanometer scale
distances. This enables field engineering to align the conduction band within
the semiconductor with the vacuum level outside. The polarization engineering
concepts will be combined with ballistic transport in ultrascaled structures to
achieve efficient field emission from III-nitride semiconductor surfaces. The
proposed device will enable high current density field emission in planar
geometries that could be advantageous for several applications. Sophisticated
modeling techniques including 2-dimensional electro-thermal simulations and
Monte Carlo simulations of transport in heterostructures will be developed at
Purdue University and Ohio State University to design and evaluate the vacuum
emitters in both Silicon and III-nitride material systems. Development and
demonstration of micro-fabrication technology for integrated vacuum electronic
devices will be done. The proposed work would lead to better understanding of
field emission from engineered nanoscale structures and III-nitride
semiconductors. The concepts proposed here use promising and novel approaches
for overcoming challenges related to high current density emitters, and could
therefore have transformative impact on the science and applications of vacuum
microelectronics.