* 1450364
* I-Corps Sites:  Michigan Tech Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Site Program
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Mary Raber, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 02/29/2020
* USD 293,026.00

This project creates an NSF I-Corps Site at Michigan Technological
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A typical I-Corps Site is funded for approximately
$100,000 per year for up to three years. The Site funding is used to by academic
institutions to catalyze teams (with amounts ranging from $1,000 to $3,000)
whose technology concepts are likely candidates for commercialization. The make-
up of teams at the Sites is modeled after the composition of I-Corps Teams, and
education at the Sites shares the principles of the I-Corps Curriculum. With the
support and mentorship of the Sites, the teams will learn first-hand about
entrepreneurship and explore the transition of their ideas, devices, processes
or other intellectual activities into the
marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michigan
Tech's innovation success looks to the Sites Program to achieve higher levels of
translating innovations to market through a structured I-Corps Site approach,
particularly at the undergraduate and graduate levels. Also, this project adapts
and applies the recently developed Lean Start-up methodology as a means to
strengthen their innovation ecosystem. By introducing Lean Start-up methodology
to I-Corps Site teams, as in the National Program, it is anticipated that there
will be increased start-up business development and other commercialization
initiatives, increased rate of success of those initiatives, and improved
knowledge and skill development that will be used, shared, and perpetuated by
all faculty, staff and student participants in current and future initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;By strengthening their
infrastructure and support systems with an I-Corps Site, Michigan Tech will be
better positioned to contribute to the economic challenges of the country and
their geographical region. Participation in NSF's I-Corps Site program will
allow Michigan Tech to increase the reach of the program and contribute to the
expansion of start-ups that are critical to the economic and employment growth
required to survive and thrive in the 21st century.