* 1450407
* EAGER: Electrothermal Investigation of Damped Bloch Transport at Extremely High Fields in Wide Bandgap Semiconductor Materials and its Exploitation for New Paradigms in...
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Douglas Yoder, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2017
* USD 158,844.00

Fundamental to the operation of electronic devices is the motion of charge,
which is the origin of electrical current flow. Understanding the nature of
charge transport in bulk materials, across or along material interfaces, and
through even more complex structures is therefore not only requisite for the
development and optimization of present-day electron devices, but is indeed
critical for the process of innovation and for the conception of entirely new
devices offering superior functionality in terms of size, speed, power, and
other performance metrics. Under the influence of extremely large electric
fields, recent theoretical analysis predicts that charge motion at the
microscopic level in the emerging wurtzite III-nitride material system takes on
an entirely new character, radically dissimilar to that which has been observed
in other semiconductor crystals. Specifically, the combined influence of a large
number of electrons, whose individual trajectories are predominantly oscillatory
at the microscopic level, collectively leads to a macroscopic negative
differential resistance which can be exploited for diverse original high-speed,
high-power device applications. The proposed work will generate a thorough
understanding of this new mode of charge transport at the microscopic level, its
implications at the macroscopic level, and provide a solid theoretical framework
with the potential to engender entirely new paradigms for millimeter-wave and
terahertz electronic devices. Results of the proposed research will be
disseminated through conference presentations, publication in technical
journals, and incorporated into courses taught at Georgia Tech at both the
graduate and undergraduate levels. Georgia Tech (GT) is a leading institution
for the education of underrepresented groups in science and engineering. Its
College of Engineering leads the nation in engineering degrees awarded to women
and minorities, and the participation of underrepresented groups in the proposed
research will be encouraged proactively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evidence is
presented for a fundamentally new and unexplored mode of charge transport in the
wurtzite III-nitride material system at extremely high field strengths, with
exciting implications for high-power millimeter-wave and terahertz (THz)
electronics. At the high field strengths which only wide bandgap semiconductor
materials can sustain, the time required for electrons to traverse the Brillouin
zone can in some cases approach and even fall below the characteristic
scattering time for hot electrons. In this extremely high field regime, charge
transport is characterized by damped Bloch oscillation, for which particles
velocities and trajectories in real space are predominantly oscillatory, with
sporadic interruption by momentum-randomizing collisions with phonons which,
paradoxically, lead to a net forward motion. This is very different from the
textbook picture of charge transport at lower field strengths, in which
electrons instantaneous velocities are predominantly thermal and randomly-
oriented. Moreover, electrons participating in Bloch transport exhibit a
negative differential drift velocity as a result of damped Bloch oscillation
which is critically different from other known mechanisms for negative
differential resistance (NDR) in that the drift velocity tends asymptotically
towards zero (rather than some finite value) in the limit of largest field
strengths. This negative differential drift velocity can excite a wide variety
of charge domain instabilities that may be exploited for the generation of high-
power millimeter-wave and THz signals. The proposed effort represents a thorough
theoretical investigation of the phenomenon of Bloch transport, the associated
charge domain instabilities, and its implications for device applications, based
on analytic and semi-analytic methods, as well as electrothermal full-band
ensemble Monte Carlo simulation.