* 1450417
* I-Corps Sites:  Ventureprise Charlotte Launch Program
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2015,09/30/2023
* Na (Luna) Lu, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 419,649.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;With this project, the University of North
Carolina at Charlotte creates an I-Corps Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF
Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UNC
Charlotte I-Corp Site, the Ventureprise Charlotte Launch Program, enables a
substantial expansion of faculty and student customer discovery and startup
participation by building upon programs and resources that are underway at the
University. UNC Charlotte, through its Charlotte Research Institute and
Ventureprise organizations, offers an integrated series of programs that
directly address early idea identification, customer discovery, startup and
growth stage guidance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-Corps Site funding at UNC
improves visibility of entrepreneurship, incent broad student and faculty
participation, and drives commercialization opportunities that leverage the
University's major investment in innovation and entrepreneurship personnel and
infrastructure. The Ventureprise Charlotte Launch Program is likely to yield
insights into best practices applicable to a public university with a diverse
student population that includes many first generation college students. The
program operates in a region with strong corporate operations and modest venture
capital presence and is designed to engage corporate partners in team evaluation
and guidance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;UNC Charlotte
serves more than 26,000 students with a substantial population of
underrepresented minorities (23% African-American and Hispanic) and numerous
students from modest economic circumstances. The UNC I-Corps Site focuses on
this population and on reducing the barriers to STEM entrepreneurial
participation by all motivated and qualified UNC Charlotte
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapidly growing Charlotte region with 2.6
million residents and strong corporate presence participate in the Ventureprise
Charlotte Launch Program through mentor engagement and community entrepreneur
involvement. This creates linkages between the diverse student population and
community resources, strengthening student network access. The I-Corps evidence-
based customer discovery methodologies have broader economic impact as they
infuse the region's innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem. The I-Corps Site
funding increases engagement of University faculty and students with corporate
innovation executives located in the Carolinas. This program strengthens and
expands partnerships among the University, industry, and the entrepreneurial
community. These partnerships directly affect commercialization and are likely
to lead to additional collaborative research and other positive outcomes.