* 1450293
* I-Corps Sites:  An Innovation Corps Site Program at The University of Alabama
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Daniel Daly, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 12/31/2019
* USD 299,999.00

This project implements an Innovation Corps Site Program at The University of
Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and
regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors,
researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
project, the Alabama Innovation and Mentoring of Entrepreneurs center (AIME) at
The University of Alabama expands their existing proof-of-concept center into an
I-Corps Site, to accelerate the commercialization of marketable ideas at The
University of Alabama. The Site nurtures science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) faculty and students, with projects originating from student
work, research, institutional or industrial projects, and creates a local
innovation ecosystem that contributes to a larger, national network of mentors,
researchers, entrepreneurs and investors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University
of Alabama Site provides infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. Working with
their regional I-Corps Node at the Georgia Institute of Technology, The
University of Alabama Site will improve and expand AIME's current innovation
curriculum and training programs. Site funding offers entrepreneurial teams the
opportunity to increase their chance of commercial success through funds for the
acquisition of modest amounts of equipment or materials needed to fabricate
prototypes, travel expenses to consult with potential clients or experts, or
other resources needed to directly advance the goals of transitioning a team's
project into the marketplace. In addition, the Site offers access to resources
and training to the sponsored entrepreneurial teams in order to nurture UA
faculty, staff and students to transition their innovative technologies into the
marketplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The direct impact
is to educate the UA community in technology commercialization, transition teams
to becoming NSF I-Corps trained teams and form start-up companies. The potential
long term impact is to provide them with the education and skills that will
position them to become part of the knowledgeable, creative workforce that will
help the US maintain leadership in critical areas of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The University of Alabama Site provides a
formal structure to nurture entrepreneurial teams and guide the output of
scientific discoveries closer to the development of technologies, products, and
processes that benefit society. AIME has consistently recruited underrepresented
STEM students and the Site will leverage the university's STEM Path to the MBA
program and will encourage and advance minority participation in STEM-based
entrepreneurial activities. In addition to impacting the university community,
this Site program will enhance networking and partnerships through the
involvement of AIME's mentors, who provide a network in their specific
industries. Through providing a database of contacts, providing interaction with
experts and providing top notch seminars, the University of Alabama Site has the
opportunity to increase public participation in STEM activities by providing
modest funds for prototypes and exploration into product-market fit, which
increases the chance of commercial success. The University of Alabama Site has
the opportunity to enhance the value of new ventures and make them better-
positioned to hire employees and create transformative products and services for
the benefit of society.