* 1450650
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Plant Hydraulics with Climate and Hydrology to Understand and Predict Responses to Climate Change
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2020
* John Sperry, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2020
* USD 777,757.00

Droughts threaten the health of the nation's forest resources by reducing tree
growth and increasing mortality from multiple causes including fires and insect
attack. This project will determine when and where forests are most at risk from
drought-induced mortality in the western USA under current and future climate
scenarios. Plant drought responses will be predicted from a theory of water
supply and demand that is based on the physics of water flow. When plants are
photosynthesizing they are also losing water by evaporation through the stomatal
pores that take up CO2 in their leaves. The lost water is replenished by a
passive wicking process that pulls water from the soil into roots and up dead,
water-filled xylem tubes. Drought-induced failure of this water transport limits
the possible rate of water supply, which by theory is associated with reduced
water demand caused by closure of stomatal pores. Consequently, prolonged
droughts reduce growth and transport capacity, creating persistent metabolic
stresses that increase mortality by the "chronic stress hypothesis". A computer
model will combine the supply-demand theory with climatic and landscape causes
of drought stress, including precipitation, groundwater hydrology, and
atmospheric humidity. The model and chronic stress hypothesis will be tested in
greenhouse, plantation, and natural stands, focusing on trees of the
intermountain west. Predictions for the region's forests will be made from
climate projections. Forecasts will inform decisions on land management.
Educational versions of the model will illustrate the combined roles of climate
and groundwater hydrology on plant health. The project is a regionally focused
trial of an approach that can be applied nationally and globally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to identify and characterize the key hydraulic
traits of plants necessary for accurate predictions of how their gas exchange,
vascular performance, productivity, and risk of mortality will respond to
climate change. The context is forests of the mountain west (USA), where
droughts have already caused significant woody plant mortality. The backbone of
the project is a model of the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum that applies
mathematical approaches for soil water flow to plant xylem. Key research
questions include whether the model can be accurately driven by climate and
hydrology, the importance of vascular recovery via xylem refilling, and whether
there is a chronic stress threshold of vascular dysfunction and consequent
reduction in CO2 uptake and productivity that is reproducibly associated with
mortality risk. The utility of the chronic stress hypothesis is that hydraulics
can be predicted from the climate-coupled model, whereas the exact proximal
cause of death is likely variable and less predictable. The integrated model and
chronic stress idea will be tested rigorously in greenhouse, research garden,
and natural settings, including tests of its ability to "hindcast" the current
hydraulic status of montane woody plants in the region from known climate
inputs. The model will predict the severity of droughts required to threaten
western forests, and forecast the immediate impacts of future climate scenarios
for the region. Forecasts will inform forest management decisions. Educational
model versions will promote understanding of the plant-climate linkage. Research
versions will be available via website, because the basic approach is relevant
for analyzing drought impacts on forests of any region.