* 1450936
* BRAIN EAGER: New Tools for Real-Time Imaging of Molecular-Resolution Connectomics of Synapses
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Xiaohong Nancy Xu, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2021
* USD 359,307.00

PI: Xu, X. Nancy&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1450936&lt;br/&gt;Title: BRAIN EAGER: New
Tools for Real-Time Imaging of Molecular-Resolution Connectomics of
Synapses&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance&lt;br/&gt;The successful outcome of
this EAGER project will have a broad impact in neuroscience. The proposed
project will offer new insights into the roles and functions of
neurotransmitters in synaptic plasticity and regeneration. This will lead to the
development of innovative tools for molecular identification and
characterization of roles and functions of multiple types of neurotransmitters,
their receptors, and their interactions and dynamics in synapses at the spatial
and temporal resolution level. These powerful new tools are expected to become
extremely valuable in addressing a wide range of pressing biological,
biochemical and biomedical questions related to molecular and real-time
characterization of functions of single live cells (neurons).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The brain comprises large
number of neurons, which are not continuous. Synapses enable them to communicate
complex and specific commands with each other by passing specific electrical or
chemical signals to another cell. Each synapse contains extensive arrays of
molecular machinery that links the membranes of the coupled partner neurons, an
array of neurotransmitters and their receptors. The aims of this project is to
develop a novel imaging platform, including next-generation multicolored far-
field photostable optical nanoscopy (PHOTON) with photostable multicolored
single molecule nanoparticle optical biosensors (SMNOBS). This platform will
quantitatively image and molecularly characterize roles and functions of
multiple types of molecules (neurotransmitters, receptors) at individual live
synapses in real time at nanometer (nm) resolution. These capabilities will
enable the identification of the roles and functions of single neurotransmitter-
receptor interactions, identify and characterize their roles in modulating and
regulating functions of single synapses and neurons in real time. They will use
the multicolored PHOTON: (i) to quantitatively and simultaneously detect and map
diffusion and molecular dynamics of multiple types of neurotransmitters, their
receptors and their interactions on each synapse with both spatial and temporal
resolutions; (ii) to construct the connection of individual neurons at
individual synapses at the molecular resolution; (iii) to explore the
possibility of creating connectomics to determine the functions and related
molecular pathways of synapses and their roles in neuron and brain functions at
the molecular resolution level.