* 1450560
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Conflict Resolution and Exchange of Temporal Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Wang-Chiew Tan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

An increasing number of applications, such as fraud detection and personal
electronic health records, all rely on the availability of an integrated,
consistent, and query-able view of entities over time. Such a view, implemented
as an integrated archive, consolidates temporal information from different data
sources and creates significant added value by making explicit the times when
facts about the entities are true. The task of creating an integrated archive
remains non-trivial even with the state-of-the-art data integration techniques.
This is a high-risk research project that targets challenging problems in the
nexus of several research areas: data exchange, temporal databases, conflict
resolution and data inconsistency. This project has the potential to make
significant societal impact through the development of a foundational framework
that facilitates the process of consolidating temporal data from different
heterogeneous temporal data sources. It is anticipated that the availability of
such a platform will lead to new classes of applications, particularly those
involving profiling, tracking, monitoring, and understanding of the evolution of
entities over time. This project will involve the research and training of
graduate and undergraduate students in science and engineering, including
members of groups underrepresented in computer science, in pertinent areas of
data integration. Results obtained from this investigation will be incorporated
into advanced graduate data management courses on large-scale data integration
that will be developed and taught at both SUNY at Buffalo and UC Santa Cruz.
Selected material from the outcomes of this project will also be incorporated
into upper-division undergraduate database courses taught at both universities.

This proposal will develop formal foundations and principled solutions to the
problems of exchanging temporal data (i.e., transformations of temporal data
from one format into another) and resolving conflicts of temporal data. The
unique challenge in managing temporal data that underlies all aspects of this
proposal is the management of the discrepancy between the abstract declarative
view of temporal data and its corresponding concrete implementation view. The
general approach adopted by this proposal will be two-tiered: data exchange and
conflict resolution over temporal data are declaratively specified using the
declarative point-based view, while computational tasks required to exchange
data and resolve conflicts manipulate the underlying time intervals. Results
from this investigation will also lay the groundwork for longer-term research
such as answering queries over inconsistent temporal databases. For further
information see the project web site at http://greenwich.cs.ucsc.edu or
http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/~chomicki/.