* 1450370
* I-Corps Sites:  University of Louisville Innovation Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Van Clouse, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 02/29/2020
* USD 299,998.00

This project, at the University of Louisville, establishes an NSF Innovation
Corps (I-Corps) Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites
are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture
and support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into
the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A typical I-Corps Site is funded for approximately
$100,000 per year for up to three years. The Site funding is used to by academic
institutions to catalyze teams (with amounts ranging from $1,000 to $3,000)
whose technology concepts are likely candidates for commercialization. The make-
up of teams at the Sites is modeled after the composition of I-Corps Teams, and
education at the Sites shares the principles of the I-Corps Curriculum. With the
support and mentorship of the Sites, the teams will learn first-hand about
entrepreneurship and explore the transition of their ideas, devices, processes
or other intellectual activities into the
marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the University of Louisville (UofL) I-Corps Site program is to integrate and
leverage existing commercialization infrastructure and capabilities as a
collaborative effort between the Office of Executive Vice President for Research
and Innovation (EVPRI), College of Business' Forcht Center for Entrepreneurship
(Forcht Center) and the STEM programs to establish a sustainable program for the
discovery and commercialization of STEM innovations and stimulate regional
economic development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UofL I-Corps Site team will
recruit and engage STEM researchers and students to facilitate and accelerate
the translation of emerging technologies into commercial products by providing
training and support at all stages of the entrepreneurial discovery process.
Recruited students and researchers participate in an in-depth entrepreneurship
education program, based on Stanford's Lean LaunchPad process, conducted by the
Forcht Center and the EVPRI through Nucleus: Kentucky Innovation Center
(Nucleus). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program implements an Innovation
Discovery Grants mechanism ($1,000 - $3,000) to support entrepreneurial teams
in: 1) utilizing the new UofL Institute for Product Realization to develop proof
of concept and prototypes for promising product ideas based on scientific and
entrepreneurial merit; 2) customer discovery; 3) additional entrepreneurial
training; and/or 4) traveling to consult with potential clients or experts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of the program at the University of Louisville
is to develop a cadre of well-trained, entrepreneurially oriented researchers
and graduates who can effectively evaluate the commercial potential of new
innovations and more expediently develop them as the drivers of new business
development in Louisville, the Commonwealth of Kentucky and the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential
to contribute to Kentucky's high tech industries, particularly in the areas of
science and technology. The UofL I-Corps Site will provide a fertile environment
for STEM entrepreneurial discovery and business development, which will
stimulate the creation and growth of new, high-tech industries and higher paying
jobs, while at the same time develop the entrepreneurial infrastructure of the
state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From an educational perspective, this program will
implement and evaluate a model for training innovators to extend their focus
beyond the laboratory by exploring commercialization strategies for their
innovations. Training outstanding students and researchers with entrepreneurial
skills will help recruit and retain the best and the brightest in Kentucky and
establish an entrepreneurial culture of value to the entire state. This program
will also reach out to attract a diverse student body and group of researchers
from under-represented groups in the STEM fields. The program will expand and
develop a new paradigm at the University of Louisville that capitalizes on
institutional strengths and resources for evaluating the potential, developing
and establishing successful entrepreneurial ventures in emerging technologies.