* 1450230
* CAREER: Exploring New Regimes of Physics to Constrain the Properties of Heating in the Solar Corona
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2023
* Stephen Bradshaw, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2023
* USD 696,497.00

The main research objective of this five-year CAREER project is to investigate
the physical mechanisms responsible for the heating of the solar atmosphere. The
project will explore challenging new regimes of physics, including: (1) non-
equilibrium ionization due to the short timescales of plasma evolution during
the heating events on the Sun; and, (2) substantial heat flux limiting and de-
localization where the global plasma structure must be considered in the
transport of energy through the solar atmosphere. The proposed research program
has two primary goals: (1) learn about the physics of the almost entirely
unexplored regime of very high temperature, low density plasma in the solar
corona; and, (2) use what is learned to find strong constraints on the
properties of coronal heating. The program of research presents the opportunity
to study a new regime of thermal energy transport, in which the global structure
of the plasma must be considered, and to determine how it affects the overall
energy balance of the Sun's upper atmosphere. This will be of value to other
areas of space plasma physics. By combining what is learned from the hot
emission with what is already known from the warm emission, strong constraints
will be placed on the properties of coronal heating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this CAREER project target students at all levels as well as
educators. The physics' topics on which this research is based will be
incorporated into the solar astrophysics graduate course taught by the PI, from
which a graduate student will be recruited specifically to work on this project.
The program also provides opportunities for undergraduate participation in
research. A major part of this project is a summer school program on key
physical science concepts, taught within the context of the Sun, for rising
juniors and seniors in the Houston Independent School District, which educates
predominantly minority and socioeconomically disadvantaged students. The mode of
teaching will be through peer instruction and mentoring in small groups. A high
school teacher will assist the PI, and will develop lesson plans and other
curriculum material based on the outcomes of the summer program for
dissemination to other teachers, publication in educational journals,
presentation at major conferences, and contribution to the Connexions website.
The research and EPO agenda of this CAREER project supports the Strategic Goals
of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.