* 1450999
* RAPID:  Optical Tracking and Spectral Characterization of CubeSats for Operational Missions (OSCOM)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Ted von Hippel, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Irfan S. Azeem
* 07/31/2015
* USD 65,015.00

This is a short-term (one-year) effort to coordinate the development, testing,
and implementation of a new optical tracking and spectral characterization
system for CubeSat missions. Utilizing existing, newly installed telescopes at
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University together with a real-time tracking
architecture and analysis algorithms to be developed under this award the goal
is the development of a capability to support mission operations on orbit for
CubeSats by determining their physical characteristics such as spin, deployment
mechanisms, and optical changes over time. The Special Purpose Inexpensive
Satellite, named SpinSat, is a nano satellite developed by the Naval Research
Laboratory scheduled to be deployed from the International Space Station in
August 2014 and provides an ideal test case for the new system. Other NSF-funded
CubeSat missions are scheduled for launch later in 2014 and will be used as
additional test cases.

The new diagnostic tool will enhance CubeSat mission operations and help assess
and address mission critical situations. Any improvements in satellite
survivability, and increases in operational lifetime, will enable larger return
from geospace science missions that use CubeSats to target outstanding
unanswered questions in the space sciences, space weather, and aeronomy. Any
changes observed in spectral characteristics of the CubeSat fabrication material
over long durations will also provide valuable input for understanding that
material?s survivability in low Earth orbit space environment. Once completed
and tested, the project will make the design and source code for the new system
freely and publicly available and distributed for use by the CubeSat and small-
satellite communities. The system design, once released at project completion,
will be a unique technical resource for use by a large number of student teams
and academic institutions aiming to be engaged in impactful science and
engineering.

In addition, the project offers a unique outreach opportunity to tie the field
of astronomy with engineering and geospace science by educating young minds
about CubeSats and their capabilities. ERAU hosts an Astronomy Open House every
month where the general public is invited to peruse the university?s myriad
telescopes, including the flagship 1 meter telescope. These opportunities will
be leveraged to present to the general public exciting information about CubeSat
and related technologies, as well as geospace science accomplished by small
satellites.