* 1450992
* EAGER: Variance and Invariance in Voice Quality
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jody Kreiman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2017
* USD 239,000.00

This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research aims at developing a database and
model of voice source variability. A model of voice variations across people and
speech tasks could improve the naturalness of speech synthesis systems. In
addition, understanding what aspects of the voice, if any, are speaker-specific,
should aid in developing better speaker identification and verification
algorithms. Knowing how much a person could change his or her voice quality
without compromising their vocal identity, could also inform medical rehab
applications. A better understanding of the human voice will, thus, be of
significant impact scientifically, and for engineering and medical applications.
The project has strong outreach and dissemination programs and fosters
interdisciplinary activities in Electrical Engineering, Linguistics, and Speech
and Hearing Science at UCLA. It will train undergraduate and graduate students
in important cross-disciplinary activities of technological and scientific
significance.

This exploratory project will analyze and discover how the voice source varies
within and across talkers under circumstances that introduce variability in
everyday life situations. The project aims to address three questions: 1) Does
an individual talker's voice source vary significantly across recording sessions
and speech tasks?, 2) Do bilingual talkers show more or less intra-talker
variation when speaking in English?, and 3) Most importantly, how does intra-
talker variability from all these sources compare with inter-talker variability?
Understanding these issues will require a high-quality speech database with
multiple voice samples from many talkers (in this case 200) which will be
collected and distributed to other researchers. Acoustic analyses will reveal
inter- and intra-talker variability in the voice source across different
situations by generating a multi-dimensional acoustic profile of each talker
that specifies the range of parameter values that are typical in the corpus for
that talker, and the likelihood of deviations from that usual profile.