* 1450848
* EAGER: A Graphical Approach for Choice Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Sewoong Oh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 87,937.00

A central problem of interest to operations managers is how to use historical
sales data to accurately predict revenues when offering a particular assortment
of products. Such predictions are subsequently used in making important business
decisions such as assortment planning, new product development, and demand
estimation. Choice models are widely used in modeling the underlying customer
behavior. Traditional choice models are either too simple to accurately reflect
the nature of how people make decisions, or so complex that it is either
computationally intractable to fit the model to historical data or to
subsequently use it to make business decisions. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project studies innovative and novel choice models
that are designed to be computationally efficient for the decision problems of
interest in revenue management and at the same time have strong predictive
power. The results of the research will enable improved business decisions to be
made while simultaneously reducing operational costs. It will provide key
technologies in important business applications of assortment planning, new
product development, brand value evaluation, demand estimation, optimal pricing,
and revenue management. It will generate collaborations among the disciplines of
operations management, economics, cognitive psychology, and machine learning.
The research component is tightly integrated with the education plan, including
a graduate course on probabilistic graphical models. Both undergraduate and
graduate students will benefit from the research activities by engaging in
research and applying the knowledge to solve real world problems.

The suboptimal tradeoff of traditional choice models is due to the fact that
these models are designed without computational efficiency in mind. In this era
of tremendous increase in the scale of data being generated, computational
efficiency is of primary concern. This project will build on graph-based
probabilistic models such as random walks on graphs and probabilistic graphical
models, and will lead to (a) development of new graph-based models for choice
modeling designed for computational efficiency; (b) development of new
methodologies for learning these models from historical purchase data; (c)
development of novel inference algorithms for predicting the customer
preferences from these models; and (d) development of new methodologies for
solving optimization problems in revenue management with these models. The
research will lay foundations of a new graph-based modeling approach for revenue
management. The significance and novelty of the work lie in the fact that the
design objective of the choice modeling is critically different from the
traditional criteria used by economists and cognitive psychologists (such as
describing the functional form of the underlying rational decision processes),
which does not consider the computational efficiency of solving decision
problems in revenue management. In contrast to this, choice models for making
decisions based on massive modern datasets should have computational efficiency
embedded into the models by design. The theory and models developed in this
project will bring together ideas and techniques from probability theory and
graph theory to jointly reason about uncertainty and complexity (such as
probabilistic graphical models and random walks on graphs) as well as insights
and tools from recent advances in revenue management (such as choice modeling
using Markov chains). The research has a potential to advance our fundamental
understanding in how people make decisions when presented with many options.