* 1450895
* BRAIN EAGER:  The Molecular Interactome of Synaptogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Gaetano Montelione, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The primary objective of this EAGER project is to provide infrastructure that
will have broad scientific and social impacts. The scientific information and
reagents generated in this project will impact a wide range of scientific
activities relevant to the NSF BRAIN Initiative. The protein interactions
uncovered will provide the basis for hypothesis-driven research neurobiology
programs in humans and model organisms. Discovery of the ensemble of molecular
interactions of the synaptic cleft, and sharing these data and reagents with the
scientific community, will provide stepping stones for many other projects,
increasing the overall rate of discovery in neuroscience, developmental and
structural biology, proteomics, and related fields. The PIs have a strong
commitment to undergraduate teaching in their laboratories, and have extensive
experience training undergraduate and minority students in research projects.
Several aspects of the proposed BRAIN EAGER project, and the anticipated follow-
up structural and functional studies of synaptic proteins, are ideally suited
for such undergraduate projects. The interdisciplinary nature of our EAGER
proposal, at the interface of neurobiology, cell biology, systems biology,
bioengineering, bioinformatics, and molecular biophysics, will allow the PIs to
expand their undergraduate research programs, and to proactively recruit
undergraduate minority students into these programs, training the next
generation of molecular neuroscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is estimated
that the human brain is composed of about 120 billion neurons, connected through
more than 100 trillion synapses. Despite the astronomical number of possible
connections, during development the brain is wired with exquisite precision so
that brain circuits precisely integrate and process sensory inputs to generate
proper motor outputs as well as behavior and social interactions. At the
cellular and molecular level, each individual synapse requires the apposition of
structurally and functionally matching pre- and post-synaptic protein pairs.
Although there are trillions of synapses, each synapse is likely to be unique.
Synaptic specificity is thought to arise from a code of specific interactions
among adhesive molecules acting across the synaptic cleft. However, if a
synaptic code does indeed exist, it is not known how it works, which synaptic
molecules are involved, how they connect to each other, or their structures. The
PIs will develop a high-throughput (HTP) program aimed at building an
experimentally-validate protein interaction network of synaptic proteins and
exodomains. The protein interactions and functions discovered in this project
will provide a more comprehensive and unified view of the synaptic protein
interaction network, which will enable the scientific community to determine
whether a synaptic code may exist. New molecular pathways will be uncovered.
These efforts to characterize the synaptic protein interaction network will
provide innovative insights into brain circuit formation, and likely result in
totally unexpected discoveries. These results will broadly inform cellular and
molecular neurobiology and open the door to many interdisciplinary follow up
studies.