* 1450854
* EAGER: US-Ignite: Creation of Situational Awareness for Emergency Response and Management Using Next Generation Gigabit Communication Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Nirmala Shenoy, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 09/30/2017
* USD 299,796.00

This US Ignite project aims to develop and demonstrate the integration and
distribution of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) maps and Light Detection
And Ranging (LIDAR) type imaging in support of emergency management. A major
stumbling block for successful response and recovery in the event of an
emergency is the lack of actionable, timely and reliable information flows
between the regional emergency management office (EMO) to the incident command
(IC) and then to incident responders in the field and from the IC to the EMO.
There are multiple informational flows between these coordinating entities and
stakeholders such as utility crews, transportation managers, health services and
the like. Emergency response benefits from having all parties aware of the
"ground truth" associated with the incident. Because of large data set sizes,
current disaster response relies on pre-generated static maps with overlaid
physical notations. There is a lack of real-time method to integrate data,
particularly high density GIS and image applications for emergency response
needs. This project shows the value of high-bandwidth communications in
emergencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines GIS maps and LIDAR
imagery and transmits the combined data to public safety offices via on-demand,
Global Environment for Network Innovations (GENI)-provided Software Defined
Network (SDN) connections for performance and authorization reasons. Several
public safety training exercises using the enhanced data will provide
demonstrations of the system's usefulness.