* 1450684
* I-Corps:  A Shape Memory External Stent for Vein Graft
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Hak-Joon Sung, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 07/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

More than 1 in 6 people die from coronary artery disease (CAD). Over half of CAD
patients require either coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) or percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) techniques. CABG has proven more effective than PCI
in long term clinical studies, but is currently less utilized. This is in part
because saphenous vein grafts (SVGs), the most commonly used conduit in these
procedures, fail nearly half the time within 18 months. This failure is
primarily due to narrowing of the vein graft in a process known as intimal
hyperplasia. When failure occurs, re-do CABG operations are required at the
expense of increased morbidity and mortality. The proposed technology/product,
VasculoStent, is designed to prevent, rather than prolong, intimal hyperplasia
so that the initial CABG procedure is more successful and does not require re-do
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VenoStent, is placed around the outside of SVGs
during CABG procedures to improve adaptation of the vein to the high pressure,
high flow environment of the arterial circulation. It is comprised of a porous
mesh of shape memory polymers (SMPs) that offer several unique advantages
including: custom-fitting to avoid flow-mediated thrombosis and hyperplasia;
robust, facile surgical placement; mechanical compliance to withstand blood
vessel pulsation similar to an artery; biocompatibility and slow
biodegradability; ease of programming and manufacturing; and high porosity to
promote microvascular growth to repair damaged vessel tissue. VenoStent may
result in more prevalent clinical implementation and improvement in patient
outcomes compared to other external stents currently in clinical trials.