* 1450824
* BRAIN EAGER: Panoramic, dynamic, multi-region two-photon microscopy for systems neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Spencer Smith, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This award is made by the Instrument Development for Biological Research program
(IDBR)in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI; BIO
Directorate).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cerebral cortex, the outer layer of
brain, has greatly expanded in surface are during mammalian evolution. This
cortical region is parcellized into discrete functional areas including visual
cortex, motor cortex, and language areas. These brain areas act in concert to
support behavior. Although we have learned much about how to ascribe function to
particular brain areas, we know little about the cellular mechanisms by which
this concert is conducted. Model systems, including mice have discrete
functional areas in their brains. However, the current tools that
neuroscientists have for investigating activity in brains are limited to either
a sparse sampling of neurons distributed over large areas, or a large density of
neurons in a single area just 500-700 microns across. Thus, it is tremendously
difficult to make progress in understanding how cortical areas act in concert to
support behavior. The proposed research project will develop a new type of
microscope which will be able to detect single neuron spiking across a field of
view of several millimeters. This area can encompass five or more cortical areas
in a mouse. In addition, this microscope will contain high speed spotlights for
simultaneously imaging neuronal activity in multiple cortical areas. This time
resolution is crucial for understanding the information neurons encode, their
dynamics during behavior, and their connectivity. A community of scientists
across the US and the globe will be cultivated to disseminate the research, aid
in its implementation, and accelerate collaborative progress in neuroscience.
Workshops will also be held to train scientists in advanced optics and
neuroscience. Ultimately, this project will provide new technology that is
crucial for the BRAIN Initiative, and will foster a broader scientific community
for further progress in the field of two-photon imaging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop a two photon (2p) imaging
system with a wide field-of-view (FOV) (~ 3 mm) and cellular resolution across
the full FOV. To ensure high temporal resolution of recorded activity, they will
also develop multiplexed beams that image brain regions within the FOV at high
speed. These multiplexed beams can be dynamically reconfigured to target
different areas within the full FOV, like spotlights. The approach is to model
the full system and create optimized optical subassemblies, including a custom
objective. The team will make calculated engineering tradeoffs to preserve
cellular resolution while still achieving a wide FOV. High speed scanning will
be developed using resonant scanners and photon counting electronics. This
system is scalable, as the beam multiplexing can be modularized, and multiple
modules can be stacked to increase the number of beams, so long as the
fluorescence lifetime is shorter than the interval between laser pulses. Thus,
the Trepan2p (Twin-Region, Panoramic 2p), will enable direct measurements of
cross-correlations and moment-to-moment, dynamics in extended brain networks.
This technology will enable previously impossible experiments, imaging neuronal
activity with single cell resolution across extended neuronal circuitry in an
array of model systems including mice and primates.