* 1450429
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Proposal: Performance Application Programming Interface for Extreme-Scale Environments (PAPI-EX)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Heike Jagode, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,126,446.00

Modern High Performance Computing (HPC) systems continue to increase in size and
complexity. Tools to measure application performance in these increasingly
complex environments must also increase the richness of their measurements to
provide insights into the increasingly intricate ways in which software and
hardware interact. The PAPI performance-monitoring library has provided a clear,
portable interface to the hardware performance counters available on all modern
CPUs and some other components of interest (scattered across the chip and
system). Widely deployed and widely used, PAPI has established itself as
fundamental software infrastructure, not only for the scientific computing
community, but for many industry users of HPC as well. But the radical changes
in processor and system design that have occurred over the past several years
pose new challenges to PAPI and the HPC software infrastructure as a whole. The
PAPI-EX project integrates critical PAPI enhancements that flow from both
governmental and industry research investments, focusing on processor and system
design changes that are expected to be present in every extreme scale platform
on the path to exascale computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary impact of
PAPI-EX is a direct function of the importance of the PAPI library. PAPI has
been in predominant use by tool developers, major national HPC centers, system
vendors, and application developers for over 15 years. PAPI-EX builds on that
foundation. As important research infrastructure, the PAPI-EX project allows
PAPI to continue to play its essential role in the face of the revolutionary
changes in the design and scale of new systems. In terms of enhancing discovery
and education, the list of partners working with PAPI-EX includes NSF computing
centers, major tool developers, major system vendors, and individual community
leaders, and this diverse group will help facilitate training sessions, targeted
workshops, and mini-symposia at national and international meetings. Finally,
the active promotion of PAPI by many major system vendors means that PAPI, and
therefore PAPI-EX, will continue to deliver major benefits for government and
industry in many domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PAPI-EX addresses a hardware
environment in which the cores of current and future multicore CPUs share
various performance-critical resources (a.k.a., 'inter-core' resources),
including power management, on-chip networks, the memory hierarchy, and memory
controllers between cores. Failure to manage contention for these 'inter-core'
resources has already become a major drag on overall application performance.
Consequently, the lack of ability to reveal the actual behavior of these
resources at a low level, has become very problematic for the users of the many
performance tools (e.g., TAU, HPCToolkit, Open|SpeedShop, Vampir, Scalasca,
CrayPat, Active Harmony, etc.). PAPI-EX enhances and extends PAPI to solve this
critical problem and prepare it to play its well-established role in HPC
performance optimization. Accordingly, PAPI-EX targets the following objectives:
(1) Develop shared hardware counter support that includes system-wide and inter-
core measurements; (2) Provide support for data-flow based runtime systems; (3)
Create a sampling interface to record streams of performance data with relevant
context; (4) Combine an easy-to-use tool for text-based application performance
analysis with updates to PAPI?s high-level API to create a basic, ?out of the
box? instrumentation API.