* 1450350
* I-Corps Sites:  University of Iowa - Building an Integrated Innovation and Entrepreneurial Ecosystem in America's Heartland
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2021
* David Hensley, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 359,989.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to establish an I-Corps Site at
the University of Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps)
Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to
nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their technology
concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources,
networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to
transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team
applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and
contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Iowa's (UI)
I-Corps Site accelerates commercialization of technologies developed by UI
faculty, students and community-based entrepreneurs and has invested in campus-
wide infrastructure to foster innovation and technology commercialization. Core
university entrepreneurship and technology commercialization operating units are
closely aligned to ensure effective and rapid implementation of the UI I-Corps
program. The UI has strong working relationships with external stakeholders for
identifying experienced entrepreneurial leaders and mentors and securing
financial capital from angel investors, venture capitalists and public sector
programs to support UI I-Corps teams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of
a UI I-Corps program significantly improves the campus' entrepreneurial eco-
system by providing funding for new strategic investments in entrepreneurship
education and support while leveraging existing commercialization
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the core of the UI I-Corps program is
entrepreneurial training; UI Venture School is an entrepreneurial training
program based on the LeanLaunch Pad and Business Model Canvas. The UI offers 6-8
entrepreneurial educational programs annually, serving a minimum of 30
commercialization teams. In addition to training, the university launches 1)
several business and technical support initiatives for I-Corps teams including
the Summer Accelerator-a 90-day new venture launch program, 2) UI ProtoLabs-a
prototype development program, 3) UI Ventures-a comprehensive technical and
business development initiative, 4) UI Mentoring-a mentoring program connecting
UI faculty and students to entrepreneurs, investors and technical experts, and
5) a SBIR/STTR grant development assistance program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The UI I-Corps program
incorporates mechanisms that may demonstrate the potential for how universities
can successfully build a campus-wide, interconnected entrepreneurial ecosystem
through interdisciplinary education and innovation, collaboration with colleges,
centers, and research units, and partnerships with the private sector. UI
I-Corps program is expected to: increase the number of UI startup companies;
intensify interdisciplinary collaborations among faculty, students,
entrepreneurs, investors and private sector companies; expand the
entrepreneurial management talent of UI faculty and student entrepreneurs; and
support the development and commercialization of new technologies designed to
solve significant societal challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, female
entrepreneurs and female led startup companies is the focus of the UI I-Corps
project. Startup companies led by female CEOs and CTOs represent a small
fraction of entrepreneurs. The goal of the BI is to increase the number of
female entrepreneurs on campus to be equal to their male counterpart within 5
years. Key elements of the BI approach include: 1) targeted grant funding for
Gap and startup activities for female entrepreneurs, 2) one-on-one mentoring
that pairs successful female entrepreneurs with each new female led startup, 3)
formal recognition of accomplishments, grants and awards by female
entrepreneurs, 4) bringing successful hi-tech female entrepreneurs to campus for
publicized seminars and one-on-one sessions, 5) developing a network of female
entrepreneurs for support, feedback and social connections, and 6) instituting
an entrepreneurial leave of absence with special emphasis for female
entrepreneurs.