* 1450344
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Task-Based Environment for Scientific Simulation at Extreme Scale (TESSE)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Robert Harrison, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 04/30/2019
* USD 622,808.00

This project, TESSE, is developing a new-generation programming environment that
uniquely address the needs of emerging computational models in chemistry and
other fields, and allowing these models to reap the benefits of the computer
hardware of tomorrow. The project thus is bringing closer the ability to predict
properties of matter and design matter transformations of importance to the
technological leadership and energy security of the US. TESSE's impact has
scientific, cyberinfrastructure, and interdisciplinary educational aspects.
TESSE helps carry widely used scientific applications (NWChem, MADNESS, MPQC,
etc.) into a whole new generation of many-core and accelerated architectures,
while at the same time dramatically improving programmer productivity. In terms
of cyberinfrastructure, TESSE's PaRSEC runtime system delivers capabilities that
many libraries and advanced applications will require for high performance on
large scale and hybridized systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project, Task-based Environment for Scientific Simulation at Extreme Scale
(TESSE), are to design and demonstrate via substantial scientific simulations
within chemistry and other disciplines a prototype software framework that
provides a groundbreaking response to the twin problems of portable performance
and programmer productivity for advanced scientific applications on emerging
massively-parallel, hybrid, many-core systems. TESSE will create a viable
foundation for a new generation of science codes, one which enables even more
rapid exploration of new physical models, provides greatly enhanced performance
portability through directed acyclic graph (DAG) scheduling and auto-tuned
kernels, and works towards full interoperability between major chemistry
packages through compatible runtimes and data structures. TESSE will mature to
become a standard, widely available, community-based and broadly-applicable
parallel programming environment complementing and rivaling MPI/OpenMP. This is
needed due to the widely appreciated shortfalls of existing mainstream
programming models and the already huge successes of the existing DAG-based
runtimes that are the foundation of the next generation of NSF- and DOE-
supported (Sca)LAPACK high-performance linear algebra libraries.