* 1450620
* EAGER: Exploring the Relation between BMI and Visual Appearance of Face and Body
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Guodong Guo, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,113.00

Body mass index (BMI) is a measure of the ratio between an individual's weight
and height, which is an important parameter to characterize human bodies into
four categories, i.e., underweight, normal, overweight, and obese. A high BMI
value is associated with a higher risk for conditions such as type 2 diabetes,
high blood pressure, cardiovascular disease, and certain cancers. This project
explores the inherent and fundamental relation between BMI and the visual
appearance of human face and body. A major reason of the prevalence of obesity
is that many people are not aware of their BMI and the higher risks of various
diseases associated with high BMI values. The study of this project leads to
develop-ment of an intelligent and computational system that can be used by
everybody at anywhere and anytime. The developed system enables people to aware
their BMI and understand the strongly correlated high risks of various diseases
to combat overweight and obesity. The developed technology can also improve
personal health care and quality of life, and public health
surveillance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores and determines the
relation between BMI and the visual appearance of face and body, in order to
obtain knowledge for future developing of a low-cost, portable, reliable, and
convenient BMI assessment system. The key research question is what kinds of
features or patterns can be extracted from human face and body images to
characterize the visual appearance related to BMI measure. In facial images, the
study focuses on 2D facial feature representation and its robustness in order to
build the mapping relation from face to BMI. In body images, the focuses are on
3D body shape analysis to connect to BMI measure. This research provides a
theoretic foundation for developing a visual analysis system that can be
deployed to provide convenient estimate of the BMI and related health conditions
anywhere and anytime.