* 1450456
* I-Corps Sites:  Tulane I-Corps Site for a Resurgent New Orleans
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Lars Gilbertson, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 12/31/2017
* USD 163,285.00

This project creates an I-Corps Site at Tulane University located in New
Orleans, LA. The project contributes to Tulane?s innovation-translation efforts
and also to the post-Katrina New Orleans? ecosystem ? particularly in the areas
of technology, energy, and the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation
Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace. Site funding is used to by
academic institutions to catalyze teams (with amounts ranging from $1,000 to
$3,000) whose technology concepts are likely candidates for commercialization.
With the support and mentorship of the Sites, the teams learn first-hand about
entrepreneurship and explore the transition of their ideas, devices, processes
or other intellectual activities into the marketplace. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tulane will fund fifteen Tulane I-Corps SIte
teams per year, to move funded research out of the laboratories into the
marketplace and to support commercialization of promising ideas emerging from
the classroom (particularly capstone design courses that have generated a track
record of launching intellectual property and start-up companies).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tulane has a critical mass of faculty researchers?many
NSF-supported?willing to serve as Academic Advisors for Tulane I-Corps teams.
Team Entrepreneurial Leads wil be recruited from students and postdocs and
immersed in a curriculum emphasizing business model development based on Blank?s
Customer Development process, Osterwalder?s Business Model Canvas, and Furr?s
Nail It then Scale It process. Tulane and New Orleans have large pools of
entrepreneurs willing to serve as Mentors to Tulane I-Corps teams?including
emerging entrepreneurs from their interdisciplinary BioInnovation PhD Program
and the Tulane Entrepreneurs Association (TEA). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Anticipated program outcomes include increases in patentable
technologies, start-up companies, and commercial licenses as well as students
and faculty of the Tulane I-Corps teams who, by their deep involvement in
innovation and entrepreneurship, will emerge as innovators and entrepreneurs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tulane I-Corps Site will strengthen Tulane?s
commitment to STEM education, women and underrepresented minorities, global
health initiatives, and service to persons with disabilities. The Development of
new technologies will expand economic development and reinforce the growing life
sciences industry of New Orleans and surrounding regions.