* 1450767
* BRAIN EAGER: Integrated Measurement of Dopamine Release and Large-Scale Ensemble Activity in Behaving Animals
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Stephen Cowen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This award is jointly made by two programs: the Instrument Development for
Biological Research program (IDBR) and Emerging Frontiers (EF) in the
Directorate of Biological Sciences (BIO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
neurotransmitter dopamine plays a central role in learning, decision making,
motivation, and the control of movement. It is assumed that dopamine influences
these functions by modulating the capacity of individual neurons to form brief
or lasting connections with other neurons. This assumption, however, has not
been tested as no instrument exists for the real-time measurement of both
dopamine release and the activities of groups of individual neurons in freely-
moving animals. To build such a device the following will be combined: fast-scan
cyclic voltammetry, the current state-of-the-art technology for measuring
dopamine release, and high-density extracellular electrode arrays for the real-
time measurement of large groups of individual neurons. The instrument will be
designed for recording in freely-behaving animals, giving scientists the
unprecedented opportunity to address questions such as: Is communication between
neurons in distant brain regions enhanced by dopamine release? Does such
enhanced communication correspond with improvements in learning, decision
making, or motor control? Does dopamine release during sleep coordinate the
reactivation of neurons involved in a recent learning experience? Is such
reactivation important for the formation of long-term memories? The societal
impact of addressing questions such as these would be in the fundamental
advances answers would bring to the understanding of the brain as an integrated
system, how this system works during learning and decision making, and what goes
wrong when components of this system break down due to neurological disease or
injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;No tool exists that enables researchers to
investigate the link between the activities of large groups of individual
neurons and dopamine release in freely-behaving animals. The goal of this
project is to build an instrument capable of measuring dopamine release and the
activity of 100s of simultaneously active neurons in awake and behaving animals.
The instrument integrates state-of-the-art technologies for measuring dopamine
(fast-scan cyclic voltammetry) and neural activity (high-density ensemble
recording). These technologies have not been integrated due to technical
limitations. For example, electrical pulses created during voltammetry interfere
with neural recording. Our methods are 1) adapt a recently-developed multi-
channel headstage amplifier into our recording system that rapidly adapts to
electrical artifacts, and 2) develop a novel carbon-film coating for metal
electrodes, permitting dopamine recordings from electrode arrays. Our approach
is to identify technical hurdles by troubleshooting and collecting scientific
data from the system in anesthetized and freely-behaving rats. The two-year
scope of this study is to collect and publish scientific and technical data from
fully functional prototypes. These data will support funding efforts to build
and distribute a commercial product. The theoretical foundation inspiring this
work is that dopamine modulates decision making, learning, and motor control
through its ongoing regulation of plasticity and neural activity in neuronal
groups. According to the reinforcement-learning theory of dopamine function,
dopamine release following unexpected rewards triggers associative learning and
plasticity in networks of neurons. The question of how activity and connectivity
are regulated by dopamine in behaving animals is unanswered and the proposed
instrument will help fill this gap in understanding.