* 1450404
* I-Corps Sites:  Stony Brook University
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2015,07/31/2022
* Clive Clayton, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,583.00

This is a proposal to create an I-Corps Site at SUNY at Stony
Brook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stony Brook developed a suite of programs for
providing science and engineering-based assistance to companies with technology
needs. This suite of programs has been successful in fostering the growth of
enterprises, including startups. The Stony Brook campus leads SUNY in technology
transfer performance - invention disclosures, patent applications, issued
patents, and executed licenses. Its economic development/ industry assistance
programs, which assists companies of any size at any stage of development, has a
track record of promoting company growth - more than 3,500 projects, completed
with more than 800 companies, have generated more than $900 million in corporate
revenues. The oldest and largest Stony Brook incubator has exited some 80
companies with a 55% success record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Stony Brook
I-Corps Site will capitalize on the prospective talent within its own faculty
and student body and the discovery and innovation generated by sponsored
investments in its research programs. Stony Brook's Site will collaborate with
the University's academic leadership to focus assets on discovering and
nurturing a new target, the entrepreneur, and structuring access to assets -
including the Long Island REACH Hub - to maximize innovation impact and create a
permanent, sustainable entrepreneurial pipeline as both beneficiary of and
stimulus for a larger innovation network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a region of
2.8M people with a $143B Gross Metropolitan Product (2012), Stony Brook's
location, Long Island, is larger than 19 states and a net contributor to New
York's fiscal health. Its growth rate, however, has lagged the nation since
2010. Strengthening the regional innovation ecosystem may have long-term
positive economic impacts across the state. Within the ecosystem itself, the
Stony Brook I-Corps Site will not only transform the culture of the Stony Brook
campus, creating a permanent vehicle to feed the new venture pipeline, which
will be strengthened by a synergistic relationship with the proposed Long Island
REACH Hub, but it will also broaden the impact of the established NYCRIN I-Corps
Node, in which Stony Brook is a partner, by feeding it close to an additional
100 entrepreneurial teams over a three-year period. Regionally, the design of
the Stony Brook I-Corps Site will extend the Site's impact by inviting
entrepreneurial researchers from the region's other research institutions to
participate.