* 1450865
* Accelerating our Understanding of Supramolecular Chemistry in Aqueous Solutions: A Workshop Proposal
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Paul Cremer, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2017
* USD 48,784.00

Water plays a central role in many natural chemical and biological processes as
well as industrial and technological applications. A fuller understanding of the
chemistry of water and aqueous solutions is expected to have important impacts
on a wide range of fields including green chemistry, environmental remediation,
atmospheric science, biological sciences, biomedical research, and
pharmaceutical development. To help build up our knowledge of aqueous solutions,
Dr. Bruce Gibb of Tulane University, Dr. Paul Cremer of Pennsylvania State
University, Dr. Amar Flood of Indiana University, and Dr. David Mobley of the
University of California, Irvine co-organize a workshop entitled "Accelerating
our Understanding of Supramolecular Chemistry in Aqueous Solutions."
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop, to be held on May 31-June 4, 2015 in
Virginia, is jointly supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry (MSN) Program, the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational
Methods (CTMC) Program, and the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry. It brings together physical
scientists who study water and aqueous solutions and supramolecular chemists who
investigate non-covalent forces and intermolecular interactions. Tutorial
presentations and breakout discussion sessions are scheduled to facilitate a
rapid exchange of knowledge and experiences between the two groups of
scientists, the generation of new ideas and perspectives, and the formation of
new collaborative efforts. The long-term goal of the workshop is to further
understand the chemistry of aqueous solutions through bridging the knowledge gap
between bulk-scale phenomena and the chemical events occurring at the
molecular/supramolecular level.