* 1450069
* Reverse Engineering of Bio-Inspired Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2014,02/28/2015
* Seung-Wuk Lee, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 02/28/2015
* USD 4,000.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of
Materials Research to Materials Research Society is to partially support the
2014 Fall Meeting of Materials Research Society (MRS) Symposium on "Reverse
Engineering of Bio-Inspired Nanomaterials" in Boston, MA on November 30-December
5, 2014. The objectives of this Symposium are: 1) bringing together a diverse
group of speakers comprised of leaders and young researchers; 2) promoting cross
disciplinary fertilization of new ideas in Bioinspired Nanomaterials; and
3)creating a sense of community by promoting interaction among young scientists,
underrepresented minority scientists, and junior faculty members with prominent
senior investigators in the field. The program serves both to educate the
biomaterials and engineering community in the highly relevant field of
bioinspired nanomaterial, and to stimulate discussions on current approaches
from materials research, engineering and biological perspectives. This Symposium
is specifically designed to provide a venue for drawing in young scientists and
researchers, and getting involved at the Frontier of Science. Graduate students,
post-docs, and other scientists with comparable levels of experience and
education will come together in a highly-stimulating environment to discuss
their current research and build informal networks with their peers, and these
interactions may lead to a lifetime of collaborations and scientific
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The focus of this MRS Symposium is
on "Reverse Engineering of Bio-Inspired Nanomaterials" and in pursuing a
fundamental understanding of the materials design principles in nature using
basic biological building blocks such as DNA/RNA, peptide/proteins, lipids,
polysaccharides, etc., and re-engineering hierarchically organized functional
structures for various applications. Progress in bio-inspired or biomimetic
materials design provides new solutions to tackle challenging scientific
problems in energy, medicine, nanomanufacturing, and other related areas. This
Symposium will be on physical scientific and engineering aspects of bioinspired
nanomaterials. The attendees of this multidisciplinary Symposium will be
biologists, bioengineers, chemists, physicists, materials scientists, etc., and
they will be addressing the challenges in translating ground breaking
fundamental scientific advances in biology and physical sciences into products
in biomaterials and naomaterials among others.