* 1450414
* I-Corps Sites:  Purdue's Innovation Pipeline
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Alyssa Panitch, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 02/28/2019
* USD 297,260.00

Intellectual Merit: This project creates an I-Corps Site at Purdue University.

NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.

The overall goal of this project is to expand Purdue's innovation ecosystem.
This Site increases the number of successful commercialization projects by
developing the commercialization and entrepreneurial skills of faculty,
postdocs, and graduate students through the resources and infrastructure
provided by Purdue's Burton D. Morgan Center for Entrepreneurship (BDMCE) and
their Foundry program. These activities are supported through the involvement of
key researchers and mentors who help create and support I-Corps teams in the
areas of biomedical technology and engineering technologies. The objectives of
Purdue?s Sites include: 1) Increase the level of customer development activity
by I-Corps Site teams by providing support through the BDMCE's Foundry; 2)
Develop the commercialization and entrepreneurial skills of graduate students in
life sciences/health care, engineering technologies and management through the
support of I-Corps Site teams in several domain-specific Lean LaunchPad courses;
and 3) Build a better understanding of the characteristics, motivations, and
needs of university-supported commercialization teams through assessment and
evaluation

Broader Impacts: By enabling over thirty teams a year to actively move through
the Foundry's processes, the outcomes of this project will include the increase
in both activity and knowledge that will mpact the innovation ecosystem at
Purdue. In addition, this can lead to the rise in the quality and quantity of
end products supported by the BDMCE. Faculty involved in the project will also
increase their experience as mentors, researchers and innovators through their
sustained involvement in this I-Corps project.

By supporting entrepreneurial teams in several technology/market domains, Purdue
may further their understanding and codification of the processes and activities
that are appropriate to commercialize each technology -- and those that are not
-- and contribute to the global body of knowledge about entrepreneurship. The
project's assessment outputs, and the academic articles that they will enable,
will help both Purdue and other universities better understand best practices
for the support of student-led teams. Also, in line with their overall goal, the
Purdue I-Corps Site will help ensure that more research benefits society.