* 1450507
* Field Testing Raman Microspectroscopic Therobarometers in Garnet
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Matthew Kohn, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/29/2020
* USD 147,430.00

This project will use a novel analytical technique - confocal Raman
microspectroscopy - to investigate the physical character of natural mineral
inclusions inside their host minerals. This information is important for
understanding the physical conditions under which rocks form, and the degree to
which rocks retain that information during cooling. This work will also identify
whether measurements are biased by inclusion geometry or high temperatures of
rock formation. If successful, Raman microspectroscopy could revolutionize
investigations of the pressures and temperatures of rock formation, which are
important to a variety of fields including igneous, metamorphic, and ore-forming
processes. We may also identify what holds rocks together, which would have
broad applications to materials synthesis science. Funding will support the
research and training of a new PhD student. This research will be used to
leverage educational opportunities in undergraduate and graduate courses at
Boise State University, which reaches a different student demographic than other
American universities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The central focus of this project
is to critically test the Quartz-in-Garnet (QuiG) barometer and Zircon-in-Garnet
(ZiG) thermometer. Three main questions include: (1) Is there a threshold
temperature above which thermoba-Raman-try fails in garnet? (2) Are inclusion
underpressures reliably preserved? and (3) Does inclusion shape matter? Five
basic sets of data will address these questions: (1) Raman spectra will be
collected over a range of pressure-temperature (P-T) conditions to see whether
garnet reliably encodes entrapment P-T conditions over all P-T space.
Application of ZiG is particularly important in identifying whether entrapment
T's are preserved. (2) Chemical zoning will be investigated around inclusions to
see whether pressures induced by expanding or contracting inclusions induce
chemical modification to garnet molar volumes. (3) Raman spectra will be
collected for low-P, high-T rocks, where QuiG underpressures are expected, and
compared against expected Pincl. (4) Pincl (Raman peak shifts) in quartz and
zircon inclusions with a range of aspect ratios will be spatially mapped at a Âµm
scale. (5) Infrared spectra will be collected on sub-mm spots in garnet to
identify OH contents and possible impact of hydrolytic weakening on garnet
strength. These data will test assumptions that underpin applications of
thermoba-Raman-try and empirically identify the region of P-T space over which
the method can be applied to inclusions in garnet. Data will also permit
expanded research into the P-T conditions of igneous and ore deposit formation,
independent of chemical or thermodynamic models.