* 1450227
* Development of a Biology-Based Sperm Storage System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* David Miller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2016
* USD 299,984.00

In most animals, the female reproductive tract can store sperm for longer times
than semen extenders. For example, poultry semen in extenders is usually only
stored for up to 48 hours before insemination compared to the 2-3 week storage
in the hen. Clearly, the female reproductive tract has capabilities unmatched by
artificial extenders. Based on supportive preliminary results, the investigators
hypothesize that adding specific oviduct glycans to bovine sperm will prolong
sperm lifespan ex vivo. The studies supported by this award are designed to
address the NSF BREAD Challenge topic of developing a cold-chain-free artificial
insemination process. Sperm storage by cryopreservation in liquid nitrogen has
revolutionized transportation of bovine semen in developed countries. But
cryopreservation techniques are impractical for small herdowners in developing
countries due to technical and infrastructure constraints. A more practical
alternative would allow semen from valuable males to be transported at ambient
temperature, maximizing the genetic impact of valuable animals.

The characteristics of the mammalian oviduct that enable sperm to live an
extended lifespan are unclear but there is a developing paradigm that oviductal
glycans are involved in sperm retention and that the glycans extend sperm cell
viability. These hypotheses will be addressed in 3 specific aims: 1)
identification of glycan motifs that bind bovine sperm and determine their
location in the oviduct; 2) determination of whether oviduct glycans that bind
sperm prolong sperm lifespan and function in standard culture medium (dmTALP);
and 3) determination of whether oviduct glycans can prolong sperm lifespan and
function in an optimized semen diluent at normal room temperatures. In addition
to the research findings, this project will train a postdoctoral fellow and
several undergraduates, including underrepresented minority students recruited
through the many diversity-oriented programs at the University of Illinois. An
interactive web site that teaches the importance of semen analysis that will be
developed and used in laboratories for a class of 175 students each year.
Results from the study will be published in peer-reviewed journals and
disseminated through scientific conferences.