* 1450826
* EAGER proposal: Consequences of Environmental Stress-induced Epigenomes on Mutation and Organismal Fitness
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Joseph Shaw, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2017
* USD 288,479.00

Mutations are the ultimate source of all genetic variation. How organisms
interact with the environment to influence the processes that generate mutations
is therefore, critical for understanding the origin of all evolutionary change.
Scientists are rapidly discovering the integrative role the epigenome, defined
as chemical compounds that interact with DNA to modify gene function, plays in
mediating responses between the environment and the expression of individual
traits. However, the molecular events that underlie these environmentally
governed controls remain virtually unknown. This research is designed to
characterize the influence of environment induced epigenetic state on the
frequency, types and genetic location of mutations to better understand their
influence on the health and fitness of organisms, populations, and evolution.
The waterflea, Daphnia pulex, offers a unique opportunity for these studies,
because it is well established as a model of environmental stress, its genome is
well characterized, and its reproductive strategy that includes clonal
reproduction allows for control of both genetic and epigenetic background. This
research through outreach programs at both Indiana University and Mount Desert
Island Biological Laboratory will benefit the development of young scientist,
especially related to the novel bioinformatics and computational approaches that
will be developed in this proposal. The knowledge gained through this research
stands to have profound implications for society and the long-term health of
populations, which are living longer in the presence of a large diversity of
chemicals that can modify DNA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will leverage
preexisting D. pulex mutation accumulation (MA) lines bottlenecked ~10,000 total
generations and propagated in the presence and absence of cadmium. Cadmium is
used here as a model environmental stressor, because it is a powerful mutagen in
spite of not interacting directly with DNA, and it has been shown to profoundly
affect heritable chromatin packaging and epigenetic state of DNA. However, it is
expected that the epigenetic affects due to cadmium and the subsequent influence
on mutation will be generalizable across any stressor. These MA lines have
already undergone whole genome sequencing, the spectra of all mutations (de novo
copy number variants, base-substitution mutations, and gene conversion
processes) are established, their fitness quantified over the course of multiple
generations, and the mutational consequences on fitness determined. The goals of
this research are to: 1) determine the environment's influence on DNA packaging
by identifying nucleosome occupancy within chromatin from individual MA lines,
2) characterize the role of stress on epigenetic state by identifying stress
induced post-translational modifications of histones, and 3) investigate the
role epigenetic state plays in regulating access to the genome, thereby
potentiating mutations, and influencing organismal fitness. Thus, these studies
will elucidate how the epigenome communicates with the genome to provide an
interface between the genome and the environment.