* 1450838
* Resolving Issues of Hydrogen Oxides Measurements: Laboratory Studies of HOx-NOx Chemistry and Measurement Intercomparisons
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* William Brune, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2019
* USD 379,727.00

This project is focused on improving measurement methods for hydroxyl and
hydroperoxyl radicals (OH and HO2) in the atmosphere. These compounds are very
reactive and known to ?cleanse? the atmosphere by oxidizing and breaking down a
number of trace species and pollutants so that they are removed from the
atmosphere. Understanding atmospheric oxidation chemistry is critical for
establishing the links between atmospheric composition, air quality, and climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One method for measuring OH and HO2 is the
Fluorescence Assay by Gas Expansion (FAGE) instrument using a Ground-based
Tropospheric Hydrogen Oxides Sensor (GTHOS). In the past, there have been
discrepancies between the GTHOS/FAGE measured values and the modeled values of
OH and HO2, primarily showing greater-than-expected OH in low-nitrogen oxides
(NOx) environments and greater-than-expected HO2 in high-NOx
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort consists of three main
tasks: (1) identifying the cause of the OH interference in the measurement
instrument (GTHOS/FAGE) and implementing instrument changes to minimize its
impact on OH measurement; (2) resolving the issues of HOx-NOx chemistry with
focused laboratory studies; and (3) lowering the GTHOS limit-of-detection to 105
OH cm-3 and the absolute uncertainty to 20% (95%
confidence).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has a high potential to
transform current understanding of atmospheric chemistry, including air
pollution chemistry and the forcing of global climate by radiatively active
species that respond to changes in this chemistry.