* 1450446
* I-Corps Sites:  Accelerate UConn
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2015,12/31/2021
* Ali Andalibi, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 356,801.00

This is a proposal to create an I-Corps Site at the University of Connecticut
(UConn).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and
regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors,
researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Connecticut proposes to create Accelerate UConn, an NSF I-Corp Site, to
strengthen its existing innovation ecosystem with entrepreneurial education,
experiential learning and a business creation process that is based on the
I-Corps model. Accelerate UConn (AU) is a joint effort of Technology
Acceleration Partners (TAP) Â­UConn's technology transfer, incubation and
commercialization entity -and the Connecticut Center for Entrepreneurship and
Innovation (CCEI), which is responsible for much of UConn?s internal and
external entrepreneurial education activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an NSF
I-Corps site, AU will expand UConn's community of innovators and entrepreneurs
and will aid in the transformation of UConn discoveries into products that
benefit humanity and add to economic growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity may significantly impact the
preparedness of university talent for roles in technology-based, entrepreneurial
enterprises and, as such, will be a critical ingredient of the economic success
of Connecticut and the nation. Connecticut has historically relied on well-
established companies to support its economy, resulting in a dearth of
entrepreneurial talent that has lead to a loss of innovative capacity. AU's
activities will support the shift from dependence on large corporate employers
to an entrepreneurially driven economy. As more startups begin to flourish as a
result of AU's efforts, new jobs will be created and the career prospects of
graduates will be strengthened. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the national level,
there is valid concern that losing our standing as the global leader in
technology will result in economic contraction. AU?s activities may counter this
trend by teaching university researchers to think beyond traditional academic
boundaries, thus enabling this group of individuals to remain in science by
becoming drivers of innovation within technology-based, entrepreneurial
companies, which they help to create.