* 1450894
* Proposal for a Workshop on Reducing Barriers for the Management, Integration, and Public Sharing of Large and Complex Data among Biologists Working at Genome-Phenome to Macrosystem
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Richard O'Grady, American Institute of Biological Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2015
* USD 49,345.00

Abstract

Title: Proposal for a Workshop on Reducing Barriers for the Management,
Integration, and Public Sharing of Large and Complex Data among Biologists
Working at Genome-Phenome to Macrosystems Levels (EF-1450894)

American Institute of Biological Sciences (AIBS) will convene a workshop for
biologists from plant sciences and environmental macrosystems to discuss public
access to federally funded research. The workshop will focus on challenges
associated with research that requires combining data from multiple sources to
conduct the research. The need to consider data management practices and
problems is especially pressing for research communities in biology that require
and generate large complex data, particularly when the resulting data will be
used for future research. While different fields of biology may require
different data these same research communities have common (and unique) issues
they face related to managing and integrating these complex data, complying with
standards and requirements, and how they can improve their science and its
ongoing usefulness to the general public that support it through federal tax
dollars.

The macrosystems biology community works on quantitative, interdisciplinary,
systems-oriented research on biosphere processes and their complex interactions
with climate, land use, and invasive species at regional to continental scales.
The systematics, evolutionary biology, and biological collections communities
are also grappling with "big data" and "long tail data" issues. The genome-to-
phenome community works in disciplines that include, but are not limited to,
plant physiology, quantitative genetics, biochemistry, and bioengineering,
especially in plants of economic importance.

This workshop has broad reaching implications as researchers from different
fields learn of each other's data, tools, and techniques, new scientific
questions and opportunities can be expected to emerge, many at the intersection
of previously independent lines of scholarship. Coupled with increased public
access, the results can stimulate new private sector innovations and contribute
to new scientific discoveries as different research communities access data
collected by other disciplines. Results of the workshop and plans for further
cross-disciplinary collaboration will be shared in a publicly accessible article
that will be placed in the BioScience journal.