* 1450633
* Cultural Accommodation And Change In The North Carolina Piedmont
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Benjamin Arbuckle, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 238,231.00

This project seeks to provide a new understanding of human health and adaptation
on the Atlantic coast during the early Colonial period, one of the most dramatic
and dynamic periods of cultural change and interaction in the history of North
America. Although the situation in the North Carolina coastal region has
received the most scholarly attention, the impacts of European colonization on
the indigenous populations and environments of the heartland (the Piedmont
region) are poorly documented by historical sources. As a result, archaeological
evidence provides a unique means to uncover the unwritten histories of the
indigenous peoples of North Carolina and document their experience of, and
participation in, the dramatic events and social disruptions that unfolded
during the early colonial period. Taking advantage of the unique historical and
archaeological resources of this region, systematically collected by the UNC-
Chapel Hill Research Laboratories in Archaeology for more than a half century,
the researchers will examine how indigenous populations were impacted by the
early colonial process. They will document changes in diet and resource
selection and reconstruct how the changes associated with colonization impacted
economy, diet, mobility, and health. All previous discussions of subsistence in
the Piedmont have focused on identifying what was eaten and how it was obtained
and distributed, but not on how shifts in subsistence relate to human nutrition
and health. The data collected on this project have direct relevance in the
modern world. They provide a new understanding of the history of North
Carolina's peoples, resources, and land use strategies. They also document
indigenous responses to the social, political, environmental and biological
stresses of colonial processes, which present a means to assess alternative
sustainable food programs in the face of poverty and food insecurity on local
and global scales. Moreover, under the direction of collaborating principal
investigators, graduate and undergraduate students will play a major role in
data collection, management, and analysis, thereby gaining valuable experience
in laboratory work, research design, and publication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
combination of plant, animal, ethnohistoric, and human biological data included
in this project make valuable contributions to understanding how flexible human
behavior facilitates changes in food availability and choice. Few other studies
have incorporated all of these kinds of data sets at the onset. Materials from
archaeological sites dating between AD 1200 and AD 1720 will be used to examine
trends in food choice and procurement within communities through time, as well
as to assess variability in resource scheduling, diversity, hunting, and
cropping strategies between communities. Are there changes in plant and animal
use between the late prehistoric and early colonial periods? Are some animals
more desirable for European commodity markets? Do patterns of health and
nutrition indicate shifts in diet between the late prehistoric and early
colonial periods? We predict that continued emphasis on mixed domestic and wild
dietary resources helped buffer the subsistence stress of colonization, while
subtle shifts in the way that they were utilized reflect contingent responses in
the face of colonization.