* 1450273
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research: A Sustainable Infrastructure for Perfomance, Security, and Correctness Tools
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* John Mellor-Crummey, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,500,000.00

Software has become indispensable to society, used by computational scientists
for science and engineering, by analysts mining big data for value, and to
connect society over the Internet. However, the properties of software systems
for any of these purposes cannot be understood without accounting for code
transformations applied by optimizing compilers used to compose algorithm and
data structure templates, and libraries available only in binary form. To
address this need, this project will overhaul, integrate, and enhance static
binary analysis and runtime technologies to produce components that provide a
foundation for performance, correctness, and security tools. The project will
build upon three successful and widely adopted open source software packages:
the DynInst library for analysis and transformation of application binaries, the
MRNet infrastructure for control of large-scale parallel executions and data
analysis of their results, and the HPCToolkit performance analysis tools. The
project team will engage the community to participate in the design and
evaluation of the emerging components, as well as to adopt its components.

This project will have a wide range of impacts. First, software components built
by the project will enable the development of sophisticated, high-quality, end-
user performance, correctness, and security tools built by the project team, as
well as others in academia, government, and industry. Software developed by the
project team will help researchers and developers tackle testing, debugging,
monitoring, analysis, and tuning of applications for systems at all scales.
Second, end-user tools produced by the project have a natural place in the
classroom to help students write efficient, correct, and secure programs. Third,
components produced by the project will lower the barrier for new researchers to
enter the field and build tools that have impact on production applications
without years of investment. Fourth, the project will provide training for
graduate students and interns in the area of software for performance,
correctness, and security. Finally, through workshops and tutorials, the project
will disseminate project results, provide training to enable others to leverage
project software, and grow a community of tool researchers who depend on project
components and thus have a strong motivation to help sustain project software
into the future.

Modernizing open-source software components and tools for binary analysis will
enable static analysis of application characteristics at the level of executable
machine code, transformation of binaries to inject monitoring code, measurement
to capture a detailed record of application?s interactions with all facets of a
target platform, analysis of recorded data in parallel, and attribution of
analysis results back to application source code in meaningful ways. Providing
innovative, software components that support development of robust performance,
correctness, and security tools will accelerate innovation by tools researchers
and help them grapple with the increasing complexity of modern software. Of
particular note, helping tools researchers and computational scientists grapple
with the challenges of software for modern parallel systems and producing
training materials that help people use this software, addresses several of the
needs identified in the NSF Vision for Cyberinfrastructure for the 21st Century.