* 1450956
* BRAIN EAGER: High-resolution multimodal acousto-electromagnetic neuroimaging of brain activity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Emad Ebbini, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

PI: He, Bin &lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1450956 &lt;br/&gt;Title: BRAIN EAGER: High-
resolution multimodal acousto-electromagnetic neuroimaging of brain activity
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance &lt;br/&gt;Brain activity resulting from
neuronal excitation is distributed over the 3-dimensional volume and evolves in
time. There is a strong need to map the spatio-temporal distributions of brain
activation noninvasively. The proposed project aims at developing a
groundbreaking technology for neuroimaging of brain activity with high
resolution in both space and time. The successful completion of the proposed
exploratory project may lead to a transformative neuroimaging modality that
would change the practice of functional neuroimaging and offer an extremely
desirable high spatio-temporal resolution neuroimaging capability to
noninvasively map dynamic neural information processing within the brain at
neural circuits level. Such capability will have the potential to transform the
current state-of-art that neuroimaging is carried out using separate modalities
that can map brain activity either with high spatial or high temporal
resolution, but unable to map dynamic brain activation with both high spatial
resolution and high temporal resolution. This is of significant impact to human
brain mapping, a grand challenge in the BRAIN Initiative.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to
develop a novel hybrid multimodal neuroimaging technology "acousto-
electromagnetic neuroimaging" by fully integrating focused ultrasound with
electromagnetic sensing and imaging for mapping dynamic brain activation. The
proposed imaging technology has the potential to achieve millimeter spatial
resolution and millisecond temporal resolution in a single hybrid neuroimaging
system for mapping brain activation noninvasively in subjects throughout the
lifespan. The central hypothesis is that using focused ultrasound modulation and
electromagnetic sensing and source imaging, the PIs will be able to
noninvasively detect and image dynamic brain activation and function at neural
circuits level in the brain. The specific aims of the proposed project are as
follows. Aim 1: Test the proposed acousto-electric neuroimaging in a rat model.
In this aim, the investigators will use focused ultrasound to modulate regional
neural activity and record the induced electrophysiological signals using an
electrode-array. The investigators will decode the neural signals from
ultrasound modulated electrical measurements and reconstruct the neural
activation to test the hypothesis that the proposed imaging will reveal high
spatio-temporal pattern of neural activation. Aim 2: Test the proposed acousto-
magnetic neuroimaging in a rat model. In this aim, the investigators will use
focused ultrasound to modulate regional neural activity and record the induced
electrophysiological signals using a spintronic magnetic sensor array. They will
decode the neural signals from ultrasound modulated magnetic measurements and
reconstruct the neural activation to test the hypothesis that the proposed
imaging will reveal neural activation at a high spatio-temporal pattern.