* 1450187
* EAGER: Extending cell phone capabilities for sensitive detection in lateral flow assays
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Paul Yager, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,776.00

PI: Yager, Paul Proposal: 1450187 Title: EAGER: Extending cell phone
capabilities for sensitive detection in lateral flow assays

Significance: Decentralization of today's most sophisticated biochemical
measurements has the potential to revolutionize many fields, from medicine to
agriculture; there is great potential to reduce societal costs, improve outcomes
by more frequent measurements, and make field measurements that are currently
impossible. One promising decentralization approach is to couple new inexpensive
disposable chemical devices with our smart phones, which provide "free"
measurement and analysis capacity, and can immediately transmit data anywhere.
In all such measurement, the sensitivity of the detection process determines
whether the measurement is useful. Current lateral flow devices (e.g., home
pregnancy tests) are rapid, robust, inexpensive, and useful, but the few
commercial systems detect a small set of relatively concentrated analytes. To
successfully use antibody binding or nucleic acid detection tests for lower-
abundance analytes, we need a significant increase in detection sensitivity. The
proposed new methods for detecting analytes in this project could bring such
capacity to the lateral flow format. The aim is to minimize cost and maximize
speed of adoption by implementing these methods so that they can be carried out
with current or next-generation smart phones. Intellectual Description: A goal
of this work is to determine whether a particular set of additional capabilities
associated with cellular telephones would add significant functionality for
smart phones with respect to biochemical measurement, specifically to improving
the sensitivity of current and conventional lateral flow-based assays. The PI
proposes ways in which next-generation phones could enhance our ability to do
useful chemical detection anywhere, whether for medicine, environmental
monitoring, process monitoring, laboratory science or education.

The PI will utilize acoustic detection of rapid heating of the detection lines
to measure the amplitude of binding. This approach is used in photoacoustic
ultrasound imaging, in which the lateral flow strip detection zone is
illuminated by a rapid flash of light. Alternatively, one could raster scan a
bright light beam as is done in today?s commercial barcode scanners