* 1450443
* I-Corps Sites:  Howard University
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2022
* Legand Burge, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 468,999.00

This is a project from Howard University that establishes an I-Corps Site with
Hampton University. NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Howard University I-Corps Site is a novel
partnership involving two Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs),
with assistance from the DC I-Corps Node, a regional I-Corps node supporting the
DC-MD-VA region. The partnership supports enhanced participation of HBCU
students and faculty from Howard and Hampton universities in technology transfer
and venture creation by leveraging DC I-Corps' expertise in the Lean Launch Pad
philosophy and curriculum. DC I-Corps benefits from the Site's regional
alignment to accelerate the participation of African-Americans in future I-Corps
Node cohorts thereby enhancing diversity. I-Corps activities on each campus and
assessment of these targeted programs also informs strategies for improving
innovation and entrepreneurship interventions aimed at under-represented
minorities (URM) and enhance ongoing educational
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These institutions are uniquely positioned among
the HBCUs to undertake this effort. Both institutions are among the inaugural
cohort of HBCUs participating in the HBCU Innovation and Entrepreneurship
Collaborative (IEC) organized by the United Negro College Fund (UNCF) and the
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities (APLU) to stimulate innovation
activity on HBCU campuses. The IEC effort connects HBCUs with best practices to
implementing entrepreneurship and innovation activities on campus. These best
practices are based on models advocated by Stanford University and the National
Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance (NCIIA - recently renamed
VentureWell), among others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership between the
Howard and Hampton University Site and the DC I-Corps Node allows for greater
opportunities to assess diversity as a variable in innovation and
entrepreneurship programming interventions targeting under-represented
minorities; enhancing fundamental understanding of effective frameworks for LLP
education for diverse populations. Additionally, the Site seeks to increase
technical entrepreneurship participation among the HBCU faculty and students by
focusing on the following activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Increasing the
training of HBCU faculty and students in Lean Launchpad
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;2. Developing a strong inter-related network of HBCU
entrepreneurs with the NSF I-Corps system. &lt;br/&gt;3. Organizing and growing
a diverse mentorship network. &lt;br/&gt;4. Encouraging applications from in
response to NSF I-Corps Regional and National training and/or SBIR
solicitations.