* 1450975
* IRNC: AMI: Collaborative Research: Software-Defined and Privacy-Preserving Network Measurement Instrument and Services for Understanding Data-Driven Science Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Gabriel Ghinita, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2019
* USD 416,574.00

Data intensive science discovery at a global scale has imposed new requirements
on the speed and management of international research and education networks. At
the connection points of these international networks, it is critical to measure
the network data flows to understand network traffic patterns, identify network
anomalies and provide insights to network control and planning. However, the
ever-increasing network speed, the massive amount of network flows and the
changing measurement objectives have made the flow-level measurement on very
high-speed networks extremely challenging. The Advanced Measurement Instrument
and Services (AMIS) project leverages many-core, programmable network processors
to prototype and deploy an advanced measurement instrument to enable services
for accurate network monitoring and in-depth traffic analysis. The instrument
supports flow-granularity measurement at line rate up to 100Gbps and software
application programming interfaces to examine selected flows, with no impact to
the performance of user traffic. With scalable hardware and an open source
software stack, the measurement services equip network operators with effective
tools to quantify flow-level network performance and study network flows through
privacy-preserving computational analytics. This project is built on a
consortium of academia, industrial partners, network operators and international
alliances, who bring unique expertise and resources to achieve the objectives of
high performance, programmable flow-granularity network measurement. The
outcomes from this project will significantly benefit data driven science
discovery, such as astronomy and space weather studies, and will promote
broadened participation of underrepresented groups (such as Hispanic and female
students) through the involvement of multiple universities, including an EPSCoR
university and a Hispanic Serving Institution.