* 1450798
* EAGER: A New Methodology for Studying Dynamical Systems Using Probabilistic Digital Logic
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Arnd Scheel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 12/31/2015
* USD 77,779.00

Dynamical systems theory and simulation play an important role in the
understanding of the behavior of complex physical phenomena such as weather and
its forecast, turbulence generated by moving vehicles and planes, ocean currents
and flow of warm and cold air inside buildings. Even though dynamical systems
have been studied for decades, researchers still struggle with the accurate
characterization of their behavior. Large-scale hardware and software
simulations are usually employed to that end. This research will investigate an
unconventional hardware design methodology that uses probabilities to represent
values of parameters associated with the behavior of dynamical systems. This
results in significant reductions of the hardware cost and runtime of dynamical
systems simulations. The approach also potentially results in inherently
superior design methods that characterize dynamical systems faster and more
accurately, with far reaching implications for improved weather forecasting, car
and plane fuel efficiency, and green buildings with efficient heating and
cooling. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this EArly-Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) is to approach the complexity in dynamical systems using an
inherently probabilistic computational methodology called stochastic computing -
a non-traditional way of computing that encodes values as probabilities, instead
of deterministic binary numbers. Instead of perturbing a deterministic dynamical
system such as the logistic map x |--&gt; u x(1-x) with noise, stochastic
computing encodes a variable itself as a random variable, thus embedding the
noise in the encoding itself. Such an inherently stochastic approach could point
to a new and effective avenue for computations in large dynamical systems, and
enables extremely simple circuits to be used to perform non-trivial computations
using a fraction of the resources required by traditional hardware and software
solutions. However, a fundamental issue has to be addressed for the successful
application of stochastic computing to dynamical system simulation: stochastic
computing requires the probabilistic inputs to be uncorrelated random variables.
The feedback path in dynamical systems from system outputs to the inputs
inevitably creates strong correlations between probabilistic representations of
the inputs unless specific techniques are used to reduce such correlations. The
PIs plan to investigate such methods by adding hardware resources that do not
increase hardware costs significantly.