* 1450474
* COLLABORATIVE NSF-NASA WORKSHOPS:  EVOLVING ENVIRONMENTS AND LIFE ON THE EARLY EARTH -- FROM ACCRETION TO THE RISE OF ANIMALS
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Timothy Lyons, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2018
* USD 71,460.00

&lt;br/&gt;NSF and NASA plan to co-sponsor two workshops at the Smithsonian
Natural History Museum in August of this year. The purpose is to consider the
scientific challenges of unraveling the earliest history of the Earth after its
formation, and the relation these processes had in the development of Earth's
habitable environment and earliest life up to the appearance of animals. These
two workshops are: &lt;br/&gt;Workshop 1: The fecundity of the early Earth
(Hadean to mid-Archean, ca. 4.6 to 3.0 billion years ago) &lt;br/&gt;Workshop 2:
Drivers of complexity (earliest oxygenesis through the Cryogenian, ca. 3.0 to
0.6 billion years ago) &lt;br/&gt;Workshop participants will focus on defining
the next generation of essential questions and opportunities. Interagency
collaboration will be promoted between NSF and NASA, a generally underutilized
opportunity. Furthermore, and perhaps most importantly, the workshops will bring
together scientific subdisciplines which historically have not worked together
to provide a more holistic plan for future research directions in early Earth
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: NSF and NASA propose to
co-sponsor two complementary, back-to-back workshops at the Smithsonian Natural
History Museum during late summer 2014 to define the state-of-the-art in studies
of the co-evolution of life and the environment on early Earth - from the
beginnings of habitability through the progression of life from the first
prokaryotes to complex eukaryotes. These two workshops are: &lt;br/&gt;Workshop
1: The fecundity of the early Earth (Hadean to mid-Archean, ca. 4.6 to 3.0
billion years ago) &lt;br/&gt;Workshop 2: Drivers of complexity (earliest
oxygenesis through the Cryogenian, ca. 3.0 to 0.6 billion years ago)
&lt;br/&gt;Building from a foundation of the current state of knowledge,
workshop participants will define the next generation of essential questions and
opportunities. An additional outcome should be a proof-of-concept for
underutilized opportunities for interagency collaboration between NSF and NASA.
The overarching goal is to build interdisciplinarity at unprecedented levels
among diverse fields. The workshops, by design, will bring groups together that
are not normally assembled to discuss critical issues and opportunities in early
Earth research from diverse but complementary perspectives.