* 1450144
* RAPID The American Fire: Evaluating the ecosystem impact of a master variable.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* John Battles, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 39,932.00

The ecology and management of wildfire in the American West poses a daunting
challenge. This project takes advantage of a unique opportunity to directly
measure the impacts of wildfire on forest health in the forests of the western
United States. In 2013, the American Fire burned through 43 square miles of the
Tahoe National Forest in California. In the process, it coincidentally burned
through an existing research study that was designed to evaluate the
effectiveness of fuel management on tree survival, new seedling establishment,
ground vegetation, wildlife, and water quality and quantity after a fire, where
the fire treatments were to be imposed later in a small-scale experimental mode.
In fact, all the pre-fire measurements had just been completed on an extensive
network of tree and fuel inventory plots that were both untreated and treated
when the American Fire broke out. This new award will enable the re-measurement
of all the plots immediately after the wildfire, but before planned salvage
logging operations begin to test whether the fuel management treatments in fact
moderated the fire effects and reduced the damage to the forests. This research
will be conducted in the context of the prevailing management regime for
National Forests in the West. And since it will be done in partnership with
local federal and state forest managers, the results will immediately inform the
future management of these forests. This circumstance also enables an
exceptional learning and teaching opportunity. For example, focused workshops
and webinars will be held to explain, discuss, and dissect the meaning of the
results of this project for management and natural resources policy.

Wildfires in the forests of the Sierra Nevada Mountains tend to burn more
intensely and larger than they have in the past. The consequences on ecosystem
structure and function can be transformational. At the same time, harvest and
thinning operations that could reduce fire risks raise concerns about impacts on
forest health. Fire is a landscape level process that is most often studied with
smaller-scale experiments, field-parameterized models, or retrospective field
studies. It is very rare when there are opportunities to empirically test
wildfire effects and fire treatments with the level of control offered by a
paired watershed study with a before-after-control-impact design, as presented
in this circumstance. This project will very directly advance our understanding
by quantifying the inherent trade-offs associated with wildfire and treatments
to reduce wildfire impacts.