* 1450899
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Mesozoic Deformation in the Pamir: Implications for Crustal Thickening in the Pamir and the Evolution of the Tibetan Orogen
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Alexander Robinson, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 01/31/2020
* USD 244,901.00

The objective of this proposal is to understand the timing and magnitude of
Mesozoic crustal shortening that has occurred within the Central and Southern
Pamir region as the western end of the Himalayan-Tibetan orogenic belt. The
Himalayan-Tibetan orogen is the classic example of a mountain belt that has
formed by continent-continent collision due to the convergence of the Indian and
Eurasian tectonic plates. Conventional geologic understanding suggest that most
of the uplift is occurred during the Cenozoic. In contrast, the principal
investigators hypothesize that much of the crustal shortening and thickening
recorded by rocks in this area occurred during Late Jurassic to middle
Cretaceous time. To test this hypothesis, the PIs will conduct a
multidisciplinary investigation that will involve geologic and structural
mapping, stratigraphic analysis, geochronologic and and thermochronologic
dating. The results of this project will provide new insights in to the
understanding of the tectonic evolution of the Pamir region of the Himalayan-
Tibetan orogenic belt. In addition to the scientific goals of the research, the
project is contributing to the training of graduate and undergraduate students
in cutting-edge research in the geosciences, an important STEM discipline. The
project will contribute to the broadening of participation of underrepresented
groups in the geosciences, which is an important societal outcome. The project
will facilitate international collaboration between researchers at U.S., Italy,
and Tajikistan, and will build important institutional collaborations between
two U.S. universities. The project will include outreach efforts that include
lectures and workshops on the Geology of the Pamir for students at the
University of Dushanbe in order to promote geoscience education and science
literacy in this developing country. The outcomes of the research will be
published in peer-reviewed scientific literature and presentations at
professional society meetings; isotopic and geochemical data will be archived in
web-based community databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last
decade, increased evidence has shown that much of the crustal shortening and
thickening in the Tibetan plateau is Cretaceous in age, pre-dating the Cenozoic
collision between India and Asia. However, it is still unclear how laterally
extensive, or spatially variable, pre-Cenozoic shortening and thickening is
across the entire orogen. This study will provide important information on the
timing and magnitude of crustal shortening over a broad region of the western
portion of the Tibetan orogen and address important questions regarding the
along-strike continuity of pre-Cenozoic deformation in the Tibetan orogen.
Further, while significant Cenozoic crustal thickening in the Pamir has been
documented in Miocene to Recent gneiss domes, early calculations of the
magnitude of upper crustal shortening have been shown to be significantly
overestimated, raising important questions regarding the mechanism of Cenozoic
crustal thickening (i.e. underthrusting vs. pure shear thickening). The results
of this will also provide new information in understanding the mechanisms of
crustal thickening in the Pamir region. The specific goal of this study involves
testing the hypothesis that much of the crustal shortening and thickening in the
Central and Southern Pamir is Mesozoic in age (rather than Cenozoic, as
previously interpreted) and represents the along-strike continuation of
extensive Late Jurassic-middle Cretaceous crustal shortening and thickening
documented in Tibet. The project will include detailed geologic mapping and
structural analysis to evaluate crustal shortening in the Pamir; stratigraphic
analyses of coarse terrigenous deposits found throughout the region to evaluate
whether the deposits are syntectonic with regional shortening structures;
geochronologic (detrital U-Pb zircon) and thermochronologic (detrital muscovite
40Ar/39Ar dating, and detrital AFT/AHe double dating) analyses of coarse
terrigenous deposits to determine the age of deposition in order to evaluate
timing of regional shortening; thermochronologic analyses of basement terranes
involved in regional shortening to evaluate timing of shortening related
exhumation.