* 1450922
* New GPS Constraints on Africa-Arabia-Eurasia Plate Kinematics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Robert King, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2017
* USD 175,000.00

The active plate boundary interactions in the Mediterranean are complex and pose
significant earthquake hazards for the populations living in that region. In
this study, MIT researchers in conjunction with a large multi-national team will
carry out analyses of GPS data, which track the directions and speeds of the
plates, for this region that have been collected over the past 20 years in an
effort to better understand the plate interactions in this region as well as the
motion of earthquake generating faults such as the North Anatolian fault. The
range of active geodynamic processes that characterize this plate system
(continental collision, subduction/slab rollback, lithospheric delamination,
continental transform faults and triple junctions, volcanism, ocean and
continental rifting), when studied through the lens of the new GPS data, affords
new insights into active continental tectonics with broader implications for
earthquake, tsunami, and volcanic natural hazards. The potential for the
proposed activity to benefit society or advance desired societal outcomes lies
primarily in the following: (1) improved well-being of individuals in society
through improved basis of earthquake hazard estimation along the Africa-Arabia-
Eurasia plate boundary system; (2) increased partnerships through a substantial
international collaboration; and (3) enhanced infrastructure for research by
archiving a large amount of data from international partner data in the UNAVCO
database for open access.

In collaboration with many international institutions, a new secular velocity
field for the Africa-Arabia-Eurasia plate system based on continuous and survey
observations for the period 1994-2014 has been generated. The velocity field
includes major densification and improved resolution around active structures
(North and East Anatolian, Dead Sea, and Main Caucasus Thrust faults, Hellenic
arc, Gulf of Corinth rift, Zagros Fold and Thrust belt, Red Sea, Gulf of Aden,
and East African rifts, Danakil and Afar depression) and areas characterized by
low internal strain rates (East Turkey/Iranian High Plateau, central Anatolia,
south-central Aegean/Peloponnese, Arabian Plate). This project, carried in
collaboration with researchers from France, Turkey, and Australia, utilizes this
new velocity to explore the behavior of various components of the Arabia-Africa-
Eurasia plate system. Research on the Aegean and western/central Anatolia
deformation focuses on block and continuum deformation models, and estimating
slip rates on major faults. Work on the North Anatolian fault slip rates and
locking depths will provide improved constraints on slip rates and locking
depths along the full, approximately 1200 km extent of the fault and constrain
possible variations in rates and locking depths that may be related to the time
since the last earthquake, and/or spatial variations in other fault
characteristics. Finally, study of Africa-Arabia-Eurasia intra- and inter-plate
deformation and dynamics investigates kinematic models for the system. The full
data set used for the 1994-2014 velocity field plus any new observations will be
archived in the UNAVCO database for open access.