* 1450588
* Workshop: Unsteady Aquatic Locomotion with Respect to Eco-Design and Mechanics; West Palm Beach, Florida, -January 3-7, 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Frank Fish, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 17,078.00

This award will support the symposium 'Unsteady aquatic locomotion with respect
to eco-design and mechanics' at the annual meeting of the Society for
Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB) in January 2015. The symposium is
intended to bring together morphologists, engineers, and mathematicians with an
interest in how animals cope with the problem of unsteadiness in the aquatic
environment. A major goal is to take theoretical analysis of swimming from the
laboratory and examine the interaction of the animal and the environment in the
field, where unsteadiness is the general condition. The aquatic environment in
which animals must operate is in a constant state of change and therefore
unsteady by nature. The occurrence of intrinsic instabilities together with
currents, turbulence, tidal oscillations, wave action, and the need for predator
and obstacle avoidance, high accelerations and maneuverability make functioning
in open water difficult. Turbulence for aquatic animals is important at scales
ranging from micro to macro to global. To meet the challenges of inherently
unsteady movements and unsteady environment, aquatic animals have adapted body
morphologies and behaviors that not only act to enhance stabilization, but can
also take advantage of the unsteadiness. Mechanics of vortex energy capture,
tidal transport, the drag reduction experienced by animals in swarms and
schools, stabilization kinematics associated with short-term perturbations,
diving strategies, and fast-start behaviors are examples of mechanisms that
utilize unsteadiness in an adaptive manner. Furthermore, the unsteady turbulence
that animals produce themselves can have ramifications for ocean mixing and
global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bringing together a diverse array of
investigators capitalizes on new approaches and concepts to the study of
unsteadiness for aquatic organisms. The potential scientific significance of
this symposium is an understanding of the importance of unsteadiness in the
environment. This focus can stimulate research based on the knowledge of
swimming generated in the laboratory into a natural context. Such information is
necessary to assess the energetics of swimming with its implications to the
conservation of aquatic species. In addition, morphology and performance
displayed by aquatic animals can suggest future avenues for bio-inspired
designs. By using SICB as the venue for the symposium, the symposium will be
broadly advertised and presented to a large contingent of researchers, who work
directly or are allied with the topic of interest. Papers from each presentation
(11 total) will be published in the society's journal, Integrative and
Comparative Biology. Ultimately, it is hoped that this symposium will provide a
forum for discussion among researchers, foster new ideas, interdisciplinary
collaborations, and lead the way toward future directions of research efforts in
aquatic locomotion.