* 1450819
* Workshop: Advanced Manufacturing for the Oil and Gas Energy Industry; Houston, Texas; November 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Satish Bukkapatnam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2015
* USD 36,995.00

For the foreseeable future, clean oil and gas (O&amp;G) is likely to remain the
largest and the most economical source of energy. The advent of unconventional
(shale) energy sources during the past decade offers an unprecedented
opportunity to promote manufacturing resurgence, which in turn is essential to
absorb the projected abundance of energy (45 quadrillion BTUs of annual
production) and chemical feedstock. Recent advances in manufacturing
technologies (e.g., additive, ultraprecision, and nano-manufacturing) offer a
mostly untapped opportunity to create high value products (e.g., nanowire
thermoelectrics) out of byproducts (e.g., sulfuric compounds) that are generally
treated as waste in O&amp;G value chains. These technologies can lead to an
exciting possibility of transforming the O&amp;G sector into a net-zero material
footprint industry. Additionally, fundamental research that addresses key
scientific and technological challenges in processing (e.g., drilling, and
coating) complex and advanced materials (e.g., shale rock and alloy steel)
pertinent to the O&amp;G energy industry will also be beneficial to other
industries in the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held in
Houston, which is considered as the nation's hub for the O&amp;G energy
industry, in November 2014. This workshop brings together a team of invited
speakers to identify research and education needs in advanced manufacturing for
the O&amp;G energy industry. The invited speakers bring distinct and
complementary expertise in O&amp;G practice, materials processing (e.g., nano-
manufacturing technologies, rock drilling process), manufacturing machines and
tools (e.g., precision machines, diamond bits for horizontal drilling),
enterprise systems (e.g., energy supply chains, transport and storage), and
public policy (e.g., environmental and workforce related). The main objectives
of the workshop are as follows: (1) Examine the state-of-the-art in
manufacturing process technologies, automation methods and equipment, and
systems-level research for the O&amp;G energy industry taking place in academia,
industry, and research labs; (2) Assess future prospects and outlook, including
the growth in energy supply and the demand for advanced machinery and processes;
(3) Gather the O&amp;G industry perspective of the short-term (1-3 year ahead)
and long-term (3-10 years ahead) research issues; (4) Identify and formulate
specific needs, gaps and challenges, especially in the upstream (extraction of
oil and gas) and the midstream (storage and transport) of the O&amp;G value
stream; (5) Formulate recommendations for research and education programs to
advance manufacturing technologies and systems for the O&amp;G energy industry.