* 1450619
* EAGER: Digital Interventions for Reducing Social Networking Risks in Adolescents
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Debra Davis, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 216,540.00

Adolescents are at higher risk of engaging in risky behaviors in online social
networks. This project develops digital intervention solutions to motivate,
educate, support and engender safe social networking behaviors among
adolescents. It significantly extends the current understanding of adolescent
motivations for engaging in risky online behaviors and the state-of-the-art
solutions for reducing adolescent exposure to such behaviors. This project aims
to educate and provide long-term improvements in online safety for adolescents,
which benefits one of the most vulnerable but also educationally malleable
segments of the population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
researchers investigate the connection between psychological mechanisms that
render adolescents vulnerable to risky social networking behaviors and just-in-
time interventions that can increase safety-enhancing behaviors. The researchers
develop notifications and warnings for effectively detecting adolescents' risky
behaviors. The designs of risk notifications and warnings leverage the unique
combinations of social, spatial and temporal dimensions provided by social
networks. In addition, the researchers leverage elements of cryptographic and
other tools to devise reward mechanisms that (i) convey and reinforce safety
information in an effective and ongoing basis, (ii) provide motivation for user
participation, and (iii) whose correctness can be privately verified by other
users. User studies are designed to evaluate the effectiveness of their proposed
solutions. Instead of the standard approach of using post-hoc, self-report
surveys, their evaluation approach could capture users' real risky behaviors
with measures taken at the time those behaviors occur.