* 1450529
* Workshop: Environmental Implications of Additive Manufacturing; Arlington, Virginia; October 14-15, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Yong Huang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 07/31/2015
* USD 29,550.00

This grant provides funding to support a workshop on the environmental
implications of additive manufacturing. Additive manufacturing, also known as
three-dimensional printing, is a suite of computer-automated technologies to
fabricate three-dimensional structural and functional parts from metallic,
plastic, ceramic, biological, and composite materials. The workshop will help
identify the environmental implications and research needs related to additive
manufacturing and further inform a research agenda. It will build productive,
on-going collaborations among users of additive manufacturing and a wide range
of researchers involved in the impact assessment of emerging technologies. The
ideas coming from the workshop attendees will be helpful to policymakers setting
environmental priorities as well as organizations developing research strategies
and educational activities.

The objective of this workshop is to provide a forum for disseminating
information and sharing ideas about the emerging technology of additive
manufacturing and its impact on the environment and occupational health. The
workshop will review the existing research on environmental impacts of additive
manufacturing; identify knowledge gaps and uncertainties that could help inform
an agenda for future research into environmental impacts of additive
manufacturing; and expand the research community focused on these environmental
and energy-use issues by including researchers with backgrounds in industrial
ecology, energy and materials mass balance assessments, lifecycle analysis, and
environmental risk assessment. The major intellectual outcomes of this workshop
include a research agenda for environmental and occupational health issues that
proactively addresses future uses of additive manufacturing and a research
consensus between the additive manufacturing community and the environment and
lifecycle assessment community. This workshop is distinct from previous additive
manufacturing-related workshops in its focus on environmental implications.