* 1450582
* Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) Initiation-DYNAMO (DYNAmics of the Madden-julian  Oscillation) and Beyond
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Chidong Zhang, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2019
* USD 512,220.00

The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) is a disturbance of the tropical atmosphere
in which clouds and precipitation are enhanced over a broad region near the
equator, with an accompanying region of reduced precipitation and cloudiness to
the west or east. MJO events typically begin when convective precipitation
breaks out over a large portion of the Indian Ocean, and the region of enhanced
precipitation gradually propagates eastward, often as far as the central
equatorial Pacific before dissipating. MJO events affect weather and climate
over much of the globe, with substantial impacts over the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A field campaign to study the MJO was conducted in the
Indian Ocean From October 2011 to February 2012, titled Dynamics of the Madden-
julian Oscillation (DYNAMO; see AGS-1022899). This project is a follow-on to
DYNAMO in that it seeks to generalize the results from the DYNAMO campaign to a
broader region than the area observed in the campaign, and to MJO events
occurring outside the deployment period. It also seeks to use results from the
campaign to understand why global weather and climate models have difficulty in
simulating the initiation of the MJO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel approach
taken in this research is to consider MJO initiation as a two stage process, in
which the outbreak of widespread convective precipitation is the first stage and
the onset of eastward propagation is the second. Previous work shows the
existence of non-MJO events, in which precipitation occurs over much of the
tropical Indian Ocean but eastward propagation fails to develop. Research under
this award attempts to understand why eastward propagation occurs in some cases,
resulting in a fully developed MJO event and accompanying global impacts, but
not in others. One hypothesis is that propagation of the region of precipitation
is initiated by propagating precursor disturbances in atmospheric temperature
and winds, which occur independently of the MJO but can interact with the
precipitation anomalies to form an eastward moving MJO
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond its scientific interest the work has societal
relevance due to the widespread impacts of the MJO. For example, the likelihood
of hurricane genesis in the Gulf of Mexico and western Caribbean hurricane
genesis is much more likely when the MJO propagates into the central equatorial
Pacific, and the MJO is also linked to "atmospheric river" events that bring
flooding to coastal California. This work has a direct connection to improving
MJO predictions through its emphasis on improving the representation of the MJO
in global atmospheric models.