* 1450970
* Reconciling Invariant Topography with Along-Strike Gradients in Climate and Tectonics in the Greater Caucasus Mountains
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Kelin Whipple, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 02/28/2019
* USD 315,158.00

The concept of plate tectonics describes the large scale structural formation of
mountain belts. However, the more fundamental processes that create the
topography of an active mountain range are not fully understood. In particular,
does the tectonic deformation or climate control the erosion that generates the
mountain topography? Despite many different types of studies, the relative
importance of tectonics versus climate in controlling erosion rates and
topography remains unresolved. This study takes advantage of the interesting
case of the Greater Caucasus Mountains (Azerbaijan and Georgia) where the
topography is constant but the mean annual precipitation (climate) and the
collision rate between Arabia and Eurasia (tectonics) change along the range
length. By measuring erosion rates along the range, the research team will
assess the relative importance of tectonic versus climate in topographic
development of this actively deforming mountain range. The project has potential
to benefit society or advance desired societal outcomes by: (1) improved STEM
education through development of learning materials and lab modules; (2)
improved well-being of individuals in society through better understanding of
natural hazards; (3) development of a competitive STEM workforce through the
training of undergraduate students and a foreign graduate student plus support
for an early career researcher; and (4) increased partnerships through
international collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Greater Caucasus Mountains
are a young predominantly east-west striking orogen that lie between the Black
and Caspian Seas and represent the locus of northeast-southwest directed
convergence in the central Arabia-Eurasia collision zone. Despite significant
along-strike gradients in climate, convergence rate, structural geometries,
crustal structure and exposed rock types, the topography of the Greater Caucasus
is remarkably invariant. The western end of the range is a predominantly one-
sided, south-directed orogen, with hinterland exposures of basement, that
experienced slab-detachment, has a low modern convergence rate of 1-4 mm/yr and
a high mean annual precipitation of 1-2 m/yr. In contrast, the eastern end of
the range is a doubly-vergent orogen, is devoid of basement exposures, is
underlain by a subducting slab, and experiences a convergence rate of 8-12 mm/yr
and mean annual precipitation of only 0.1-0.5 m/yr. On their own, the gradients
in climate and convergence predict a narrow and low elevation range in the high-
precipitation, low-convergence west and a wide and high elevation orogen in the
low-precipitation, high-convergence east. However, remarkably similar maximum
elevations, 2.5 km scale relief, orogen width, and cross-sectional area along
the strike of the range instead characterize the actual topography of the
Greater Caucasus. This project tests the hypothesis that this along-strike
similarity in the topography reflects a similarity in erosional flux out of the
orogen along-strike. Specifically, tectonics is the primary control on the
topographic form of the Greater Caucasus such that the combination of variations
in convergence rate and structural style combine along-strike to produce similar
rates of accretion into the orogen, and thus similar rates of rock uplift and
erosion along-strike. The hypothesis will be tested by measuring basin averaged
erosion rates along the southern flank of the Greater Caucasus using cosmogenic
radionuclide dating of 10Be in quartz sampled from modern river sediments to
measure these basin averaged erosion rates - a well-developed and time-proven
method to gauge millennial-scale catchment mean erosion rates. Available
historical climate and river discharge data will be used to assess the potential
influence of runoff variability on modulating changes in erosional efficiency
along-strike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Tectonics
Program, the Geomorphology and Land Use Dynamics Program, and NSF International
Science and Engineering.