* 1450864
* Acceleration of Electrons in a Reconnecting Magnetotail
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Mostafa El-Alaoui, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 387,691.00

The dynamics of the space environment near Earth is driven by the interaction
between the solar wind and the Earth's magnetic field. A characteristic feature
on the nightside of Earth is a cyclic storage and explosive release of energy in
the magnetic field. The detailed understanding of how magnetic energy is
converted into heating and large-scale transport of the plasma in this process
still eludes us. One outstanding question concerns the acceleration of electrons
to very high energies. Observations show that this happens on a much larger
scale than can easily be explained by the small-scale physical processes
involved. Recent studies have confirmed the large-scale dynamics of the
nightside region during these events as the dominant source for the
energization. Entangling the complex mix of processes over a wide range of
scales for a comprehensive, quantitative description of the generation and
evolution of the energetic electrons is an important current challenge in
magnetospheric physics. This project will utilize a combination of advanced
computer codes to simulate the effects on the particles of both the small- and
large-scale processes involved. Simulation results from three real-life events
observed by spacecraft will be analyzed and compared to determine where and how
electrons are accelerated during these events. The novel multi-scale approach
the team will employ promises to provide the first quantitative assessment of
the relative roles of the various processes. It will also provide crucial new
insights into the importance of cross-scale coupling. The magnetic energy
conversion process that is the subject of this study is a generic plasma physics
process that operates in a wide range of space and laboratory plasmas. The
Earth's magnetosphere is a natural laboratory for studying such processes, where
both simulations and direct observations are possible. Results from this project
therefore will impact a broad variety of research areas.

When the electrons with great energy are propelled back toward Earth, they can
impact the near-Earth space environment. Some are trapped in the stronger
magnetic field there and contribute to the make-up of the Earth radiation belts.
Others precipitate into the upper atmosphere where the impact contributes to the
creation, amongst others, of strong auroral displays. The disturbance effects in
the space environment near Earth are of concern for satellites and other
technological systems on the Earth surface that might be affected. This adds
broad societal relevance and importance to the research study. The project will
integrate research and education through the training of a graduate student. The
graduate student will work with members of the team to complement his thesis
work on multi-scale processes. In addition, a number of undergraduate interns
will participate in the project during the summers. Finally, the PI is a founder
and member of the program committee for the International School for Space
Simulations (ISSS). This school focuses on student learning of simulation
techniques. The PI will continue her active involvement with this activity as
part of this project.

This is a numerical modeling project focused on the magnetotail. Its goal is to
determine where and how electrons are accelerated during magnetospheric
substorms. The aim is to understand the multi-scale nature of the acceleration
process by including the effects of kinetic processes that occur near the
neutral line while taking into account the global changes in the configuration
of the magnetotail. In particular, the study will quantify the relative role of
reconnection and dipolarization fronts in energizing electrons during substorm
events. Previous investigations of the acceleration of electrons associated with
dipolarization fronts have been carried out using either local particle-in-cell
(PIC) simulations or large-scale kinetic calculations based on following large
numbers of electrons in the time dependent electric and magnetic fields obtained
from global Magneto-Hydro-Dynamic (MHD) simulations. Here, a multi-scale
approach will be adopted that incorporates the effects of kinetic processes,
including wave-particle interactions that occur near the neutral line, while
taking into account the global changes in the configuration of the magnetotail.
The results of global MHD simulations will be used to determine the initial and
boundary conditions of a three-dimensional particle in cell simulation by
setting the magnetic fields and particle flows at the boundaries to the values
given by the MHD results. The simulation system will include the region of fast
outflow emanating from the reconnection site that drives the formation of
dipolarization fronts. The acceleration seen in the implicit-particle-in-cell
code (iPIC3d) will be characterized in order to address the questions of
electron energization near the reconnection site. Finally, large-scale kinetic
simulations using the electric and magnetic fields from the MHD simulation will
provide information on energization and precipitation loss as the dipolarization
front moves earthward. The effects of adiabatic and non-adiabatic heating of the
electrons will be compared and contrasted between several simulations to
determine whether the predominant acceleration and heating mechanisms are
different for various substorms and what causes that variation.