* 1450214
* RAPID:  Understanding Thresholds and regime shifts in marine ecosystems: effects of the 2014-2015 El Nino in the Galapagos rocky subtidal
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Jon Witman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2016
* USD 154,999.00

The question addressed in this project is: Does the 2014-2015 El Niño cause a
regime shift in Galapagos subtidal ecosystems? And if so, what thresholds are
crossed to drive the change from rocky subtidal communities with abundant corals
to a barnacle dominated regime? Regime shifts are non-linear "ecological
surprises" in the sense that the endpoint is not predictable as a linear outcome
of a driver variable. The working hypothesis for this project is that the
forthcoming 2014-2015 El Niño will create non-linear effects that are negative
for corals which bleach during extreme temperature variability of the El Niño
Southern Oscillation (ENSO), but are positive for the benthic (bottom dwelling)
food chain dependent on barnacles for food. The specific work in the Galapagos
will contribute to the general understanding of non-linear effects of climate
stress in marine ecosystems, which has been highlighted as a critical
information gap needed to understand the effects of climate change on
ecosystems. The study will also inform best practices for the conservation of
corals, which are threatened worldwide by multiple stressors and cumulative
direct, and indirect impacts. Broader educational impacts of the one-year
project will transpire at all levels from high school students to graduate
students. For example, the research program will provide valuable mentoring of a
Brown University PhD student in subtidal field ecology and climate science.
Undergraduate students will benefit from enhanced lectures on ecological impacts
of climate oscillations in a large Ecology course at Brown and from training in
the lab. The research team is committed to expanding outreach beyond these
venues by fostering ocean and climate change literacy in presentations about the
research results to local high schools.

Perturbations such as El Niños can drive ecosystems to a tipping point as
thresholds are exceeded and a sudden transition to a different state (regime)
occurs. Since the frequency of extreme El Niños is projected to increase with
climate change, there is a pressing need to develop a more comprehensive
understanding of how ENSOs affect marine communities in the context of climate
change. Currently, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Climate Prediction Center predicts a 70-80 % chance of an El Niño occurring
during the northern hemisphere summer-winter of 2014-2015. This project
leverages an existing quantitative baseline on benthic community structure in
the Galapagos subtidal to address 12 predictions about community-ecosystem level
impacts of the oncoming 2014-2015 El Niño. The research employs an
observational-experimental approach to test the predictions and to discern if
additional bleaching stress to corals and further increases in barnacles
associated with this ENSO ultimately leads to an ecosystem state (regime)
characterized by declining coral populations and increasing barnacles and their
predators.