* 1450985
* EAGER: Engineering Inquiry for All at Nedlam's Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* R. Benjamin Shapiro, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,951.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. This exploratory
project will research how teachers learn to adapt open-ended, self-directed, and
fabrication-rich maker space pedagogy and technology to school settings in ways
that are responsive to the needs and interests of the students, their families,
and the surrounding community. Maker culture is a do-it-yourself movement
supported by technology, such as electronics, robotics and 3-D printing,
available in maker spaces in many communities. The project will look at whether
the maker culture can help reshape how we connect high school vocational
education, academic coursework, informal learning, and community based learning.
The project will bring teachers, university-based researchers, and leaders of
non-school maker spaces to rethink how academic and vocational topics relate to
one another. By doing so, the project is moving towards a new technical
environment in which different groups of people can work on personally relevant
technical problems (like fixing your own car) and simultaneously learn science,
technology, engineering and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
use design-based research and a partnership between the Malden Schools, Tufts
University, and Artisan's Asylum to design and implement a community-school
partnership maker space. This space will host activities involving formal
vocational education, formal academic courses, informal education, and community
participation. An iterative curriculum design and development process will
create a number of learning units that take advantage of the space and of the
skills of vocationally tracked students, some of whom will be paid to tutor
peers and adults in the technologies available. Research will examine the degree
to which the social status of vocational subjects and students in vocational
tracks can be raised, and whether it can be used to increase academic
achievement in core academic subjects. Additionally, research will examine the
impact of bringing together adult makers with teachers to design these units,
including especially whether this co-design process helps infuse inquiry driven
teaching and learning across subjects.