* 1450484
* CAREER: Enabling Design of Future Smart Grids via Input/Output Hybrid Systems Tools
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Ricardo Sanfelice, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/2018
* USD 328,245.00

The proposal is to advance the knowledge on modeling, analysis, and design of
hybrid systems theory with the purpose of enabling the design of future smart
grid systems. Hybrid systems are dynamical systems with intertwined continuous
and discrete behavior. Such a mixed behavior is embodied in models of smart
microgrids and their interconnections due to continuous changes as well as jumps
in currents and voltages, i.e., mainly due to controlled switches, failures, and
modeling approximations. The approach taken in this proposal is to interpret
smart grid systems as the interconnection of hybrid systems with inputs and
outputs to facilitate partitioning of the entire system into small, tractable
components suitable for modular analysis and design. Such a divide and conquer
approach relies upon the existence of a theory of interconnections of systems
and on constructive control design tools that guarantee robustness and
optimality. The proposed developmental plan consists of generating these control
and game theoretical tools for input/output hybrid system models emerging in
smart grids.

Intellectual merit: The proposed plan will contribute to the knowledge base by
generating tools for modeling, analysis, and design of interconnected hybrid
systems with input and outputs emerging in future smart grids. It will also
advance the knowledge in the main fields tied with hybrid systems, in
particular, computer science and control theory. It will uniquely contribute to
the field of power systems by providing new methods from the theory of hybrid
systems. The proposed methods for interconnection analysis and feedback control
design will lead to systematic analysis and control design for input/output
hybrid systems, currently lacking in hybrid control theory. These new tools will
enable modular design of components that operate robustly and optimally when
interconnected in real-world smart grids, such as the smart microgrid testbed at
Sandia National Laboratories which is a key component of this project. The
framework and theory of hybrid dynamical games proposed for the study of
robustness and optimality under adversaries will be essential in developing
secure smart grids.

Broader impacts: Collaboration with Sandia National Laboratories will be
instrumental in the validation of the new tools and will introduce new problems
emerging from the smart grid field to the control community. The proposed
research plan is deeply integrated with teaching and training activities that
will significantly impact middle and high school education levels by training
instructors and students on control engineering and applications to smart grids.
In particular, these activities will increase awareness and inform young
students of the future energy needs in the world.