* 1450439
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Big Weather Web: A Common and Sustainable Big Data Infrastructure in Support of Weather Prediction Research and Education in Universities
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Allen Evans, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 164,381.00

Earth science communities need to rely on access to large and growing amounts of
curated data to make progress in research and provide adequate education.
Existing infrastructures pose significant barriers to this access, especially
for small to mid-size research groups and primarily undergraduate institutions:
cloud services disappear when funding runs out to pay for them and therefore do
not provide the long-term availability required for curated data. Similarly, in-
house IT infrastructure is maintenance-intensive and requires dedicated
resources for which long-term funding is often unavailable. The goal of the Big
Weather Web is to make in-house IT infrastructure affordable by combining the
application of three recent technologies: virtualization, federated smart
storage, and big data management. Virtualization allows push-button deployment
and maintenance of complex systems, smart storage provides automatic, community-
wide data availability guarantees, and big data management allows for easy
curation of data and its products. The combination of these three technologies
allows communities to create a standard community-specific computational
environment and efficiently refine it with minimal repetition of work,
introducing a high degree of reproducibility in research and education. This
reproducibility accelerates learning and amplifies everyone?s contribution. Due
to virtualization, it can easily take advantage of cloud services whenever they
become available, and it can run on in-house IT infrastructure using
significantly reduced maintenance resources. The Big Weather Web will be
developed in the context of numerical weather prediction with the expectation
that the resulting infrastructure can be easily adapted to other data-intensive
scientific communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The volume, variety, and velocity
of scientific data generated is growing exponentially. Small to mid-size
research groups and especially primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) do
not have the resources to manage large amounts of data locally and share their
data products globally at high availability. This lack of resources has a number
of consequences in education and research that have been well-documented in
recent EarthCube workshops: (1) data-intensive scientific results are not easily
reproducible, whether in the context of research or education, (2) limited or
non-existent availability of intermediate results causes a lot of unnecessary
duplication of work and makes learning curves unnecessarily steep, and
consequently (3) scientific communities of practice are falling behind
technological innovations. This Big Weather Web project focuses on the numerical
weather prediction community. Numerical weather models produce terabytes of
output per day, comprising a wealth of information that can be used for research
and education, but this amount of data is difficult to transfer, store, or
analyze for most universities. The Big Weather Web addresses this situation with
the design, implementation, and deployment of "nuclei," which are shared
artifacts that enable reliable and efficient access and sharing of data, encode
best practices, and are sustainably maintained and improved by the community.
These nuclei use existing and well-established technologies, but the integration
of these technologies will significantly reduce the resource burden mentioned
above. Nucleus 1 is a large ensemble distributed over seven universities.
Nucleus 2 is a common storage, linking, and cataloging methodology implemented
as an appliance-like Data Investigation and Sharing Environment (DISE) that is
extremely easy to maintain and that automatically ensures data availability and
safety. Nucleus 3 is a versioned virtualization and container technology for
easy deployment and reproducibility of computational environments. Together,
these nuclei will advance discovery and understanding through sharing of data
products and methods to replicate scientific results while promoting teaching,
training, and learning by creating a shared environment for scientific
communities of practice. These shared environments are particularly important
for underrepresented groups who otherwise have limited access to knowledge that
is primarily propagated by social means. Our approach is a significant step
towards improving reproducibility in the complex computational environments
found in many scientific communities.