* 1450850
* Collaborative Research: Iodine-enhanced micro-CT Imaging:  Repeated Measures Design to Improve Visualization of Vertebrate Soft-tissue Anatomy
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Paul Gignac, Oklahoma State University Center for Health Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 12/31/2017
* USD 148,040.00

The ability to rapidly visualize hard tissues (e.g., bone, dentine, enamel) in
three dimensions has been one of the most important advancements for
researchers, medical doctors, and scientific educators in the last half-century.
However, comparable advancements in soft-tissue imaging have yet to be fully
realized due to the inherently low X-ray absorption of non-mineralized tissues.
The use of Lugol's iodine (I2KI) solution as a contrast agent for the rapid
visualization of soft-tissue anatomy using X-ray CT and micro-CT (&amp;#956CT)
imaging is a potentially transformative new tool for the field of vertebrate
morphology. The project goal is to create a generalized protocol for iodine-
enhanced (i-e) &amp;#956CT imaging that will allow any morphologist to create
high-quality, 3-D images of soft tissues from nearly any species of vertebrate.
The i-e &amp;#956CT research also has the potential for broad-based educational
applications through the development of 3-D, high-definition anatomical atlases.
In addition to evolutionary and organismal biology curricula, such materials
could readily augment anatomy and physiology
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will encompass three phases of
research. In Phase I, the researchers will test the effects of specimen
preservation and staining. Next, a subset of specimens from Phase I will be used
in Phase II to test the effects of various &amp;#956CT scanning parameters.
Finally, in Phase III we will test novel protocols for (a) removing iodine from
previously stained specimens and (b) expanding the current size limits on
staining and imaging of larger specimens. Taken together, this research aims to
address the current gaps in our knowledge limiting the broad application of i-e
&amp;#956CT, while also examining potential new research directions that could
further expand its utility for the biological sciences at large. Results from
the studies will be disseminated through workshops, peer-reviewed publications,
and presentations at scientific meetings.