* 1450112
* Japan-US Seminar on Two-Phase Flow Dynamics,  May 10-16, 2015, West Lafayette, IN
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Martin Lopez de Bertodano, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 12/31/2015
* USD 24,000.00

CBET 1450112 Martin Lopez de Bartodano

This award will support a technical conference entitled Japan-US Seminar on Two-
Phase Flow Dynamics, which will be held May 10-16, 2015 in West Lafayette,
Indiana. The seminar has been held every four years since 1979 with the location
alternating between Japan and the US. The seminar will bring together leading
researchers to discuss their research in multiphase fluid dynamics. The seminar
will consist of a series of plenary and keynote lectures and technical sessions.
Participation by junior researchers, postdoctoral students, and graduate
students will be encouraged and supported. Multiphase systems consisting of gas
and liquid phases or immiscible liquids pose special challenges to scientists
and engineers who analyze them and design equipment to process them. Theory and
simulation worked out for single phase fluids do not apply to multiphase fluid
systems owing to the presence of moving, deformable interfaces between fluid
phases in multiphase systems. Nevertheless, multiphase flows are important in
many technological, biological, and environmental applications, including
processes in the energy, chemical, and nuclear, petroleum and aerospace
industries. The seminar will provide a forum for researchers to discuss theory,
simulation, and experimental results that pertain specifically to two-phase
systems.