* 1450468
* SI2-SSI Integration of Synchrotron X-Ray Analysis Software Methods into the Larch Framework
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Matthew Newville, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2019
* USD 540,969.00

The solutions to many of the outstanding problems in geology, environmental
science, material science, and biology require understanding the chemical state
and detailed atomic structure of the molecules and solids that make up our
world. Such problems range from understanding the molecular forms of arsenic in
rice, determining the chemical composition of the earths interior, and improving
the performance and reducing the environmental impact of batteries that are in
our laptops, cellphones, and cars. The nation's synchrotron facilities provide
powerful X-ray facilities that allow researchers to study these questions by
investigating the chemical makeup and crystal structure of complex, real-world
materials such as plant seeds, contaminated soils, human and animal tissue,
minerals and meteorites, and working batteries and catalysts. Synchrotron
measurement techniques have developed very rapidly over the past few decades,
and are being used by many more researchers. The ability to handle and interpret
the large and complex datasets now being routinely generated at these facilities
is often a significant challenge, even for experts. The work here will develop
the Larch X-ray analysis framework to provide open-source software that is easy
to use and specific enough to correctly interpret several categories of
synchrotron X-ray data. The approach will provide tools that are flexible enough
to enable researchers to explore and interpret new combinations of data easily
enough to make new connections and discoveries in a wide variety of scientific
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate visualization
and analysis software for multiple synchrotron X-ray techniques into the open
source and extensible Larch X-ray Analysis framework. The immediate focus of the
work is to support visualization and quantitative analysis of the rich and
complex data from X-ray microprobes, including X-ray fluorescence imaging,
fluorescence and absorption spectroscopies, and X-ray diffraction. The Larch
framework already provides a suite of analysis procedures for X-ray absorption
spectroscopy and fluorescence imaging, and has been designed to be readily
extensible by adding plug-ins in Python, widely used in scientific computing and
being embraced in the synchrotron user communities. Existing state-of-the-art
analysis procedures for X-ray fluorescence, X-ray absorption, and X-ray
diffraction have been identified to be integrated into the Larch framework,
adapting and translating the software as needed to be compatible with the open-
source Python framework. With the combination of state-of-the-art analysis
methods for multiple data types, Larch will provide a single well-supported and
-documented analysis package with robust, easy to use analytic methods for a
range of synchrotron X-ray data. By being easily extensible, the Larch package
can also accommodate methods for other synchrotron X-ray techniques.