* 1450110
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Experimental Verification of Piezoelectric Augmentation of Strength and Toughness in Polymer Fiber Bundles
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Majid Minary-Jolandan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 75,672.00

With this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) the feasibility
of an anticipated enhancement of mechanical properties for piezoelectric
polymeric bundles of nanofibers will be explored. Piezoelectric materials are
responsive materials that generate mechanical stress in response to an applied
electric field (or vice versa). The premise for the concept is that
electrostatic interactions can enhance load transfer between piezoelectric
fibers in a yarn, thereby potentially increasing the strength and toughness of
the yarn. This finding could impact applications in aerospace and automotive
industries where fiber-reinforced composites are used for their high strength
and light weight features. This research effort will serve as a platform to
train the future workforce for STEM fields with focus on nanotechnology and
materials engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to experimentally demonstrate the magnitude of internal long-range electrostatic
interactions between deformation-induced piezoelectric charges toward enhancing
the mechanical properties of fibrous synthetic yarns. The planned approach is
based on the premise that the electrostatic interactions between
piezoelectrically-induced charges in hierarchical structures can considerably
enhance load-transfer between fibers of the yarn. The piezoelectric enhancement
of mechanical properties is potentially significant, and may impact the design
of high performance structural materials through systematic engineering of
piezoelectric behavior. This research is inspired by toughness mechanisms in
bone and potential role of piezoelectric effect of collagen fibrils in bone's
remarkable mechanical properties. As such, demonstration of piezoelectric
augmentation of mechanical properties in a synthetic material may provide new
insight into mechanics of natural materials. Toward the goal, polymeric
(polyvinylidene fluoride) piezoelectric membranes and yarns will be fabricated
via electrospinning process and poled via electromechanical treatment. The
piezoelectric properties of the nanofibers and the mechanical properties of the
yarns will be measured as a function of poling conditions.