* 1450976
* Collaborative Research: Exhumation History of the Indian Lesser Himalaya: Discriminating Tectonic Models with Implications for the Neogene Isotopic Composition of Seawater
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Neil 'Ryan' McKenzie, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2018
* USD 361,772.00

The uplift of the Himalayan Mountains due to collision of the Indian and
Eurasian plates is the textbook example of continental collision in plate
tectonics. The effect that uplift of this orogenic belt has had on the Earth
surface system processes and lithospheric dynamics has been dramatic and far-
reaching. This project will use an integrative multidisciplinary approach to
better understand timing and sequence of thrust fault deformation and exhumation
of crustal rocks in the 'outer' Himalayan zone of the Lesser Himalaya of India.
The research will greatly improve our understanding of compression-driven
crustal deformation processes associated with mountain building. These results
will provide a means to critically evaluate the potential relationship between
monsoon intensity and thrust fault propagation, as well as document the
importance of Himalayan uplift and exhumation and chemical weathering on ocean
chemistry. The isotopic seawater record of the ratios of osmium (187Os/188Os) as
recorded in sedimentary rocks has been used as a proxy for global chemical
weathering, and the results of this study will provide data with profound
influences on future global oceanographic and climate models. In addition to the
scientific objectives of this study, potential benefits to society and national
interests include providing support for an early career researcher at a major
research institution; graduate and undergraduate student training in a science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) discipline; with international
collaboration of a U.S. graduate student and post-doctoral researcher with
Indian scientists; education and outreach activities aimed at U.S. and Indian
K-12 equivalent students; and development of web-based informational
contributions for the general public. The project will promote broadening of
participation of underrepresented groups in science, and the results of the work
will dissemination of research results through professional science
presentations, the peer-reviewed scientific literature, and incorporation of
research results in into publicly accessible community databases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves a high-resolution
geo/thermochronometric investigation of bedrock and foreland basin deposits of
the Himalayan frontal system in north India to constrain exhumation timing for
distinct zones in the Lesser Himalaya. This work will focus on a series of
strike-perpendicular transects across major thrust sheets for (Uranium-
Thorium)/Helium dating of zircon and apatite, coupled with detailed facies
analysis and provenance studies via zircon Uranium-Lead-Helium (U-Pb-He) double
dating of foreland basin deposits. Contrasting models have been proposed for the
sequence of thrust propagation of Lesser Himalayan blocks, notably the time of
exhumation and structural affinities of the 'outer' Lesser Himalayan zone. These
models postulate structural emplacement ages for the 'outer' Lesser Himalayan
zone that range from the late Eocene to less than about 14 million years ago--a
potential 14 to 30 million-year discrepancy. However, recent studies of foreland
basin provenance data suggested the 'outer' Lesser Himalayan zone was likely
exhumed at approximately 16 Ma, which corresponds with a noted increase in
monsoon intensity. The weathering of 'outer' Lesser Himalayan zone rocks
enriched in radiogenic 187Os has been tied to a pronounced increase in Neogene
seawater 187Os/188Os at 16 million years ago. Our comprehensive study will
constrain the sequence of thrust propagation and exhumation timing of the
'outer' Lesser Himalayan zone, allowing us to: 1) differentiate between
contrasting kinematic models for Himalayan thrust belt evolution, and 2) test
the hypothesis that exhumation and weathering of distinct Himalayan tectonic
zones was the principal driver of secular changes in Neogene seawater chemistry.
Preliminary (U-Th)/He geochronologic data offers intriguing support for the
hypotheses of a direct link between Himalayan weathering and seawater
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by NSF's International
Science and Engineering Section.