* 1450877
* CAP: Towards Inclusive Design of Serious Games for Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Yasmin Kafai, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 11/30/2016
* USD 99,712.00

Serious games and games for learning are designed to foster learning or
engagement with real-world events or processes or for solving complex problems.
Citizen involvement in serious games and games for learning has increased
exponentially in the last decade. At the same time, it is becoming clear that
these activities can play an important, possibly profound, role in fostering
learning if they are designed and used well to do that. When students engage in
game design, this can also be important for fostering participation and learning
-- in computing and other STEM disciplines, and beyond. But little is known
about how to take into account gender and ethnicity in integrating games for
learning into educational activities. This workshop will focus on special
research issues in designing games for learning and effectively using them to
foster STEM engagement and learning among two populations under-represented in
STEM -- women/girls and minorities. The team will also deliver a set of talks
based on the workshop and will produce an edited volume that will present the
results of the workshop to the many different research, development, and
education communities that can benefit from understanding gender and ethnicity
issues in fostering learning, the challenges in addressing those issues, what is
already known about addressing those issues, and what still needs to be learnrd
to address them more fully and put what is known into
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Serious game play and game design have both been
shown to foster excitement about STEM and STEM learning when designed and used
well for those purposes. The PIs aim to better understand how to broaden
participation of minorities and women in computational thinking and computing
and to help those populations become more interested and conversant in STEM
topics. There is much research that shows the potential for serious games to
foster such engagement and learning, and their focus is on how to use such
resources well in fostering participation and learning among girls and minority
groups under-represented in computing and other STEM disciplines. They will
bring together researchers whose expertise is design of serious games and games
for learning, public policy researchers focused on education and broadening
participation, and people from industry at a workshop aimed toward framing
interactions across gender, race, and ethnicity to advance understanding of
gender and ethnicity-related issues in learning through serious game play and
game design.