* 1450218
* I-Corps EAGER:  CIMIT/B-BIC Regional Healthcare I-Corps Hub Proposal
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2015
* John Parrish, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The Consortia for Improving Medicine with Innovation &amp; Technology (CIMIT) is
a consortium of greater Boston's premier clinical, research and academic
institutions. It is headquartered administratively at Massachusetts General
Hospital and involves an ever-growing network of collaborators and affiliates.
It is also a core member of the Boston BioMedical Innovation Center (B-BIC). The
CIMIT/B-BIC Regional Healthcare I-Corps Hub (the "Hub") is a unique resource for
the perennial community of healthcare innovators and innovations emerging from
across New England's many world-class academic medical centers and institutions.
The Hub will provide critical innovation-related skills development for teams of
healthcare innovators through the facilitated experiential learning "Customer
Development" curriculum that is used to support NSF I-Corps teams. The Hub will
take advantage of the B-BIC program and effectively leverage the area's
resources, since it will be based at the Consortia for Improving Medicine with
Innovation and Technology (CIMIT). CIMIT is a consortium of greater Boston's
premier clinical, research and academic institutions with a growing network of
collaborators and affiliates, housed administratively at Massachusetts General
Hospital and is a core member of B-BIC. It is a "living lab" of healthcare
innovation with the mission to improve patient care by facilitating
collaboration among clinicians, scientists, and engineers along with
entrepreneurs and companies. The goal of the Hub is to address important unmet
clinical needs and focus on building innovation capacity at its member
institutions; while rapidly developing and implementing innovative products,
services, procedures and workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Hub will
make important contributions to the area's healthcare and biomedical ecosystem,
while also greatly benefiting from it. The Hub will amplify CIMIT and B-BIC's
resources and help fill the gaps between the area's existing healthcare
innovation resources; stemming from the teams working on basic science to the
area's strong collection of small and medium enterprises, as well as multi-
nationals. It will draw teams of innovators from the ecosystem and, in return,
provide a source of innovative teams with higher chances of commercial success
for funding and support. It is expected that the Hub will make many
contributions to NSF's network of Regional I-Corps Hubs, while also learning
from the other industries and NIN experiences in different regions of the
nation.