* 1450653
* A Bayesian Approach to Inferring the Strength of Coevolution
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Paul Joyce, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2020
* USD 251,014.00

Interactions between species play an important role in the function of
biological communities and have important implications for human health and
agriculture. For instance, interactions between pathogens and their hosts
influence the stability of natural communities and shape the spread of
infectious disease within human populations. Similarly, interactions between
plants and pollinators are essential for the proper functioning of natural
communities and also for the efficient and economical operation of agricultural
systems. For these reasons, predicting how species interactions change over time
is important for understanding biological communities, managing agricultural
systems, and minimizing infectious disease. Unfortunately, our ability to
predict how species interactions change over time is poor, in part because the
forces driving evolution of interacting species is not well understood. This
research will develop new mathematical and statistical methods for estimating
the strength of coevolution, a force long hypothesized to play a key role in the
evolution of species interactions. The research will also provide significant
opportunities for graduate student training at the interface of mathematics,
statistics, computation, and biology and thus contribute to human resource
development in STEM. Ultimately, the mathematical and statistical tools
developed by the research will be made available to the scientific community
through development of free computer software; this software will allow the
strength of coevolution to be easily estimated in a broad range biological
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two broad classes of techniques currently exist
for inferring the strength of coevolutionary selection in natural populations:
(1) Direct techniques that make robust inferences but are limited to specific
types of systems and small numbers of populations, and (2) indirect techniques
that can be applied to a broad range of systems and large numbers of populations
but which provide inferences of questionable robustness. Even under the best
case scenario, both techniques generally yield only qualitative results and thus
cannot provide crucial quantitative information on the intensity of
coevolutionary selection in natural populations. This research will capitalize
on recent advances in Bayesian statistics to develop novel methods for
estimating parameters of well-established coevolutionary models using data
routinely collected as part of broad scale studies of trait matching in species
interactions. Once these new statistical methods have been thoroughly tested
using simulated data, they will be used to estimate the strength of
coevolutionary selection in a textbook example of coevolution - the interaction
between toxic newts and their garter snake predators.