* 1450412
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Landlab: A Flexible, Open-Source Modeling Framework for Earth-Surface Dynamics
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Erkan Istanbulluoglu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 07/31/2020
* USD 676,836.00

Earth scientists discover and predict the behavior of the natural world in part
through the use of computer models. Models are used to study a wide range of
phenomena, such as soil erosion, flooding, plant growth, landslide occurrence,
and many other processes. Models can be used to develop scientific understanding
by comparing model calculations with the real world. They can also be used to
make predictions about how nature will behave under certain conditions. In the
areas of geosciences that deal with the earth's surface, one bottleneck in the
development and use of models is the effort required to build, test, and debug
the necessary software. This project contributes to scientific research and
discovery by creating open source software tools that scientists can use to more
efficiently create, modify, or combine computer models that represent portions
of earth's surface and the processes occurring thereon. The project combines
software development with user training and web-based resources, so that the
products will be openly accessible, well documented, and widely disseminated
within the relevant scientific communities. The project also contributes to
K-12, undergraduate, and graduate-level education in computational modeling and
earth-surface processes.

This project catalyzes research in earth-surface dynamics by developing a
software framework that enables rapid creation, refinement, and reuse of two-
dimensional (2D) numerical models. The phrase earth-surface dynamics refers to a
remarkably diverse group of science and engineering fields that deal with our
planet's surface and near-surface environment: its processes, its management,
and its responses to natural and human-made perturbations. Scientists who want
to use an earth-surface model often build their own unique model from the ground
up, re-coding the basic building blocks of their model rather than taking
advantage of codes that have already been written. Whereas the end result may be
novel software programs, many person-hours are lost rewriting existing code, and
the resulting software is often idiosyncratic, poorly documented, and unable to
interact with other software programs in the same scientific community and
beyond, leading to lost opportunities for exploring an even wider array of
scientific questions than those that can be addressed using a single model. The
Landlab model framework seeks to eliminate these redundancies and lost
opportunities, and simultaneously lower the bar for entry into numerical
modeling, by creating a user- and developer-friendly software library that
provides scientists with the fundamental building blocks needed for modeling
earth-surface dynamics. The framework takes advantage of the fact that nearly
all surface-dynamics models share a set of common software elements, despite the
wide range of processes and scales that they encompass. Providing these elements
in the context of a popular scientific programming environment, with strong user
support and community engagement, contributes to accelerating progress in the
diverse sciences of the earth's surface.

The Landlab modeling framework is designed so that grid creation, data storage,
and sharing of data among process components is done for the user. The framework
is generic enough so that the coupling of two process components, whether they
are squarely within a geoscience subdiscipline, or they cross subdisciplines, is
the same. This architecture makes it easy to explore a wide range of questions
in the geosciences without the need for much coding. Further, the model code is
primarily written in Python, a language that is relatively easy for casual
programmers to learn. Because of these attributes, the Landlab modeling
framework has the potential to add computational modeling to the toolbox of a
wide array of geoscientists, and to clear a path for trans-disciplinary earth-
surface modeling that explores societally relevant topics, such as land-cover
changes in response to climate change, as well as modeling of topics that
currently require the coupling of sophisticated but harder-to-use models, such
as sediment source-to-sink dynamics. The project will generate several proof-of-
concept studies that are interesting in their own right, and demonstrate the
capabilities of the modeling framework. Community engagement is fostered by
presenting clinics and demonstrations at professional venues aimed at
hydrologists, sedimentologists, critical zone scientists, and the broader earth
and environmental sciences community. The team also supports visits by
individual scientists for on-site training beyond these clinics. Input/output
tools allow compatibility with data from relevant NSF-supported research. The
project supports four graduate students and three postdoctoral researchers, and
also includes modeling workshops for fifth to seventh grade girls in a community
that has a greater than 50% minority population.