* 1450502
* A Workshop on Extensible Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Lorenzo Alvisi, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 60,772.00

A Distributed System is a system consisting of multiple computers communicating
through message passing. In the past 50 years, distributed systems have evolved
from being a novelty to a fact of life---a very large fraction of computers
today are part of a distributed system. With computers, sensors, and actuators
becoming embedded in virtually every device, users are themselves becoming, as
it were, embedded in a ubiquitous computing fabric. An Extensible Distributed
System is a distributed system that is pervasively integrated into people's
environments. The distributed systems research community has developed models
and techniques that have supported this remarkable success story and enabled
technologies, such as cloud computing, that have the potential to fundamentally
change the way in which individuals, businesses, and government access computing
resources. The pervasive or ubiquitous systems community in the meantime has
leveraged distributed systems and networking technology, as well as artificial
intelligence, to integrate devices even closer into our experience. And in the
post Dennard-Scaling era, computer architecture is undergoing a profound
transformation, and, in an effort to address the conflicting goals of delivering
performance and saving energy, it is exploring designs that are exporting weaker
abstractions to software developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are, however,
gaps between the foundations built by the various research communities and the
opportunities offered by today's and tomorrow's applications and infrastructure.
To respond to these challenges, the field not only needs to profoundly retool
today's techniques and abstractions, but also to develop a new vision, designed
to address the opportunities offered by new hardware, new networking, and new
applications. This project supports a workshop that will serve as a catalyst for
triggering the process of reflection and innovation necessary to develop this
new vision and the research agenda that will bring it
about.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensible Distributed Systems are the cornerstone
of, to name a few, cloud computing, sensor/actuator networks, and industrial
control systems, and their impact and ubiquity is likely to only increase in the
next decade. The in-depth discussions about the state of field and research
agenda that this workshop aims to develop are thus likely to have tremendous
impact on society. In addition to helping define a research agenda for the
extensible distributed systems community, this workshop will help crystallize
the shape of future graduate and undergraduate education in distributed
computing. The workshop will balance academic and industrial participation, will
engage leaders in the field, and will actively seek participation from
underrepresented groups.