* 1450163
* Support of US Scientific Participation in the North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES)
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Enrique Curchitser, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2021
* USD 385,384.00

This award provides partial funding for U.S. ocean scientists, particularly
those in the academic research community, to participate in the activities of
the North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES). This organization was
established in 1992 to promote and coordinate marine scientific research in
order to advance knowledge of living marine resources, land-ocean and
atmosphere-ocean interactions, ecosystem components and processes, resource
usage, ocean response to global weather and climate change, and human impacts in
the North Pacific. Members presently include Canada, China, Japan, Korea,
Russia, and the United States. Participation by U.S. scientists in Annual
Meetings, scientific committee working groups and workshops, will also be funded
through this award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of travel funds not
only provides influence on the scientific planning for large scale international
collaborations, but also provides the opportunity to entrain colleagues and
graduate students into research collaborations, scientific sessions, and
workshops. The scale of the North Pacific Ocean demands broad collaboration, and
the intellectual merits of international collaboration leads to increased
understanding of how diverse scientists address their research. Entrainment of
young scientists from both the US and foreign countries into these
collaborations represents one of the capacity building strategies of PICES, and
one which has a broader impact on US science through appreciation of the diverse
multicultural approaches to science. Funds have been add sufficient funds to
this project to provide full travel support for young (&lt;35 yr of age)
academic scientists to the PICES annual meeting. With matching funds from PICES
this will allow participation by 3 young academic scientists annually.