* 1450357
* Surface Elevation History of the Northern North America Cordillera as Constraint for Eocene Tectonic and Climatic Boundary Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2022
* C. Page Chamberlain, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2022
* USD 283,800.00

The development of large-scale regional topography during the development of
mountain belts reflects fundamental tectonic processes that operate at deeper
levels in the crust and mantle. Using a variety of geological and geochemical
methods that act as proxies for paleoelevation, this researcher and colleagues
suggested a broad high-standing plateau (4 to 5 km high) developed in the
northern Rockies about 50 million years ago and grew southward into central
Nevada by about 40 million years ago. Data from Nevada and California support
this model, but data limited data are equivocal. This project aims to expand the
collection of paleoelevation data to the northern regions (western Washington,
Idaho, and Montana) to further test the model. Significant revisions to tectonic
models of the building of the North American Cordillera could be required if the
data do not support the southward growth idea. The project would advance desired
societal outcomes through: 1) full participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in STEM; (2) improved STEM education and educator development through
teacher education and outreach to K-12 programs; (3) increased public scientific
literacy and public engagement with STEM through public outreach; (4)
development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce through graduate
and undergraduate student training; and (5) increased partnerships between
through international collaboration that includes an international research
opportunity for a graduate student. The research is supported by the Tectonics
Program and NSF's International Science and Engineering
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the surface elevation history of
mountain belts is central in placing critical constraints both on tectonic
models and boundary conditions to global climate models. Previous work lead to
an uplift model for the North American Cordillera that calls for north to south
growth of an Eocene plateau with the northern Rockies reaching hypsometric mean
heights of ~4 to 5 km first in British Columbia at ~50 Ma and sweeping southward
into central Nevada at ~40 Ma. However, new geologic and geochemical evidence
indicates that the surface elevation history north of the Snake River Plain
contrasts markedly with its southern counterpart. For Nevada and California
there is excellent evidence for a moderately high plateau in the Cretaceous that
underwent another phase of surface uplift at ~40 Ma with rivers draining a low-
relief highland west of the paleocontinental divide in Nevada and to the east
across a high-relief landscape. To the north, however, an earlier phase of
surface uplift at ~50 Ma is observed, but little evidence of a broad Eocene
highland. If this evidence is correct, it will require substantial modification
to surface elevation history models and would suggest other tectonic models for
the northern North American Cordillera, such as piece-meal removal of the
Farallon slab or the formation of a slab window. This project aims to obtain
more data from basins in western Washington, Idaho, and Montana in order to test
the nature of the connection between the southern region and regions farther
north. The project would employ: (1) sedimentologic studies tied to
geochronologic studies for age constraints; 2) stable isotopic studies from
multiple proxies including volcanic glasses, calcite from paleosols, and clay
minerals as well as clumped isotope temperatures; and 3) vapor transport models.