* 1450630
* The Relationship Between Household Organization And Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Verenice Heredia Espinoza, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2018
* USD 229,630.00

Drs. Richard E. Blanton and Lane F. Fargher, of Purdue University, along with an
international team of scholars from the US and Mexico, will carry out research
on the impact of political policy on households at the late pre-Hispanic city of
Tlaxcallan in Tlaxcala, Mexico. Social scientists have long been interested in
understanding how and why cities and states evolved; especially, the strategies
developed to collect revenues and govern large populations. After WWII,
explanations for the evolution of social complexity and states focused
predominantly on the ways in which ruling elites (e.g., kings, magnates)
profited from demographic expansion and resource stress to coerce subordinate
populations into supplying tribute. However, recent research has demonstrated
that peasants and other commoners remain neither powerless nor passive in the
face of rapacious elites. Especially important has been Drs. Blanton and
Fargher's research on cooperation and collective action in premodern states.
Using insights developed in economics and political science on rational choice,
public goods, and bureaucratization, they showed that governing authorities who
relied on a large segment of citizens for revenues in premodern states had to
respond to commoner voice, control public officials, and limit their luxury
consumption in order to promote compliance with taxation. Moreover, structural
changes associated with building such collective political regimes were found to
leave behind indelible marks on households and landscapes.

Given that a shift towards collective governance creates a strong material
imprint on households and landscapes, archaeology is especially well suited for
studying the long-term evolution of cooperation, collective action, and
democracy in human societies. This is particularly the case with the late pre-
Hispanic (AD 1300 - 1519) terraced, hilltop city of Tlaxcallan. In the face of
growing threats from the Aztec empire, the Tlaxcalteca (the people of
Tlaxcallan) built a republic rich in commoner voice and public goods to
encourage citizens to defend the state and its territory. The implementation of
these political policies guided the construction of an urban landscape unique in
pre-Hispanic Mexico. With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs.
Blanton and Fargher, and their colleagues will evaluate the impact of
Tlaxcallan's collective policies in the city's households and neighborhoods.
Combining geophysical survey and archaeological excavations, they will locate
and expose houses, communal areas, and terrace construction histories. The
multidisciplinary team will use architectural analysis, palynology, ceramic
analysis, soil chemistry, stratigraphy, faunal analysis, lithic analysis,
skeletal studies, and radiocarbon dating to reconstruct household organization,
activity patterns, and construction sequences. This information will shed light
on the ways that collective political policy affected daily life in houses and
neighborhoods. These data will be pivotal to growing social scientific
understanding of the long-term evolution of cooperation, collective action, and
democracy in human history. They will also provide enhanced educational and
training opportunities for students and young professional archaeologists.