* 1450259
* I-Corp Sites:  University of Rochester - Catalyzing the Commercialization of Groundbreaking Innovations with Regional Entrepreneurial Expertise
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2023
* Duncan Moore, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 400,579.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project creates an NSF I-Corps Site at the
University of Rochester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps)
Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to
nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their technology
concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources,
networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to
transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team
applicants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A typical I-Corps Site is funded for
approximately $100,000 per year for up to three years. The Site funding is used
to by academic institutions to catalyze teams (with amounts ranging from $1,000
to $3,000) whose technology concepts are likely candidates for
commercialization. The make-up of teams at the Sites is modeled after the
composition of I-Corps Teams, and education at the Sites shares the principles
of the I-Corps Curriculum. With the support and mentorship of the Sites, the
teams will learn first-hand about entrepreneurship and explore the transition of
their ideas, devices, processes or other intellectual activities into the
marketplace. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and
contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Site will take
advantage of University of Rochester's strengths and past successes in fusing
technology with entrepreneurship. This effort utilizes UR's research and
commercialization base, a network of internal and external experts to train and
mentor entrepreneurial faculty and student teams working in STEM fields. The
recruitment and selection of 90 faculty and student teams is built on a proven
process for selecting projects, identifying the necessary resources to advance
the technology, and a curricular model based on the NSF I-Corps approach to aid
in identification of viable business models and
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Rochester I-Corps Site takes
advantage of the Center for Entrepreneurship (CFE) as a university hub
leveraging UR Ventures, the university's technology transfer arm, and
organizations such as High Tech Rochester (HTR), that provide technology
entrepreneur business formation coaching, training and incubator space. The
program includes five elements: workshops, mentoring, funding for projects,
customer discovery, and community support to include incubator
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Since 2002, the
University has assisted in the launch of over 50 startup companies. The I-Corps
Site program will enable these researchers to continue along this trajectory by
enabling them to investigate the real world applications of their scientific
achievements. &lt;br/&gt;The I-Corps site program provides the University with
the necessary tools to assess the innovations that have resulted from NSF funded
research, begin the process of transferring these advancements from the bench-
top to the bedside, and provide additional commercialization training to
research faculty and students. Over 90 student teams will be supported and
efforts will be made to select and recruit teams with women and minority
participants.