* 1450746
* A Planning Conference and Workshop  On preparing Mathematics Graduate Students  For Careers Teaching and Advising Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Daniel Maki, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 07/31/2017
* USD 59,180.00

Title: A Planning Conference/Workshop On Preparing Mathematical Sciences
Graduate Students For Careers Teaching, Advising, and Mentoring
Undergraduates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The college mathematical sciences teachers
of tomorrow are the mathematical sciences graduate students of today. A
significant number of these graduate students will have workforce careers which
involve a mix of teaching, research, advising, and/or working in industry or
government. However, evidence suggests that most mathematical sciences graduate
students - especially, Ph.D. students - later will spend a substantial portion
of their professional careers teaching undergraduate students, including at
community colleges, 4-year colleges, and universities, and many teach
undergraduates while they are still graduate students. There is general
appreciation and understanding that mathematical sciences faculty members
prepare graduate students well for research careers, but there is also an
understanding among faculty and administrators of the national need for
mathematical sciences departments across the country to do a more robust job of
preparing graduate students for most likely what will be one of their key
professional activities: undergraduate teaching. The purpose of this
conference/workshop (henceforth, workshop) will be to address this issue of
preparing mathematical sciences graduate students to be successful teachers and
mentors of undergraduate students as well as prepare graduate students to be
equipped to provide useful and relevant advice to undergraduate mathematical
sciences and other STEM majors regarding various career options, including
graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the workshop will be to
recognize and discuss extant models and develop plans for improving the overall
current situation, and to consider methods for disseminating these plans to
graduate mathematical sciences departments. An additional goal will be to
provide information and suggestions to the mathematical sciences community. A
deliverable of the workshop will be a report on best practices and ways to
achieve best practices in graduate mathematical sciences programs across the
nation. Examples of current successful programs will be noted, and the questions
that will be addressed at the workshop include: (1) What is the best way to
train mathematical sciences (and other STEM) graduate students to appreciate and
understand the importance of undergraduate teaching and learning at post-
secondary institutions? (2) How can mathematical sciences graduate students be
prepared to know about career options for undergraduate mathematics majors -
options that do not involve graduate study in mathematics? (3) What can
mathematical sciences (and other STEM) departments be doing in the area of pre-
service teacher preparation and in-service professional development? In line
with this, what have we learned from existing pre-service teachers programs to
inform us? (4) How can we get key faculty interested in and engaged in promoting
K-12 outreach and introductory undergraduate mathematics education? (5) How
should graduate students be involved in the learning and employment of
technologies as a teaching and learning tool? In connection with this, what are
the technologies which have been shown to be useful in enhancing teaching and
learning and what are the efficient and effective uses of these technologies to
maximize impact? (6) What are effective techniques for preparing undergraduate
students with deficient backgrounds to be successful in college mathematics and
statistics courses? (7) How do we encourage key influential (research) faculty
to be interested in promoting the involvement of graduate students with these
issues as part of their overall graduate student training.