* 1450372
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: ELSI-Infrastructure for Scalable Electronic Structure Theory
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Lin Lin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2020
* USD 504,016.00

Predictive, so-called ab initio electronic structure calculations, particularly
those based on the Kohn-Sham density functional theory (DFT) are now a widely
used scientific workhorse with applications in virtually all sciences, and
increasingly in engineering and industry. In materials science, they enable the
computational ("in silico") design of new materials with improved properties. In
biological or pharmacological research, they provide molecular-level insights
into the function of macromolecules or drugs. In the search for new energy
solutions, they give molecular-level insights into new solar cell designs,
catalytic processes, and many others. A key bottleneck in many applications and
calculations is the "cubic scaling wall" of the so-called Kohn-Sham eigenvalue
problem with system size (i.e., the effort increases by a factor of 1,000 if the
model size increases by a factor of 10). This project will establish an open
source software infrastructure "ELSI" that offers a common, practical interface
to initially three complementary solution strategies to alleviate or overcome
the difficulty associated with solving the Kohn-Sham eigenvalue problem. ELSI
will enable a broad range of end user communities, centered around different
codes with, often, unique features that tie a specialized group of scientists to
that particular solution, to easily incorporate state-of-the-art solution
strategies for a key problem they all share. By providing these effective,
accessible solution strategies, we will open up major areas for electronic
structure theory where DFT based predictive methodologies are not applicable
today. This will in turn open doors for new development in materials science,
chemistry, and all related areas. Commitments to support ELSI exist from some of
the most important electronic structure developer communities, as well as from
industry and government leaders in high-performance computing. Thus, we will
create a strong U.S. based infrastructure that leverages the large user and
developer base from a globally active community developing DFT methods for
materials research.

ELSI will support and enhance three state-of-the-art approaches, each best
suited for a specific problem range: (i) The ELPA (EigensoLvers for Petascale
Applications) library, a leading library for efficient, massively parallel
solution of eigenvalue problems (for small- and mid-sized problems up to several
1,000s of atoms), (ii) the OMM (Orbital Minimization Method) in a recent re-
implementation, which circumvents the eigenvalue problem by focusing on a
reduced, auxiliary problem (for systems in the several 1,000s of atoms range),
and (iii) the PEXSI (Pole EXpansion and Selective Inversion) library, a proven
reduced scaling (at most quadratic scaling) solution for general systems (for
problems with 1,000s of atoms and beyond). By establishing standardized
interfaces in a style already familiar to many electronic structure developers,
ELSI will enable production electronic structure codes that use it to
significantly reduce the "scaling wall" of the eigenvalue problem. First, ELSI
will help them make efficient use of the most powerful computational platforms
available. The target platforms are current massively parallel computers and
multicore architectures, GPU based systems and future manycore processors.
Second, the project will make targeted methodological improvements to ELPA, OMM,
and PEXSI, e.g., a more effective use of matrix sparsity towards very large
systems. The focus on similar computational architectures and similar
methodological enhancements will lead to significant cross-fertilization and
synergy between these approaches.