* 1450331
* EAGER: Leucine Aminopeptidase - Regulator of the Stress-Induced Stromal Proteome
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Linda Walling, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2017
* USD 126,142.00

Over 40% of the world's food supply is lost to damage caused by pathogens, pests
and weeds. Therefore, novel strategies to enhance plant productivity and
resistance to pests will significantly increase the security of the world's food
supply. To achieve this goal, a deep understanding the mechanisms that control
resistance to insects is needed. This project is at the cutting edge of plant-
insect interactions and will reveal how chloroplasts communicate with nuclei to
coordinate a robust defense after injury and insect attack; this knowledge will
enable new strategies for insect resistance in the future. This project is a
fertile training ground for a graduate student. Graduate student leadership
skills will be developed through guiding undergraduate's in this project. UCR is
a minority-serving institution and this project will recruit and engage students
with diverse backgrounds. Results from the project will be disseminated by
publications in scientific journals, lay talks to Riverside K-12 schools and the
public, and talks at meetings and universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will study the importance of a tomato chloroplast-localized protein
called leucine aminopeptidase (LAP-A) and its role in generating a signal that
controls nuclear gene expression after insect feeding and wounding. This project
will identify the LAP-A-dependent signal that mediates this chloroplast-to-
nucleus communication. The protein/peptide (target) that LAP-A acts on will be
identified and the target may be the signal or may create the signal. LAP-A has
two activities. LAP-A is an aminopeptidase and may produce the signal by
modifying the N-terminus of a target protein/peptide that resides in the
chloroplast. LAP-A is also a molecular chaperone and may help targets stay in an
active folded state. These activities should influence the target's structure,
activity and/or stability and thereby signal production. This project will use
cutting-edge proteomics technologies to measure proteins/peptides in three
tomato lines that express different levels of LAP-A (LapA-silenced, LapA-
overexpressing, and wild type). Aim 1 will identify chloroplast proteins that
are (1) cut by LAP-A and (2) have altered stability that is strictly correlated
with the presence/absence of LAP-A. Aim 2 will determine the LAP-A-dependent
changes in a small peptide called glutathione (GSH). Preliminary data link LAP-A
and GSH turnover. GSH is an excellent candidate for the signal as it regulates
two defense signals (reactive oxygen species and redox status) in other systems.
The identity of LAP-A's targets will reveal the nature of the LAP-A-generated
signal that mediates chloroplast-nucleus communication.