* 1450487
* I-Corps Sites:  UCLA Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Site
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Nathan Wilson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 02/29/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes an I-Corps Site at the
University of California-Los Angeles (UCLA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation
Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps
Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally
and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at UCLA provides
mechanisms for thirty teams a year to receive seed funding to accelerate
translational research in the fields of Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) across campus. The additional funding and entrepreneurial
instruction enabled by this grant complements existing programs at UCLA and
prepares the selected teams to benefit from a variety of resources available on
campus, facilitating commercialization and new business formation.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Led by the Price Center for Entrepreneurial Studies in the UCLA
Anderson School of Management, the goals of the Site are to establish: 1. An
interdisciplinary UCLA I-Corps Site Team Selection Committee to oversee the
annual award of thirty grants to competitively selected UCLA I-Corps Site Teams
per year that will use the grants for STEM related projects to prepare
applications for UCLA?s collection of entrepreneurial plan competitions, on
campus accelerators and incubators, and translational governmental funding; 2. A
new UCLA I-Site Lean Startup Course that will be taught three times annually for
UCLA I-Corps Site Teams by Price Center entrepreneurship faculty; 3. Three
existing UCLA entrepreneurial courses enhanced to enable enrolled UCLA I-Corps
Site Teams to utilize grants during the course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This grant may benefit society given that sponsored
translational research and training at UCLA will directly impact the Southern
California Economic Region which consists of 18.4M people (5.9% of the U.S.
population) and contributes $924B in GDP (16th largest economy in the world).
With 28,700 undergraduates (11.8% are international students) and 12,000
graduate students representing all fifty states and nearly 80 countries
worldwide, this grant in conjunction with entrepreneurial education at UCLA
impacts beyond the borders of California.