* 1450451
* SI2-SSI: Community Software for Extreme-Scale Computing in Earthquake System Science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* John Vidale, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,200,000.00

The Software Environment for Integrated Seismic Modeling (SEISM) Project of the
Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC) will develop advanced earthquake
simulation software capable of using high-performance computing to produce new
information about earthquakes and the hazards they present. SCEC's SEISM project
is developing an integrated, sustainable community software framework for
earthquake system science to serve diverse communities of earthquake scientists
and engineers, computer scientists, and at-risk stakeholders. The SEISM project
is a collaboration among several diverse user communities with shared interests
in reducing seismic risk and enhancing seismic resilience. SCEC SEISM
researchers are addressing scientific problems that limit the accuracy and scale
in current numerical representations of earthquake processes. SEISM
computational improvements in seismic hazard calculations will benefit
earthquake system science worldwide. The SCEC SEISM project will educate a
diverse STEM workforce from the undergraduate to early-career level, and it will
cross-train scientists and engineers in a challenging high-performance
environment. As one application of SEISM, the researchers will develop new
simulations for the Great California ShakeOut, which is engaging millions of
people in earthquake preparedness exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquake
simulations at the spatiotemporal scales required for probabilistic seismic
hazard analysis present some of the toughest computational challenges in
geoscience, requiring extreme-scale computing. The Southern California
Earthquake Center is creating a Software Environment for Integrated Seismic
Modeling (SEISM) that will provide the extreme-scale simulation capability
needed to transform probabilistic seismic hazard analysis into a physics-based
science. This project will advance SEISM through a user-driven research and
development agenda that will push validated SEISM capabilities to higher seismic
frequencies and towards extreme-scale computing. It will develop an integrated,
sustainable community software framework for earthquake system science to serve
diverse communities of earthquake scientists and engineers, computer scientists
and at-risk stakeholders. A new SEISM-T framework will support both in-situ and
post-hoc data processing to make efficient use of available heterogeneous
architectures. The main goal of the project is to increase the 4D outer-
scale/inner-scale ratio of simulations at constant time-to-solution by two
orders of magnitude above current capabilities. The software development plan
will use an agile process of test-driven development, continuous software
integration, automated acceptance test suites for each application, frequent
software releases, and attention to user feedback. The researchers will take
advantage of the SCEC Implementation Interface to develop a dialog among user
communities regarding the application of SEISM to the reduction of seismic risk
and enhancement of seismic resilience. This research will address fundamental
scientific problems that limit the accuracy and scale range in current numerical
representations of earthquake processes, which will benefit earthquake system
science worldwide. This project will educate a diverse STEM workforce from the
undergraduate to early-career level, and it will cross-train scientists and
engineers in a challenging high-performance environment. As one application of
SEISM, the project team will develop new simulations for the Great California
ShakeOut, which is engaging millions of people in earthquake preparedness
exercises.