* 1451480
* BRAIN EAGER: Robust longitudinal characterization of brain oscillations in the first 3 years of life
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Catherine Stamoulis, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,996.00

The human brain undergoes rapid and profound changes during the first 3 years of
life, which accompany the emergence of new cognitive skills, including
remembering and recognizing faces and objects, acquiring vocabularies, and
focusing attention on the task at hand, among others. While such a rich
repertoire of functions requires the coordination of multiple brain regions,
little is known about how changes in the brain's electrical activity across
different brain regions correlate with changes in behavior. This knowledge gap
is in part due to methodological limitations imposed by the predominant brain
imaging method, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). fMRI not only
requires infants or toddlers to remain still or asleep during the observation,
but also cannot directly measure rapid changes in neuronal activity at a high
temporal resolutions (millisecond). With recent technological and computational
advances, it has become possible to overcome these technical barriers and obtain
direct measurements of brain electrical activity in behaving infants. With the
support of the National Science foundation, Dr Stamoulis and colleagues at the
Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience at Boston Children's Hospital/Harvard
Medical School, will have the rare opportunity to systematically characterize
development-related changes in neural signals derived from longitudinal hdEEG
data acquired in infants and toddlers repeatedly across 3 to 36 months of age
using a number of advanced computational approaches. This study will provide
fundamental information regarding how the brain changes across early
development. Findings from this project are also expected to help educate
families on how early experiences shape the brain and facilitate cognitive
functions, and will inspire the development of new courses and instructional
materials to educate students, researchers and clinicians on the relationships
between behavioral and neural mechanisms of cognitive development.

The project is an ambitious attempt at characterizing changes in the developing
human brain by analysing high-density electroencephalography (hdEEG) data
collected from the same infants across the first three years of life using
source localization and frequency analysis of neural oscillations within and
between different functional brain regions. The investigation will focus on
characterizing oscillatory waveforms of brain electrical signals originating
from different spatial locations across multiple time points during early
development. The power of these waveforms in different frequency bands, e.g.
theta, alpha, beta, and gamma power, are known to emerge at different time
points during early development and to be associated with variations in external
stimuli, information processing demands, and behaviors. However, age-related
changes in the dominant oscillation frequency, power and spatial distribution
among brain regions have not been systematically characterized during this age
range. Longitudinal high-density EEG data from about 200 typically developing
infants at 3, 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, and 36 months of age will be analyzed under the
same type of tasks and no-task conditions. Novel source analysis methods will be
applied to hdEEGs, to extract and localize dominant sources and to decompose
source signals into individual oscillation components and compare them across
ages. Resting and functional networks and directional connectivities between
identified sources will also be systematically quantified and compared across
ages. This project is expected to provide a new source-based language for
investigating human brain development using EEG and to reveal how neural signals
change in time, frequency and brain spaces to enable infants to communicate with
the world and to acquire new skills.