* 1451058
* IRNC Backbone: SXTransPORT Pacific Islands Research and Education Network
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Gwen Jacobs, University of Hawaii System
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 4,951,929.00

This project builds on the successful prior work of proven partners to support
and expand the primary international research and education (R&amp;E) network
connections supporting global scientific collaborations involving U.S.
researchers and students in the Pacific and Oceania. The project has two main
thrusts. First, it leverages prior NSF investments and mature international
partnerships to maintain support for the current resilient production 2 x 40Gbps
submarine fiber connections from Australia (AARNet) and New Zealand (REANNZ) to
the U.S. and, in 2016, upgrades these connections to 2 x 100Gbps. Since the
fiber connecting Australia and New Zealand passes through Hawaii, the project
also connects one of the world's most important international astronomy sites,
Mauna Kea (Hawaii Island), as well as the international observatories on
Haleakala (Maui). The project leverages the trans-Pacific submarine fiber
backbone to terminate and transport the connections at major U.S. open R&amp;E
network exchanges and hubs. Second, the project provides leadership in R&amp;E
network capacity building throughout the Pacific Islands, the region of the
planet most on the front line of climate change and the last area of the world
with no regional R&amp;E network initiative. Intellectual merit and broader
impact are reflected in this enabling role for international research
collaborations in astronomy, oceanography, high energy physics, coral reef
research and more. Outreach into the Pacific Islands provides an unparalleled
opportunity to engage Pacific Islanders, who are highly underrepresented in STEM
fields, in a wide range of scientific research and education initiatives that
are both appealing (astronomy) as well as of critical concern to their
communities (oceanography, biodiversity coral reef health, and climate change).