* 1451642
* Student support: 4M/ICOMM 2015 International Conference on Micromanufacturing; Milan, Italy; March 31-April 2, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Gloria Wiens, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

The purpose of this award is to provide partial support for selected graduate
students studying in U.S. institutions to participate in the 4M/ICOMM 2015
International Conference on Micromanufacturing that will be held in Milan,
Italy, March 31-April 2, 2015. This is a premiere global conference on
micromanufacturing expected to draw attendance of 150-300 people from America,
Europe and Asia. The venue is the co-location of annual conferences of the
International Institute for Micromanufacturing (I2M2) and the 4M Association,
convening together the worldwide community of micromanufacturing experts. The
4M/ICOMM serves as a platform for exchange of ideas in the field of
micromanufacturing and micro-engineering. It is important to train our next
generation of engineers and researchers with a global perspective. This is
critical in providing a complete education and high-level perspective to the
future industrial leaders and academicians the US students will
become.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fourteen graduate students will receive partial
support to attend 4M/ICOMM 2015 to learn about the latest research progress and
challenges in micro-manufacturing, and to present papers they coauthored. These
students will get an opportunity to network and exchange ideas with leading
researchers and engineers from worldwide academe, industrial and governmental
facilities, as well as the opportunity to visit with companies involved with
micromanufacturing in Europe. In addition to nurturing a global
micromanufacturing vision, participants will learn the latest research areas and
results in the fields of micromanufacturing. This experience will be very
valuable to the selected participants in developing their careers in the
manufacturing field. The funding opportunity will be broadly announced giving
students ample notice and time to apply. Applications will be reviewed by the
conference scientific committee. A total of fourteen students will be partially
supported from this award which will help offset expenses for travel, conference
registration, and lodging. Each recipient of NSF financial support to attend
4M/ICOMM 2015 must be an author or a co-author of a paper that is accepted for
the conference. A short statement on the participant's vision on
micromanufacturing will be requested along with a CV as a part of the selection
criteria.