* 1451732
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Processing code-switching in bilinguals: effects of language use and semantic expectancy
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Edith Kaan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2017
* USD 15,019.00

Most bilinguals code-switch to some extent, that is, they move from one language
to the other within the same utterance. The United States has an increasingly
heterogeneous population, which includes a growing number of bilingual
immigrants who use both English and their other language when communicating
among each other. Code switching is often stigmatized and sometimes perceived as
a deficiency in learning languages. However, code switching often occurs among
highly-proficient bilinguals who are perfectly able to speak each language
separately. Instead of condemning code switching, code switching should be seen
as a cognitive tour de force. Investigating how bilingual speakers organize and
select among the languages they know, how they process mixed languages, and what
factors determine this, will therefore provide insight in human cognitive and
social functioning in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous psycholinguistic
research on language switching has reported that switching between languages is
difficult or costly. These studies have mostly ignored the bilingual's daily
switching habits. The current study challenges the view that code switching is
always costly by testing language users who code-switch on a regular basis,
using multilinguals in Algeria as a case study. This population switches
frequently between Algerian-Arabic and French; however, switching between
Standard-Arabic and French is not common. This makes this population ideal to
investigate whether the habit of switching between a pair of languages rather
than another pair affects the expectation of switching, thus potentially
minimizing or even eliminating the costs. In particular, the proposed research
will test to what extent the switch costs depend on (1) the semantic expectancy
of a particular word in a sentence; and (2) the daily frequency of switching
between certain language pairs compared to others. Importantly, the current
study will use spoken language, which is more naturalistic than the reading-only
paradigms used in previous studies. In addition, the outcomes of the listening
study will be related to the results from a survey on the language habits of the
bilinguals in the study and their perception of and attitudes towards code
switching. Findings from this project will therefore provide insight into the
linguistic and non-linguistic factors that drive code-switching.