* 1451596
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Prosodic Encoding of Informativity
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Elsi Kaiser, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2017
* USD 19,770.00

Prosody plays a vital role in human communication. The 'melody' of words can
convey information that the words themselves do not convey. For instance, a
question like 'what did you do?' can express friendly curiosity or sharp
disapproval, among other attitudes, depending on the prosody used by the
speaker. Being able to use and understand prosodic cues is fundamental to social
interaction, and prosody is one of the first things that newborn babies learn
about their mother tongue. Considering how naturally prosody comes to us, it is
surprising that we do not yet fully understand what influences the prosody of an
utterance. One factor that has been claimed to play a role is informativity. For
example, the word 'apple' is more informative in a sentence like 'the Little
Mermaid ate an apple' than 'Snow White ate an apple', because it is more
unexpected to associate apples with the Little Mermaid than Snow White. Broadly
speaking, it seems that the more informative a word is, the more prominent it is
prosodically--a more informative word is likely to be longer and louder than a
less informative word. However, to understand what actually contributes to this
seemingly intuitive notion, further research is needed. This research has the
potential to inform other fields where prosody plays an important role--
including first language acquisition, second language comprehension, language
impairments and interpersonal communication--and will deepen our understanding
of what information can be extracted from prosody. This ability is particularly
important for listeners with a limited vocabulary and grammar such as infants,
second language learners, and people with aphasia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project strives to make connections between different research traditions on
prosody and informativity. In prior work, the research group showed that prosody
is shaped by a complex interplay between two kinds of informativity: (i)
discourse information (e.g. whether a word is being mentioned for the first
time) and (ii) statistical factors (e.g. whether a word is a frequently used
word or an infrequent word). The researchers hypothesize that these results can
in fact be explained by a unifying factor, namely the degree of difference
between what actually happened and what the speaker had expected--in other
words, how surprised the speaker is. Let us consider 'Snow White ate an apple'
again. As mentioned above, the word 'apple' in this sentence should have fairly
low prosodic prominence because it is highly predictable in the context.
However, imagine the speaker said this sentence in response to someone asking
'what fruit did Snow White eat?' In this case, the word 'apple' might be
pronounced with more prosodic prominence, because the speaker might be surprised
by the conversational partner's lack of knowledge about a famous fairytale.
Building on this idea, a series of experiments will be conducted to further test
the extent to which the speaker's 'surprisal' influences his/her prosody. In
particular, the experiments will investigate whether speakers take their
conversational partner's perspective into account, whether speakers adapt to
their partner's characteristics and changing knowledge, and whether non-
linguistic information plays a role. These studies will shed light on still-
debated questions about humans' perspective-taking abilities, our ability to
track what others know and don't know, as well as the relationship between
language and other aspects of cognition, such as vision. As a whole, this
project aims to improve our understanding of prosody, one of the most
fundamental aspects of spoken communication.