* 1451740
* LTREB: The long-term evolution experiment with Escherichia coli
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Richard Lenski, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Bacteria play critical roles in many environmental processes, in human health
and disease, and in biotechnology. It is important, therefore, to understand the
processes by which bacteria change over time, and to measure the rates of change
in their genes and ecological functions. Reseachers at Michigan State University
will study evolutionary changes in replicate experimental populations of the
bacteria species Escherichia coli, as they evolve in a controlled laboratory
environment for thousands of bacterial generations. To measure adaptation, the
researchers place the bacteria from later generations in competition with the
ancestral strain, which is stored frozen and revived for these experiments. To
quantify genetic evolution, the researchers will sequence the genomes of
bacteria from many time points and compare them to the ancestor's DNA sequence.
These analyses will provide unique information about the rates, mechanisms,
effects, and predictability of bacterial evolution. The knowledge gained will
benefit both science and society because bacteria are key players in the
environment, health, and technology.

This experiment provides a unique study of bacterial evolution by generating
exceptionally long time-series of samples from 12 replicate populations, all
founded from the same strain of E. coli and maintained in identical
environments. The research team will propagate the populations by transferring
them every day into fresh medium; every 500 generations, samples are stored
frozen, where they remain viable. Over the next decade, the experiment will
surpass 85,000 generations. The frozen samples will be used to analyze the
dynamics of adaptation by natural selection, the coupling of phenotypic and
genetic evolution, and the repeatability of evolutionary changes. Research
questions to be addressed include: Will the fitness of the evolving bacteria
relative to their ancestor continue to increase indefinitely? Do the
trajectories for relative fitness and genomic evolution have similar curvatures,
or are they discordant? How repeatable are fitness gains and genomic changes
across replicate populations? The biological samples and datasets generated in
this project will be shared with the scientific community.