* 1451350
* BRAIN EAGER: Development of Robotic Microscopy to monitor the longitudinal molecular dynamics of single neurons and circuits in situ in mammalian brain
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Steven Finkbeiner, The J. David Gladstone Institutes
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This project is directed at developing a novel technology, robotic microscopy
(RM), to "bridge multiple spatial, temporal, and organizational scales to
provide fundamental insights into the emergent properties of neural circuitry
that ultimately lead to behavior and cognition." There are two primary benefits
of the proposed studies. First, the experiments will result in the development
of an RM instrument that can monitor the molecular dynamics of individual
neurons in slices of living brain tissue over weeks at a time. Second, the
experiments will use RM to study for the first time how learning and memory
change the fundamental properties of specific neurons in situ to enhance
synaptic plasticity, providing new insights into the mechanisms involved in
learning and memory. In the past, RM was used to study neurons in culture. The
primary activity in the proposed studies will be to validate the utility of RM
to monitor neuronal dynamics in brain slices that maintain their natural
physiological connectivity and architecture. Other benefits will be access of
the scientific community to a technology that can examine the biochemistry of
neurons and other cell types longitudinally and the development of new
instrumentation that can be used in academic courses that teach students,
postdoctoral fellows and research scientists novel imaging approaches to study
brain circuits.

The problem to be addressed is whether RM can be used to study neurons
expressing the Arc gene in situ in hippocampal brain slices. Arc is important
for long-term memory consolidation and synaptic plasticity, and its activity is
greatly enhanced in specific neuron populations by stimuli that affect learning.
The methods to be employed will involve the use of novel Arc genetic probes and
transgenic mice to determine if RM can identify selective Arc-expressing neurons
activated in brain slices by long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term
depression (LTD) or in brain in vivo during learning and memory consolidation.
The goals of the studies will be to determine if different Arc neuronal circuits
mediate LTP and LTD, and if the same Arc expressing neurons activated in vivo in
the brain during learning can be monitored by RM in situ in brain slices. The
scope of the studies will determine if RM can identify and study different Arc
neuronal circuits activated in vitro and in vivo by different forms of learning
and memory consolidation.