* 1451683
* Workshop: Project-Based Learning at the African Linguistics School
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2020
* John Singler, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2020
* USD 51,500.00

Inaugurated in 2009, the African Linguistics School (ALS) is a two-week
institute held biennially. The next ALS will be held in July 2016, in Abidjan,
Ivory Coast. Most of those in attendance at the school are graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars in linguistics at African universities. The attendees also
include graduate students from American universities. The aim of the ALS is to
provide students with the latest work in core areas of linguistics. The school's
students, selected through a highly competitive application process, pay no
fees; the ALS covers tuition, room and board, and, for students coming from
within Africa, transportation to and from the school. Faculty members, drawn
from North America, Africa, and Europe, teach pro bono. The school promotes
higher education through the training of outstanding graduate students who
return to their institutions with knowledge that they then impart to their own
colleagues and students; A number of the students go on to study at leading
American graduate programs in linguistics. The ALS promotes intellectual
cooperation that may lead to research collaborations among students, postdocs,
and faculty, among participants from the US and different countries in Africa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of the current grant are to introduce
project-based teaching into the ALS curriculum and to increase the diversity of
the students in terms of country of origin. The format for ALS courses has been
lectures, which have the advantage of providing students with a guided and
highly concentrated description of the subject matter. However, especially in an
intense two-week institute, there come to be limits as to how much students as
audience can absorb. To address this at the next ALS, time will be reserved for
projects that involve students working in teams to carry out linguistic
research. The projects will focus on hands-on activities, such as eliciting
data, applying standard definitions to data, and formulating and testing
hypotheses.