* 1451762
* CAREER: Blocks, Stickers, and Puzzles:  Rethinking Computational Literacy Experiences in Informal Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Michael Horn, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 608,337.00

A recent report by the Association for Computing Machinery estimates that by
decade's end, half of all STEM jobs in the United States will be in computing.
Yet, the participation of women and underrepresented groups in post-secondary
computer science programs remains discouragingly and persistently low. One of
the most important findings from research in computer science education is the
degree to which informal experiences with computers (at many ages and in many
settings) shape young people's trajectories through high school and into
undergraduate degree programs. Just as early language and mathematics literacy
begins at home and is reinforced throughout childhood through a variety of
experiences both in school and out, for reasons of diversity and competency,
formal experiences with computational literacy alone are insufficient for
developing the next generation of scientists, engineers, and citizens. Thus,
this CAREER program of research seeks to contribute to a conceptual and design
framework to rethink computational literacy in informal environments in an
effort to engage a broad and diverse audience. It builds on the concept of
cultural forms to understand existing computational literacy practices across a
variety of learning settings and to contribute innovative technology
designs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As part of its overall strategy to enhance
learning in informal environments, the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program funds new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design
and development of STEM learning in these settings. This CAREER program of
research seeks to understand the role of cultural forms in informal
computational learning experiences and to develop a theoretically grounded
approach for designing such experiences for youth. This work starts from the
premise that new forms of computational literacy will be born from existing
cultural forms of literacy and numeracy (i.e., for mathematical literacy there
are forms like counting songs -- "10 little ducks went out to play"). Many of
these forms play out in homes between parents and children, in schools between
teachers and students, and in all sorts of other place between friends and
siblings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This program of study is a three-phased design
and development effort focused on key research questions that include
understanding (1) how cultural forms can help shape audience experiences in
informal learning environments; (2) how different cultural forms interact with
youth's identity-related needs and motivations; and (3) how new types of
computational literacy experiences based on these forms can be created. Each
phase includes inductive research that attempts to understand computational
literacy as it exists in the world and a design phase guided by concrete
learning objectives that address specific aspects of computational literacy.
Data collection strategies will include naturalist observation, semi-structured,
and in-depth interviews, and learning assessments; outcome measures will center
on voluntary engagement, motivation, and persistence around the learning
experiences. The contexts for research and design will be museums, homes, and
afterschool programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research builds on a decade of
experience by the PI in designing and studying computational literacy
experiences across a range of learning settings including museums, homes, out-
of-school programs, and classrooms. Engaging a broad and diverse audience in the
future of STEM computing fields is an urgent priority of the US education
system, both in schools and beyond. This project would complement substantial
existing efforts to promote in-school computational literacy and, if successful,
help bring about a more representative, computationally empowered citizenry. The
integrated education plan supports the training and mentoring of graduate and
undergraduate students in emerging research methods at the intersection of the
learning sciences, computer science, and human-computer interaction. This work
will also develop publically available learning experiences potentially
impacting thousands of youth. These experiences will be available in museums, on
the Web, and through App stores.