* 1451032
* BRAIN EAGER: Analyzing and modeling power-law behaviors in neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Todd Troyer, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this EAGER project is to build and apply a computational
toolbox to study and model power-law dynamics in the brain. Traditionally, any
complex behavior in neuroscience is broken into the interactions of multiple
components, each working in its own characteristic temporal framework. However,
there is an increasing number of examples, such as in brain activity recording
by electroencephalography (EEG), firing rate adaptation, and synaptic weight
dynamics, in which the characteristic process follows power-law dynamics, which
indicate that the time constant of a mechanism at one scale is highly correlated
to the activity of the system at multiple scales. Therefore, the overall
behavior of the system cannot be separated into largely independent components
and traditional analysis techniques cannot provide an appropriate description of
how the system works. In order to understand neuronal information processing at
multiple scales it is necessary to develop a framework to analyze and model
power-law dynamics at all levels of biological organization. This project plans
to make widely available a unified platform to detect, analyze, validate, and
model power-law behavior in the nervous system at multiple scales of
organization. To broaden impact the team will generate products for the public
that will explain the differences between power-law and exponential processes
and their importance in neuroscience research. Research opportunities will be
provided for students, especially underrepresented group at the University of
Texas at San Antonio (UTSA), a minority serving institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative team will analyze and model power-law
relationships in large-scale brain activity and complex behavior. The project
aims to build and validate a toolbox to test and characterize power-laws in data
streams and to model power-law dynamical systems. For this purpose state-of-the
art algorithms will be used to characterize experimental data and fractional
differential equations to model power-law dynamical systems. This modeling
platform will allow the study of power-law processes from the sub-cellular to
the behavior scales. The toolbox will be applied to two very different problems
dealing with complex pattern generation (birdsong production) and human language
comprehension. Both applications will require the analysis of Big Data streams
and model non-linear sequence production or decision-making. Although initially
the focus of research will be in these two projects the framework will be built
to be applicable to a wide range of neuroscience projects that can impact the
research done under the BRAIN initiative. Interactive examples will be
implemented using Mathematica and Matlab platforms and the team will also update
and write new Wikipedia pages on the topics of this grant. In all projects,
graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in both the research and
educational components, providing opportunities not only to do research but to
enhance their communication skills.