* 1451788
* Conference: Annual Meeting of the West Coast Bacterial Physiologists; Asilomar Conference Center in Pacific Grove, California-December 12-14, 2014
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Alfred Spormann, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pamela Morris
* 08/31/2015
* USD 14,970.00

This award, funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program, will help to
offset registration costs for 75 graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to
attend the West Coast Bacterial Physiologists Meeting. At this meeting,
approximately 90% of the talks will be presented by undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows. Junior Faculty initiating their research
programs will be invited in order to facilitate their integration into the
broader scientific community. The scientific focus of the meeting, foundational
aspects of microbial physiology, will be relevant to biotechnological
applications (bioremediation, biofuels), metabolomics and other systems-level
-omics approaches, genome to phenome studies, and synthetic biology.

The West Coast Bacterial Physiologists Meeting will be held in December of 2014
at the Asilomar Conference Center in Pacific Grove, California. The meeting will
be organized into four scientific sessions over a three-day period. Each of the
four sessions will begin with an invited "John Ingraham Lecturers in Microbial
Physiology" which will span the range of microbial physiology fields and include
new and emerging topics. The meeting program and abstracts will be made publicly
available on the meeting website. The meeting will give young researchers the
opportunity to give an oral presentation at a scientific conference, and will
help to integrate junior Faculty into the research community, which will create
new collaborative research opportunities.