* 1451316
* EAGER: A Novel Algorithmic Framework for Discovering Subnetworks from Big Biological Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Robert Reynolds, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 174,989.00

One of the commonly pursued objectives in big data analytics is to find
interesting patterns from data. When the data is big and collected from an
ensemble of underlying networks, such as molecular profiling data, inferring
molecular subnetworks emerged as a promising solution to knowledge discovery
from biological big data. A main barrier impeding the discovery is how to
effectively use the massive and heterogeneous information from the data, e.g.,
how to integrate information from rows and columns of the data matrix to
efficiently explore the complex space of possible subnetworks. A recent line of
research (by the PI and others) has resulted in new algorithms being introduced
to this area. Unfortunately, most of these algorithms are neither specifically
designed for nor work well with biological big data. The main goal of this
project is to develop tailor-made algorithms and software tools to obtain better
discovery of subnetworks from ever-increasing biological big data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and importance of this project
fall into three main areas. First, the subnet algorithms and software tools
developed in this proposal will have broad applicability for many scientific
domains wherein subnetwork structures are usually desired; this encompasses
disciplines ranging from biological, computational, medical and social sciences.
The creation of an efficient and user-friendly software toolbox would further
provide rich resources for training and educating students in these scientific
domains, thereby helping to ensure national academic competitiveness. Second,
the regularly scheduled outreach activities will provide an innovative learning
model for educating students of all levels and the community at large. Finally,
the under-represented groups, such as female and minority students, will be
involved through targeted recruiting and information
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, a novel algorithmic framework,
i.e., subnet, will be developed and implemented to discover subnetworks jointly
from molecule abundance values and co-regulated molecule sets extracted from the
same biological big data. The former correspond to the rows and the latter
correspond to the column of the data matrix. Previous research has focused on
either columns or rows but not on both simultaneously. A novel multi-criteria
score-and-search paradigm will be introduced and a novel subnet algorithm will
be developed and implemented to efficiently and reliably extract underlying
subnetworks from biological big data. These techniques are transformative in
that they are applicable to many other scientific areas where big data are
"emitted" by the underlying networks. The algorithms and tools will be
systematically evaluated on simulation data sets using standard measures.