* 1451216
* GOALI: Seismic interferometry and reflection imaging of the deep crust
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Anne Sheehan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2020
* USD 219,998.00

The proposed research aims to merge methods of academic passive source
seismology with industry active source seismology for enhanced subsurface
seismic imaging at a variety of scales. The emerging methods of seismic
interferometry will be explored and applied. Work on the proposed project will
be used to improve corrections for near-surface variations, develop schemes for
incorporating virtual source methods into seismic reflection imaging, and to
further utilize seismic data sets collected in the past. Methods will be applied
both to sedimentary basins of economic interest and to deep Rocky Mountain fault
systems, with implications for crustal deformation processes and origin of the
deep structures that formed the Rocky Mountains. The collaboration with industry
will benefit the project through access to computer hardware and software, and
to industry signal processing and large data set expertise.

In this project the utility of including virtual source gathers and velocity
structures derived from interferometry in seismic reflection studies will be
explored. The two main approaches that will be followed include development and
comparison of near-surface statics corrections derived from surface wave ambient
noise tomography to those from traditional refraction statics, and active source
interferometry applied to reflection surveys. Rather than restricting the
interferometry to ambient background noise, the virtual source methods take
advantage of waveform recordings of signals such as active source blasts, mine
blasts, and distant and local earthquakes. The study will utilize a modern data
set from a combined active-passive seismic experiment (Bighorn Arch Seismic
Experiment or BASE), and a 1970?s era vibroseis data set (COCORP Wind River
mountains experiment). The main geologic targets in each case are the deep
faults beneath the Laramide Arches and flanking basement, including suggested
crustal detachment features widely invoked in structural models. The proposed
contributions will be of general use beyond this particular geologic environment
and geographic province, and will more fully exploit existing data sets. A
comparison of resulting images from this proposed study can provide an
opportunity to evaluate the effectiveness of each imaging method with diverse
data sets, and the accompanying active source experiments provide an important
check on results.