* 1451665
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Children's Awareness of Syntactic Ambiguity
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Elly Zimmer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2017
* USD 18,145.00

Literacy education is a topic of national importance because the reading skills
of a nation's adult population affect their productivity and economic
advancement. Adults who struggle with reading often have done so since early
childhood. Thus, it is essential to probe all skills that lead to reading
success at an early age. This research examines children's awareness of
ambiguity, a linguistic skill that contributes to reading. After children learn
letter-sound correspondences in words, they begin reading sentences and texts.
Awareness of when a sentence has multiple meanings helps the reader integrate
the sentence into the whole text using context cues. Many children struggle with
this, however. According to the National Center for Education Statistics, only
46% of third-graders are able to use context cues to derive meaning from a text.
Because ambiguity detection influences text comprehension, the question of
whether it can be improved with training is important. Focus on ambiguous
sentences could supplement early literacy curriculum and inform intervention
techniques for struggling readers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This psycholinguistic
research explores children's awareness of syntactic ambiguity, as illustrated in
this sentence: "The boy saw the girl with binoculars." If the prepositional
phrase "with binoculars" modifies the verb "saw," then this sentence means that
the boy used binoculars to see the girl. If it modifies the noun phrase "the
girl," the sentence means that the boy saw the girl who has the binoculars. The
two sentence meanings have very different meanings, and detecting such ambiguity
influences text comprehension. One of the studies in this project investigates
whether pre-school children are consciously aware that such a sentence has
multiple meanings. The second study asks whether ambiguity awareness can be
improved with simple training over a period of a few weeks. The second study
also examines correlations between improvement in ambiguity detection and
improvements on measures of reading readiness. This research advances the study
of language development with new data on children's linguistic knowledge. It is
also relevant to a body of research on sentence processing suggesting that
children rely on fewer types of information than adults do.