* 1451290
* Move2Learn: Engaging Preschool Scientists through Embodiment and Technology
* EHR,DRL
* 12/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Judy Brown, Museum of Science, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 12/31/2015
* USD 115,000.00

As part of NSF's Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, Science Learning+ is
a partnership among US and UK foundations. Science Learning+ makes grant awards
that take transformational steps to inform, improve, and advance the knowledge
bases, practices, and design of informal STEM learning experiences and
environments. The long-term SL+ goals are to broaden participation in STEM and
to better understand, strengthen, and coordinate STEM engagement and lifelong
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a Science Learning+ planning project
that will develop a research plan for investigating how applying the principles
of embodied cognition to the design of informal learning environments can
support young children's (ages 2-6) engagement with, and understanding of,
science topics and concepts. While it has been fairly well established that
cognition is intertwined with the body's interaction in the physical world, the
precise means of applying these ideas to the design of effective learning
environments is still emerging. Experimenting with various embodied cognition
activities and physical learning configurations to understand what conditions
are optimal for informal learning environments for early learners is a major
objective of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the planning grant
period, the project will identity additional practitioner/research
collaborations and will develop research plans for a suite of studies to be
enacted by multiple teams of informal learning practitioners and cognitive
scientists across the US and UK and that will be submitted as a Phase 2
research. The primary activities of this planning period include organizing a
series of workshops that bring together informal learning educators and embodied
cognition researchers to engage in deep discussion and design experimentation
that will inform the development and refinement of research questions,
protocols, and measurement tools. These discussions will be informed by
observations of young children as they interact with the River of Grass, an
exhibit prototype in which principles of embodied cognition are embedded in its
design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning period will be led by a collaborative
team of informal learning practitioners and cognitive scientists from the US and
UK. This group will also oversee plans for the development of a new model for
informal STEM research in which a constellation of practitioner/research teams
across multiple organizations investigates topics of importance to informal
learning practice and research that have the potential to result in a robust
body of research that informs the design of informal learning spaces.