* 1451566
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Syntax and Semantics of Applicative Morphology in Bantu
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Kyle Jerro, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2017
* USD 12,802.00

Language serves not just as a means of communication but also a window into how
humans perceive and categorize the world. Words define basic categories of
objects or situations, and contrasts between words with similar but subtly
distinct meanings provide clues as to what properties of the world humans find
significant. One of the most tantalizing results of the last several decades of
linguistic work on word meaning is that a word's meaning also figures into its
grammatical properties and can constrain the grammatical contexts in which it
occurs, albeit in regular and systematic ways, offering still further clues as
to how humans perceive the world. However, the relationship of word meaning to
grammar varies among languages. Thus it is important to have a diverse sampling
of languages in order to capture the full spectrum of how languages describe the
world. This dissertation investigates the grammatical and semantic relationships
between word meaning and grammar in the Bantu languages of Sub-Saharan Africa.
More broadly, this study incorporates a new set of languages into work on the
semantic underpinnings of grammar, an area that to date has focused heavily on
European languages. It also promotes academic research on the languages and
cultures of Africa, which is important for improving international
collaboration. There are many misunderstandings about Africa in American
society, especially relating to the geographic, cultural, and linguistic
diversity of the people who inhabit the African continent. The inclusion of
African languages in linguistic research promotes more dialogue between Western
and African voices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research question
concerns the semantics of Bantu "applicative" morphology, a type of optional
suffix on a verb that, when present, typically introduces a new participant into
the event described by the verb, expressed as a new direct object. While
previous approaches to this phenomenon generally predict that the applicative
morphology should behave uniformly across all verbs, this study demonstrates
that there is a significant interaction of verb and applicative meaning in
determining what the semantic function of the applicatives is and the
grammatical effects it has.This in turn gives us new insights into how verb
meaning constrains the overall grammatical structure and interpretation of the
sentence and thus ultimately to how languages construe situations in the world.
This dissertation investigates applicative morphology in three Bantu of Eastern
Africa: Kinyarwanda (Rwanda), Chichewa (Malawi), and Lubukusu (Kenya). It uses
standard elicitation techniques to collect data from native speakers from these
different linguistic groups, creating a rich new database of original data, to
be analyzed using state-of-the art techniques for analyzing syntax and semantics
and the relationship of the two. The outputs are thus a rich new dataset for
further research, and also new insights into the universality of human languages
and human cognition regarding how speakers construe events in the world.