* 1451463
* EAGER: Paper Mechatronics: Creating High-Low Tech Design Kits to Promote Engineering Education
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Michael Eisenberg, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2016
* USD 232,928.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. In this Cyberlearning
EAGER project, the project team is developing foundations for using "paper
mechatronics" as a learning technology. Paper mechatronics makes possible a
craft-oriented approach to engineering and computing education that integrates
key concepts from mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, control
systems, and computer programming, while using paper as the primary material for
learner design, exploration, and inquiry. In this approach, learners will design
foldable paper components and assemblies; program motors, sensors and controls;
test their ideas iteratively; and share their designs on a website. This paper-
based modeling approach to learning concepts in and practices of mechanical
engineering, electrical engineering, control systems, and computer programming
ultimately aims to make it possible for all learners to have exposure to and the
opportunity to participate in creative engineering, design, and computer
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach to learning through designing and
making through paper mechatronics is made possible by a convergence of many
different technological factors -- the array of small computers, sensors, and
actuators that are becoming available at low cost and a size that children can
use; availability of a wide variety of manipulable conductive materials
(threads, paints, fabrics); low-cost and precise desktop and laser cutters for
paper and similar materials; a wide variety of novel paper-like materials; and
new ways of interacting with the computer. The approach has its foundations in
Papert's constructionism and in the current maker movement, but it has potential
beyond constructionism itself, both in practice and with respect to what can
potentially be learned about learning and development in in context of its use.
During the course of the proposed project, the team is addressing a variety of
issues -- theoretical (e.g., extending the constructionist approach to take into
account the kinds of embodied experiences children can have with the proposed
kinds of materials), disciplinary (e.g., which disciplinary content learning and
interdisciplinary connection making might this kind of making best support and
for which populations), technological, and pragmatic ones. They will identify
both the design goals and the research questions that it makes the most sense to
take on in a more mature project. Work on this project will lay the foundations
for extending theories of computationally-based expressive technologies, design
of constructionist-oriented learning environments, and assessing creativity,
self-efficacy, engagement, and conceptual understanding of electro-mechanical
systems with school-aged learners,