* 1451828
* HCC: Large: Collaborative Research:  Beyond Flat Images:  Acquiring, Processing, and Fabricating Visually Rich Material Appearance
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Ravi Ramamoorthi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 256,999.00

Despite revolutionary advances in how images are recorded, manipulated, and
reproduced, our ability to re-create the visual experience remains remarkably
limited. Few realistic computer models exist for the characteristic appearance
of natural materials such as marble, wood, coral, or skin, or man-made ones such
as color-shifting automotive paints. Digitizing and creating realistic images of
these substances involves reproducing their interaction with light: the way
light is reflected from surfaces, or scattered and absorbed within the
materials. Full reproducibility also involves "printing" a material as a real,
physical object that modulates the light around us. However, it is currently
impossible to output complex appearance the way we print color on a paper with
fixed gloss, or create shapes using a 3D printer. This project encompasses a
comprehensive, collaborative research agenda in computer graphics and related
areas, to develop an end-to-end framework for acquiring, representing, and
fabricating complex appearance, as well as to understand how it is perceived by
the human visual system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enabling technical idea of the
project is to treat materials as thin three-dimensional volumes populated with
general scattering sites. This is a radical departure from the hitherto standard
approach in computer graphics, which has studied materials purely as surfaces.
The volumetric representation subsumes and generalizes the diverse set of
conventional representations that currently exist in graphics, including
surface-based notions such as bidirectional reflectance (BRDF), spatially
varying BRDF, and subsurface scattering distributions (BSSRDF). Moreover, it
enables fundamentally improved approaches to efficient yet general acquisition,
fast and realistic rendering, and fabrication of objects exhibiting phenomena
beyond simple surface reflectance and spatially homogeneous subsurface
scattering.