* 1451384
* CAREER: Mathematical Modeling and Computational Studies of Human Seizure Initiation and Spread
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2023
* Mark Kramer, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Epilepsy - the condition of recurrent unprovoked seizures - is a brain disorder
that affects 3 million people in the United States. Although the symptoms of
epilepsy have been observed for millennia, the brain processes that support
human seizures remain poorly understood. This lack of understanding has a
profound clinical impact; in one-third of patients with epilepsy, seizures are
not adequately controlled. Animal studies provide powerful methods to uncover
the potential mechanisms for epilepsy, yet how the results from these studies
relate to human epilepsy remains unclear. Although some mechanisms of epilepsy
may be consistent in animal models and humans, differences occur, and these
differences are critical to understanding and treating human epilepsy. The PI's
goal is to improve understanding of the mechanisms that drive human seizures and
thereby advance therapeutic management of this disease. To do so, brain voltage
recordings made directly from human patients will be analyzed. Motivated by
these patient data, mathematical models will be developed that describe the
activity of individual neurons and small populations of interacting neurons. The
mathematical models will then be used to study the biological mechanisms that
support the different brain voltage rhythms that appear during seizure, and how
these rhythms move across the surface of the brain. Ultimately, these
mathematical models will provide new insights into human epilepsy, and help
identify novel approaches to improve patient care. The PI will also include
integration of research data and methods into an undergraduate course in
computational neuroscience, publish a textbook and online course in neuronal
data analysis, and provide undergraduate and graduate research training in
computational neuroscience, with a specific emphasis on clinical data and
computational modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to improve
understanding of the ionic and neuronal mechanisms that govern the brain's
stereotyped spatiotemporal dynamics during human seizure. To do so, a
computational modeling framework will be developed that incorporates individual
neuron dynamics in cortical and subcortical structures and ion concentration
dynamics in the extracellular space. Model behavior will be explored through
simulation and dynamical systems techniques, and model features will be
constrained to match microelectrode array recordings of seizures in human
patients. The modeling framework will be used to test the hypothesized scenario
that a class of cortical interneurons serve as the first line of defense against
the outbreak of seizure, but eventually fails upon entering depolarization
block. Concomitant with this failure, another circuit activates to the support
large amplitude, spike-and-wave dynamics, which appear as traveling waves that
sweep across the cortical surface. Two main research goals are the focus of the
project. First the modeling of human seizure data will provide new insights into
the mechanisms of medically refractory epilepsy, and help identify biological
targets for novel pharmacological approaches to improve patient care. Second, to
understand brain function and dysfunction, a deeper knowledge of cortical and
subcortical neuronal dynamics combined with ion concentration dynamics is
required. In this project, the stereotyped dynamical state of seizure motivates
models that implement these dynamics to examine principles that support
spatiotemporal patterns in the human brain. Educationally the PI will develop
new interdisciplinary training in computational neuroscience. This will be done
through integration of research data, analysis methods and computational
technology in the undergraduate classroom, publication of a textbook and
development of an online course describing cases studies in neural data
analysis, and directed graduate and undergraduate research in computational
neuroscience.