* 1451450
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Transduction of Physiological Stress through Species Interactions: Indirect Effects of Climate Change
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Jonathon Stillman, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 03/31/2020
* USD 606,971.00

Temperatures on land and in the ocean are rising as a result of increased
greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere. Much research to date has
focused on the direct physiological influence of rising temperatures on animals.
However, an important area that has received less attention is to understand how
species interactions will change as a result of warming. This project seeks to
characterize the degree to which physiological stresses experienced by one
species that is vulnerable to climate change are transduced to a second species
through behavioral interactions, even if that second species is not itself
vulnerable to climate change. The proposed research will uncover the
multifaceted nature of climate change on physiological health, an important
problem for all wildlife, including endangered and economically important
species. Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in all aspects of
this work, receiving important scientific training. In addition, the researchers
are teaming with secondary school teachers to develop educational modules on
climate change and ocean life, and school classrooms will be invited to field
sites to observe and participate in scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will assess physiological and species
interaction responses to climate change in a model system for thermal biology: a
pair of sympatric intertidal zone porcelain crab species (genus Petrolisthes)
that differ in their direct susceptibility to climate change. Both species occur
together on rocky Pacific shores but one species lives in the warmer mid-
intertidal zone and the other in the cooler low-intertidal and subtidal zones.
The mid-intertidal species (the competitive dominant) is more sensitive to
rising temperatures than the low-intertidal species (the competitive
subordinate) due to the thermal performance of each species and the maximal
habitat temperatures they experience. The central hypothesis of the study is
that rising temperatures will likely force the mid-intertidal species into the
low-intertidal habitat, increasing competitive interactions and causing
increased behavioral stress to the low-intertidal species. That hypothesis will
be tested in three studies of crabs in the natural habitat, a manipulated field
experiment, and a laboratory experiment: (1) Thermal conditions and
distributions of crabs will be measured in their natural environments to
determine the degree to which warm conditions increase species co-occurrence and
the potential for competitive interactions. (2) A manipulative field experiment
will be conducted to measure behavioral responses to thermal stress in crabs
caged at two intertidal heights. Temperature variation will be regulated by
thickness and composition of artificial stones placed over caged crabs, else
conditions will vary naturally. (3) Experimental intertidal zone simulation
tanks will be used to test for behavioral and physiological responses of each
crab species to thermal stress. Heat lamps will be used to regulate temperatures
under stones with differing degrees of immersion. In field (2) and laboratory
(3) experiments, crab species will be tested separately and in combination.
Physiological condition in all three studies will be assessed from hemolymph
(blood) samples using existing gene expression thermal stress biomarkers and
yolk protein assays of reproductive activity. Gene expression levels of 44
target transcripts and 6 houskeeping genes will be estimated using the
NanoString nCounter platform, a non-amplification based direct measurement of
mRNA. Assays of yolk protein (vitellin) from oocytes and yolk protein precursor
(vitellogenin) from hemolymph will be performed using antibody-based assays
(ELISA) with available antibodies.