* 1451584
* GALANA 6: Learning in Generative Grammar - Evaluation Measures 50 Years Later
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Jeffrey Lidz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2017
* USD 24,173.00

Language acquisition stands as the signature intellectual achievement of the
human species. The scientific study of language acquisition relates patterns of
first and second language acquisition to detailed hypotheses about developing
grammatical representations, the mechanisms by which these representations are
acquired, and the information processing mechanisms through which these
representations are engaged in real time language use by first and second
language learners. The 6th Generative Approaches to Language Acquisition --
North America conference, to be held February 19-21, 2015, will bring together
researchers examining all aspects of first and second language acquisition. The
conference will host a special session focusing on the computational mechanisms
through which learners use the language they are exposed to to build a
particular grammar. This special session will both introduce cutting edge
computational methods to the broader developmental linguistics community and
spur new links between empirical research on children's language development
with explicit computational models of language learning. The special theme of
the conference will encourage collaboration and further research in this area,
extending the range of data that computational linguists see as relevant to
modeling acquisition and highlighting the importance for developmental linguists
of thinking about the role of input and the mechanisms that use it in shaping
language acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of the conference is a
series of invited talks by six prominent researchers with relevant expertise.
Together, the speakers address key issues in language learning spanning syntax,
phonology, morphology, bilingualism and heritage language acquisition, and bring
together a diverse range of theoretical and methodological approaches. In
addition, the conference encourages broad participation. Four of the six invited
speakers are women and the conference provides travel awards to graduate student
presenters. The papers of the invited speakers will be published in Language
Acquisition: A Journal of Developmental Linguistics.