* 1451142
* Collaborative Research: Quantitative Analysis of Lightning's Multifaced Impact on the Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Morris Cohen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 08/31/2019
* USD 374,698.00

This award addresses fundamental questions about the impact of lightning
discharges on the lower ionosphere (60-90 km). Lightning discharges are among
the most powerful sources of electrostatic fields and electromagnetic radiation
and are known to create significant disturbances in the lower ionosphere.
Specifically, two well documented perturbations stem either from direct heating,
known as Early/Fast (E/F) events, or from induced bombardment by energetic
particles from the radiation belts, known as lightning-induced electron
precipitation (LEP). The low ambient electron density of the lower ionosphere
precludes direct measurement by standard radar techniques, hence observations of
E/F and LEP events are made using remote sensing with Very Low Frequency (VLF,
3-30 kHz) waves from powerful communication transmitters. VLF signals reflect
from the lower ionosphere and are perturbed in amplitude and phase when an
ionospheric disturbance occurs along the path, thus allowing a form of
continuous observation. Efforts to diagnose and understand the physics of
disturbances have yielded largely qualitative results to date. This project will
bring together two experts in ionospheric and magnetospheric processes to
realize the full potential of VLF remote sensing. This project will enhance
efforts to forecast navigation and communication outages due to lightning-
induced disturbances. Early-career PIs at each institution will lead the
project, which will also contribute to the support of several graduate students
and a post-doctoral researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unambiguous determination
of the physics of ionospheric disturbances from VLF signal perturbations has
been lacking due to the complex nature of VLF signal propagation and also the
variability of lightning discharges. In this effort, the challenges to
quantifying lightning-ionosphere coupling with VLF remote sensing by introducing
the following innovations: &lt;br/&gt;1. Strategic observations of ocean-based
lightning and overlapping VLF transmitter paths. &lt;br/&gt;2. Novel
polarization and scattered field analysis from amplitude and phase in two
channels.&lt;br/&gt;3. Quantifying the role of the lightning source spectrum in
the ionospheric disturbance.&lt;br/&gt;4. Improvement of numerical codes for
trans-ionospheric propagation and raytracing.