* 1451827
* The Role of Construal Level in Prosocial Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Marlone Henderson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/2020
* USD 305,078.00

Throughout history, human civilization has long recognized the value and
necessity of engaging in prosocial behavior both within and across groups.
Indeed, encouraging people to donate their time and resources to help others is
a wise practice, as engaging in such prosocial behavior can have economic,
social, and even mental health benefits for the receiver, giver, and society at
large. When people engage in such prosocial behavior, it is mostly as a result
of appeals. Thus, understanding fundamental processes that underlie people's
responsiveness to appeals is crucial. The investigator proposes to examine how
people's basic mental processes affect their responsiveness to different kinds
of appeals. One thing that makes humans special relative to other species (and
even sophisticated machines) is our ability to think or construe the world at
varying levels of abstractness. This ability to adopt higher levels of thinking
allows humans to grasp concepts that transcend beyond one specific situation,
including concepts such as love and justice. Previous research indicates that it
matters whether people construe their own behavior abstractly, that is, in ways
that are schematic and capture the essence of what the behavior is about, or in
terms of its concrete observable details such as how and in what circumstance
they carry out the behavior. No research, however, has examined how people's
construal level affects their responsiveness to different kinds of appeals or
influence tactics in the prosocial domain. In addition, most previous research
in the prosocial domain has focused exclusively on intentions rather than
people's actual prosocial behavior. This proposal explores how people's ability
to think or construe the world in more concrete versus more abstract terms
affects the way people respond to solicitations for donations and volunteerism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research involves a series of six studies
that employ a combination of laboratory and field designs (i.e., collaborations
with real charities and nonprofits). The proposed research will systematically
test key predictions about behavior by examining the impact of situational
factors that are known to shift individuals' thinking to a lower (more concrete)
or higher (more abstract) level, used in conjunction with different persuasive
appeals. The investigator will identify the circumstances that maximize how much
time and money people give to help others by examining the manner of making
contributions (distributed vs. all-at-once; unrestricted vs. to targeted needs)
as well as the temporal sequencing of the appeal, such as whether it is preceded
by a smaller or much larger request. This research will provide much needed
clarity and insights in the domains of judgment and decision-making, social
influence, prosocial behavior, and social-cognitive processing. In addition, the
findings have the potential to transform how charities and nonprofits target and
persuade potential donors and volunteers.