* 1451668
* CAREER: Making Aggregated Search Results More Effective and Useful
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Jaime Arguello, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 12/31/2020
* USD 518,700.00

Aggregated search is the task of combining results from multiple independent
search engines into a single presentation. The most widely used aggregated
search systems are commercial search portals such as Google. In addition to web
search, commercial search portals provide access to a wide range of auxiliary
search services, or verticals, that focus on a specific type of media (e.g.,
images, videos) or search task (e.g., search for news, local businesses).
Aggregated search systems are responsible for predicting which verticals to
present (Does the user want to see images or news?) and where/how to present
them. This project will study a phenomenon called aggregated search coherence
and its effect on search behavior. Given an ambiguous query (e.g., "saturn"), a
common strategy for a search engine is to diversify its results (e.g., to return
results about the car and the planet). Aggregated search coherence is the extent
to which results from different sources focus on similar senses of the query.
The outcomes of this project will provide the knowledge required to expand the
accessibility of search across a wide range of domains. The test collection
produced will allow others to reproduce the results of this work and test their
own solutions. The software will enable others to perform large-scale remote
studies of search behavior. Insights gained from the user studies will be of
interest to researchers in other fields such as psychology and
marketing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research by the PI found that the query-
senses in the vertical results can affect user interaction with other components
on the aggregated results page, the so-called "spill-over" effect. This project
will investigate how aggregated search coherence affects search behavior and
will incorporate this knowledge into new methods for aggregated search
evaluation and prediction. Specifically, four objectives will be tackled. (1) A
series of user studies will be conducted to investigate how different factors of
the user, the search task, the results presentation, and the layout determine
the level of spill-over from one component to another. (2) Using the insights
gained from these studies, a new test-collection evaluation methodology will be
developed and validated that models cross-component effects. (3) Due to the
pipeline architecture of existing systems, results from different components are
completely independent of each other. New algorithms will be developed and
evaluated for predicting which results from each component to display and how.
The goal will be to minimize negative cross-component effects. (4) The
generalizability of the methods will be tested on two additional domains:
library search and news story aggregation. Aggregated search facilitates single-
query access to different types of media, which require customized search
solutions. It is the underlying technology behind commercial search portals and
also widely used in other domains such as library, mobile, and desktop search.
The project will study a phenomenon that is not currently well-understood, nor
addressed in existing evaluation methods and algorithmic solutions for
aggregated search.