* 1451120
* GEOTRACES Peru-Tahiti section: Measurement of 7Be as a Tracer of Upper Ocean Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2017
* David Kadko, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2017
* USD 320,631.00

In the ocean, trace elements function variously as nutrients, as contaminants
from human activity, and even as convenient tracers of current and past
oceanographic processes. Their biogeochemical cycling has major impacts on the
ocean carbon cycle and ecosystem dynamics as well as on global climate change.
Many processes influencing the distribution and behavior of trace elements in
the ocean cannot be directly observed, so consequently a variety of geochemical
tracers are used to provide important constraints on their rates and pathways.
Beryllium-7 (Be7) is a cosmogenic (i.e., produced in the upper atmosphere)
radionuclide that, because of its half-life (53.3d), can be used in the study of
environmental processes occurring over seasonal timescales. This timescale is
important to studies of biological production, nutrient regeneration, and
atmospheric deposition, to name a few. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a
research team from the University of Miami will make measurements of water
column Be7 along the U.S.GEOTRACES transect from Peru to Tahiti in 2013. The
mission of the International GEOTRACES Program (of which the US program is a
component) is "to identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the
distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish
the sensitivity of these distributions to changing environmental conditions."
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the multi-institutional U.S.GEOTRACES Pacific
campaign, the Miami team will address key tasks formulated within the GEOTRACES
Science Plan. Specifically, they will: (1) provide realistic estimates of the
underlying transport processes influencing measured trace elements of interest
(TEI) distributions; they will use water column measurements of Be7 as a tracer
of physical processes, such as mixing and upwelling, which redistribute
biologically active species; and (2) develop and apply new Be7 methods for
quantifying the atmospheric deposition of TEIs measured by other research teams
participating in the campaign. Measurements of Be7 in the surface waters and in
the lower atmosphere along the cruise track will provide estimates of the
atmospheric input of relevant TEIs. The atmospheric input into the global ocean
is an important budgetary component of numerous chemical species, yet is very
difficult to constrain. The data generated in this work will be available to
allow ground-truthing of aerosol deposition models and the atmospheric input of
trace elements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The proposed work is in
support of the GEOTRACES program, and as such contributes to many of the broad
intellectual objectives of that program. The ability to provide estimates of the
atmospheric input of relevant TEIs is an important example, and one that will
contribute widely to the field in the future beyond GEOTRACES, including
understanding anthropogenic impacts on the oceans. Education and training of
graduate students will be essential components of this research.