* 1451631
* Workshop: Bilingualism and Executive Function: An Interdisciplinary Approach; CUNY Graduate Center-New York; May 18-19, 2015
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Virginia Valian, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 12/31/2016
* USD 37,212.00

The Graduate Center of the City University of New York will host a workshop on
the relation between bilingualism and cognition, with special emphases on
executive functions and aging. A recent set of findings suggest that being
bilingual confers cognitive advantages including a delayed onset for cognitive
decline. The goal of this workshop is to explore explanations for how and why
these advantages occur. There are a variety of different aspects of cognitive
processing that may be enhanced by the experience of being bilingual and may
therefore underlie reported advantages offered by bilingualism. Executive
function in particular enables people to manage, integrate, regulate,
coordinate, and supervise other cognitive processes, such as attention and
visual perception. Bilingualism may be especially useful in enhancing some of
those executive function capacities but may not be unique in providing those
enhancements. Workshop participants will explore evidence for a single, high-
level, description of how cognitive enhancement occurs versus many different
underlying mechanisms that may each lead to enhanced executive function. This
interdisciplinary collaborative forum will allow psychologists, neurologists,
linguists, and neuroscientists to learn from each other and develop new
approaches to this important area of research. The workshop will consist of five
discussion panels and a poster session. Each panel will feature two invited
experts and a discussant. The panelists will be experts from different
disciplines broadly divided into bilingualism and executive function. The
disciplines include cognitive psychology, linguistics, aging, and
neuropsychology. A poster session will provide an opportunity for students and
young investigators to communicate their work on this topic to the workshop
participants. Together the participants will discuss theories and mechanisms
that might connect bilingualism and executive function. Cognitive health,
extending into old age, is of increasing importance as the population ages.
Understanding the role of bilingualism in the context of other cognitively
challenging activities will have implications for public policy and public
health.