* 1451178
* An Investigation of Mutual Interactions between the Practice of Chinese Medicine and Biomedicine
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Emma Teng, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 18,000.00

General Audience Summary

This dissertation research project traces the production of two of the first
English-language acupuncture atlases in the 20th century. These atlases
highlight the work of standardizing Traditional Chinese Medicine to mirror
western medicine, and thus legitimate its practice, while simultaneously mapping
invisible meridians that fall outside the regular purview of evidence-based
Western medicine. In addition to engaging in archival research, the project will
also involve conducting a limited number of interviews with individuals
affiliated with the production and circulation of acupuncture atlases in the
United Kingdom, the United States, and China. Besides publishing the results of
this research in scholarly journals, the visual and textual components of this
project will serve as material in documentary filmmaking to reach beyond the
confines of academia and engage with broader concerns in health care. The author
has extensive experience in digital media that will facilitate using the results
of this research to make short films that will contribute a global, non-western,
human-centered perspective of medicine to a broader audience.

Technical Summary

The goal of this project is to demonstrate how two seemingly disparate medical
practices, Chinese medicine and biomedicine, became entangled. The project will
provide a comparative analysis of the production of two texts, Celestial Lancets
(1980), and Acupuncture (1981). The body maps collected and reproduced in these
two case studies will serve as sites for examining medical theory and medical
practice. Among the research questions to be addressed are the following. How
were medical practices articulated as science? What did illustrations of the
body define and obscure? The project adopts a transnational perspective and a
multidisciplinary approach. It builds on and departs from studies in the history
of the body, visualization and representation in science, and post-colonial
science and technology. This is not just a project about the making of maps, but
about how the private lives of historical actors entangled with standardizing a
narrative of the body was situated within a global history of experimentation
and practice.