* 1451768
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sociolinguistic Variation and Biracial Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Renee Blake, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2017
* USD 12,632.00

The 2010 U.S. census estimates that 9 million Americans identify as multiracial,
and demographers observe that the number of individuals identifying as two or
more races has increased significantly over the last 15 year. Multiracial
Americans, especially black/white biracial Americans, are also increasingly
visible in the public consciousness. Multiracial Americans may have personal,
social, and/or cultural motivations to identify with and project different
social and racial identities. Previous research has shown that the identity
choices of multiracial Americans are often reflected in social practice though
elements such as personal adornment and choice of friendship networks, but few
scholars have examined the effects of these identity choices on linguistic
practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project investigates racial
identity through the lens of language, examining how Millennial generation men
(ages 18-32) with one black parent and one white parent project their racial
identities in conversations with white and black peers. Under the direction of
Dr. Renee Blake, Nicole Holliday will collect conversational speech samples
under varying interview conditions from members of the study group, and will
perform a set of phonetic analyses on the collected samples. The analyses will
focus on the stylistic variation in their use of certain suprasegmental
features, such as intonation and rhythm, which appear to differ between African
American English and Mainstream U.S. English. These features include the use of
Fundamental Frequency (F0) range (including falsetto phonation), peak delay, and
the number of pitch accents in comparable utterances. Understanding how these
features work in style-shifting is important because research has demonstrated
that listeners rely on linguistic information to make racial judgments about
speakers and that this type of linguistic profiling has tangible consequences:
individuals are often denied housing, employment, or other types of
opportunities. The results of this study will shed light on how linguistic
features are used to perceive and to convey an individual's racial identity.