* 1451022
* Development of Microstructure and Creep Strength of Marble
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Brian Evans, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Carbonate rocks (limestone, dolomite, marble) are important constituents of the
Earth's crust. Notably, layers of limestone and dolomite are among the folded
and faulted units within the fold-and-thrust belts of the major mountain ranges
- the Idaho-Wyoming overthrust belt and the Alpine nappes, for example. These
belts contain major hydrocarbon reservoirs. The processes by which the
constituent minerals deform is essential in the understanding of how these belts
form and how the deep crust deforms. This project explores the detailed
mechanisms by which carbonate rocks deform through a series of experiments in
which the constituent minerals are deformed over a range of strain rates,
confining pressures, and temperatures. A new novel micro-scale strain mapping
method when coupled with various high-resolution microscopy methods, will allow
for unprecedented understanding of the atomic scale mechanisms of carbonate
mineral deformation. Results will be compared to naturally deformed carbonate
rocks collected from the Alps. The project would advance desired societal
outcomes through: (1) development of a globally competitive STEM workforce
through postdoctoral fellow training; (2) increased partnerships through
international collaboration; and (3) enhanced infrastructure for education
through development of Open Courseware materials.

The main goals of this project are to investigate the physics and kinetics of
the evolution of microstructure and strength of carbonate rocks during creep,
and to identify characteristic elements of microstructure necessary to interpret
the mechanical history of naturally deformed rocks. The project, in
collaboration with scientists at GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences and
Université Montpellier builds on previous work by this research group and will
include testing and observations of the microstructure in samples deformed under
conventional triaxial and torsion loading of natural and synthetic marbles at
shear strain rates between 10^-3 and 10^-6 per second, confining pressures less
than 300 MPa, and temperatures between 500-1000 K. Observations of
microstructure will be made using optical microscopes, SEM, TEM, and EBSD to
correlate dislocation structure, generation of LPO, dynamic recrystallization,
and the evolution of strength. Two novel techniques, micro-scale strain mapping
and sequential microanalyses, will be used to understand the kinetics and
partitioning of strain amongst the deformation mechanisms. Although lab
investigations are important, thorough and fundamental understanding of
tectonics will come only by combining and reconciling lab experiments,
observations of field- and micro- structure, geophysical investigations, and
theoretical and computational treatments. Thus, continued observations of
microstructures in naturally deformed marbles are an important part of this
project. In collaboration with researchers at Universität of Bern, the team will
observe microstructure in mylonites from the Helvetic Nappes, which provides
opportunities to investigate the influence of temperature on strain
localization, to study the influence of varying quartz and dolomite content on
strain localization within the carbonates, and to correlate dislocation
microstructure, grain structure, and phase chemistry at locations where
deformation conditions are well constrained.