* 1451586
* Collaborative research: Is Anthropocene sedimentation in valley bottoms a geologically significant event?
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Robert Walter, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 02/28/2018
* USD 137,879.00

Non-technical description of the project's broader significance and
importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research in geomorphology, the study of
Earth's surface and the processes that shape it, has found that human
modification of land in the northeastern U.S. over the past few centuries has
resulted in large volumes of sediment being eroded from hillsides and deposited
in valleys along rivers and streams. Prior research has suggested that this
sediment transfer is the most important modification of Earth's landscape in
tens of thousands of years. This project will evaluate the significance of these
deposits on a regional scale by carefully measuring them in representative field
locations and then using newly available high-resolution topographic data to
extrapolate the findings to whole watersheds and regions. Knowledge of how human
activities have contributed to landscape change is a prerequisite for informed
land-management and restoration decisions. To ensure broad communication of
project findings, the researchers will interact with policy makers, planners,
government agencies, and non-profit organizations interested in stream and
wetland conservation. This project also will include strong opportunities for
student research, since the collaborating institutions are heavily invested in
undergraduate education as a priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description of the project &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent global sedimentation
studies demonstrate that rates of erosion due to human activities exceed the
amount of sediment delivered to the oceans by rivers. At the same time, field-
based studies at the channel to watershed scale have found large quantities of
sediment stored in valley bottoms during the past few centuries. This project
will bridge the gap between global and watershed-based approaches by quantifying
the amount of Anthropocene (recent, human related) sediment stored in valley
bottoms of the northeastern United States, and then comparing this amount to
published volumes and timescales of (1) erosion from the landscape, and (2)
deposition in reservoirs, lakes, and estuaries along the Atlantic margin. The
research will use high-resolution topographic data to map the extent and
thickness of this fill over large spatial areas (1,000-10,000 square km), and
will test these methods using fieldwork (mapping, coring, geophysical data
collection, sediment sampling and dating) in key watersheds. A central goal is
to evaluate the extent to which sediment storage in the unglaciated mid-Atlantic
region applies in the glaciated, less-studied New England region, where upland
soils are thin, sediment sources are generally localized to glacial deposits,
and large natural lakes and wetlands provide terrestrial accommodation space.
The results of the project will help resolve the discrepancy between erosion and
deposition rates at small spatial (watershed) and temporal (decadal to
centennial) scales versus the rates that occur globally and over geological
time.