* 1451819
* The Implicit Content of Sluicing
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2019
* James McCloskey, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 11/30/2019
* USD 375,644.00

In planning their linguistic expressions, speakers and writers are often able to
leave out informationally redundant grammatical material, such as when the verb
"call" is omitted in "Fred called, but Sheila didn't". This process, known as
ellipsis, is widespread across the languages of the world, and is particularly
common in informal language and dialogue. Among the many varieties of ellipsis
is sluicing, where what is omitted is not a verb but an entire sentence. For
example, a speaker may choose to leave out the understood sentence "he called"
after "why" in a sentence like: "He called, but I don't know
why".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ellipsis poses challenging scientific and engineering
problems. Research over the past 50 or 60 years has demonstrated that the
principles permitting ellipsis involve many different kinds of information
(grammatical structure, the dynamics of the discourse context, and real-world
knowledge), but the precise character of these principles and their interaction
is still an open question. Progress has been hampered by the lack of a crucial
resource type: databases of felicitous uses of ellipsis that are large enough to
validate theories against, and rich enough to form the basis for machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of this project is to build such a
database for sluicing and to make it freely available to language scientists and
engineers. This resource will be a large, curated corpus of naturally occurring
ellipses, annotated at a level of sophistication that will allow a range of
analytic questions to be probed quantitatively. As the curation and annotation
proceed, patterns that emerge from the data will be used to investigate the
interplay between grammar and context that makes ellipsis possible. Since
ellipsis is a pervasive feature of human language, to better understand how it
works is to better understand the nature of human linguistic behavior itself.
This project should also stimulate technological innovation in an area of urgent
need: in designing more sophisticated systems for interfacing with natural human
conversation, which is replete with ellipses of every kind.