* 1451677
* Doctoral dissertation research: The representation, organization and access of lexical tone by native and nonnative Mandarin speakers
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Kiwako Ito, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 12/31/2016
* USD 13,592.00

China and its over 1 billion Mandarin speakers play an increasingly important
role in global affairs. Today more and more Americans of all ages are engaging
with China by learning Mandarin as a foreign language. Yet, learning Mandarin
poses many unique challenges; perhaps most daunting is the use of lexical tone,
or pitch, to differentiate word meanings. Each syllable in Mandarin can be
produced with up to four different pitch patterns--a sharp drop in a speaker's
pitch could be the only difference between saying 'four' and 'to die.'
Furthermore, tone can vary greatly according to a speaker's gender, age,
speaking rate, as well as the position in the utterance and neighboring sounds.
Given this complexity in the speech signal, how do native speakers of Mandarin
effortlessly and rapidly process tone and how can non-native learners improve
these processes? One solution involves probabilistic predictions about speech
given the listener's knowledge of Mandarin's distributional properties. All
languages exhibit regularly occurring patterns in speech: certain combinations
of sounds are highly predictable based on prior experience with the language.
Previous work by this research team has shown that native Mandarin speakers are
highly sensitive to which tones pattern with which syllables and make use of
this statistical learning during word recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building
on this research team's previous work, this project will examine how native and
non-native Mandarin speakers store mental information about tones for newly
learned words and how this information influences word recognition. This
research will test 3 groups of speakers-- native Mandarin speakers, and native
English speakers who either are learning Mandarin as a second language or have
no previous experience with a tonal language. Participants will take part in a
four-day artificial tonal language-learning paradigm. Specifically, the
investigators will manipulate the co-occurrence of syllables and tones, as well
as the number of speakers a participant hears, in order to monitor each group's
sensitivity to the statistical distribution of the artificial language.
Participants' word identification, pronunciation, and online eye-movement
responses to speech stimuli will be measured across multiple sessions. This
research program has implications not just for our cognitive understanding of
how lexical tone is learned and used during word recognition, but also for our
understanding of how to better teach and acquire a new tonal language like
Mandarin Chinese.