* 1451588
* Individual - Group Comparison of Requests for and Use of Advice
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,05/31/2019
* James Larson, Jr., Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeryl Mumpower
* 05/31/2019
* USD 179,926.00

This research examines the conditions that prompt groups to underutilize advice,
and asks whether groups might sometimes underutilize advice to a lesser extent
than individuals do. Because both individual and group decision makers often
have advice available to them, gaining a better understanding of when they will
be most likely to take advantage of that advice may help us understand why
certain individuals or groups seem to make good decisions and why and when they
might be prone to make bad ones. This research will contribute to national
health and to US competitiveness to the extent it informs the design of
processes that promote effective use of advice in individual and group decision
making so as to improve individual outcomes and organizational
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decades of research have shown that decisions
made in a social context, where many people's opinions are integrated before a
final judgment is reached, tend to be better than decisions made by lone
individuals (Kerr &amp; Tindale, 2004; Larrick &amp; Soll, 2006; Larson, 2010).
Unfortunately, most people do not realize the benefits of integrating advice
from others into their own judgments (Bonaccio &amp; Dalal, 2006), and so they
either underutilize advice or ignore it altogether. Further, it is not just
individual decision makers that underutilize advice; decision-making groups do
so as well. Indeed, one recent study found that small decision-making groups
underutilized external advice to an even greater extent than individuals do,
and, like individuals, they paid a price in accuracy for doing so (Minson and
Mueller, 2012). The present research focuses on the conditions that prompt
groups to underutilize advice, and asks whether groups might sometimes
underutilize advice to a lesser extent than individuals do. Group members are
typically very confident in their decisions right after they have reached a
consensus, but beforehand, and especially when there is substantial diversity in
their members' individual decision preferences, they are apt to have relatively
low confidence in their judgments (Tindale, 1989). Because confidence likely
plays an important role in determining openness to advice, we predict that
groups will make much better use of advice prior to consensus when their members
initially hold diverse decision preferences. In our first study, advice will be
provided to both individuals and groups at various stages of the decision making
process in order to learn more about when, during that process, groups and
individuals are most likely to make good use of advice. Our second study will
then explore these same processes in a more ecologically valid situation, where
decision-makers must actively seek-out advice, rather than the advice being
provided to them automatically.