* 1451125
* BRAIN EAGER: Massive-scale multi-area single neuron recordings to reveal circuits underlying short-term memory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Mriganka Sur, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This award is jointly made by two programs: Instrument Development for
Biological Research program (IDBR), and Emerging Frontiers (EF), in the
Directorate of Biological Sciences (BIO).

Short-term memory is a crucial component of cognitive function and pervades
nearly all aspects of our mental lives. Previous research has shown that short-
term memory involves multiple cognitive components and diverse brain regions.
However, it is not mechanistically understood what regions are involved when,
what neuronal subsets are recruited within these regions, or how they interact
to represent information relevant to behavior. This proposal aims to elucidate
the role of visual, association, and motor cortex in mice performing a visually-
cued short-term memory task. This will be accomplished using massive-scale two-
photon calcium imaging in behaving mice to measure activity of thousands of
neurons simultaneously across these multiple brain regions. Subsequently,
optogenetic manipulation of brain regions and of computationally identified
neuronal assemblies will be used to determine their causal role in behavior.
These technologies and results will have wide impact on understanding neural
circuits underlying behavior and cognition. New approaches will be introduced
for massive-scale mapping of single neuron activity in relation to a
quantifiable behavior. New ways to determine circuit connectivity, and novel
combination computational and optogenetic technologies to manipulate critical
circuit components, will be introduced. These large data sets will be made
widely and freely available, enabling other research groups to avail of these
data for novel analyses.

The goal of this proposal is to develop novel tools and provide unprecedented
information on neuronal activity patterns and circuits in order to understand
the role of multiple cortical areas during short-term memory in mice. Classical
electrophysiological recordings are limited to relatively small numbers of
neurons with unknown identity. In addition, while microstimulation or
pharmacological manipulations can be used to activate or inhibit all the neurons
within a local area, it is not possible to selectively excite or inhibit
specific neuronal subpopulations that are known to play a role in the behavior.
The proposal addresses these issues by developing novel tools to study mice
performing a visually-cued memory-guided discrimination task. First, methods for
massive scale imaging (up to ten thousand neurons simultaneously) of multiple
cortical regions spanning several millimeters in the mouse cortex will be
developed. Second, mice will be trained on a visually cued short-term memory
task with suitable behavioral richness, including separate sensory, memory and
response epochs, so that activity in distributed cortical regions (such as
visual, parietal, and frontal motor cortices) can be imaged and the role of
individual areas in each epoch can be ascertained. Third, targeted inactivation
of specific brain areas will be performed to determine their role in the
behavior. Finally, computationally identified neuronal subsets in specific areas
will be stimulated in order to determine if they are sufficient for altering
behavior. Together, these will be the first studies in the field to link
behavior, extremely large-scale multiple-area recordings, and causal
manipulations of areas and identified neuronal assemblies. By introducing tools
for a radically different approach from previous analyses of memory and memory-
guided functions, it is expected that the project will have a significant impact
on the field.