* 1451925
* CSBR: Natural History: Development of a Liquid Nitrogen System for the Genetic Resources Collection, Natural Science Research Laboratory, Museum of Texas Tech University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Robert Baker, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 412,012.00

An award is made to the Genetic Resources Collection (GRC) of the Natural
Science Research Laboratory (NSRL), Museum of Texas Tech University to improve
the security of its holdings through replacement of 16 mechanical -80oC freezers
with a Liquid Nitrogen (-190oC) system. The samples housed at NSRL-GRC are used
by researchers from around the world to address questions vital to science and
society, such as advancing understanding of global biodiversity, the impact of
humans on the natural world, and the transmission of disease between wildlife
and humans. Each tissue sample is unique and irreplaceable, as it represents an
individual at a specific point in time and space, and the samples are of
unlimited actual and potential value to the science community in terms of on-
going and future research. Outcomes of this project include: expanded storage
capacity of the GRC, allowing for growth of the collection; education and
training of graduate and undergraduate students in collection management
practices; a public exhibit highlighting the significance of genetic resource
collections to science and society; outreach materials for high school
educators; development of a newsletter and a feature page on the NSRL website;
refinement of curatorial standards; and reduced energy consumption by the
transition to a green technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
project is to replace the GRC's current storage system of 16 mechanical freezers
with five vapor-phase liquid nitrogen (LN) freezers that preserve samples at
-190Â°C. The lower temperature will ensure the integrity of the samples and
preserve the entire spectrum of genomic data they contain, including molecules
(RNA, viruses, bacteria, etc.) ensuring their potential to inform future
research efforts. This will broaden the usage of the GRC beyond traditional
disciplines, such as biodiversity and systematics, to include genomics and other
developing fields of genetic, molecular, and environmental research. The project
will also enable enhanced data accessibility by researchers and NSRL staff and
allow for implementation of new curation procedures for GRC samples. This will
be accomplished by: 1) annotating the NSRL database with genetic sequence
database numbers and making those data available via data portals such as
iDigBio and VertNet; 2) annotating the NSRL's internal database to indicate
samples obtained from virus-positive vouchers and designate those samples with
color-coded labels; and 3) identifying symbiotype and holotype genetic samples
with color-coded labels. Overall, this project seeks to preserve the integrity
and information content of the specimens while engaging the wider community by
highlighting issues of relevance to their lives.