* 1451284
* A Collaboration to Develop Tools for Mapping and Assessing the Impact of STEM Experiences Across Different Ecologies
* EHR,DRL
* 11/15/2014,09/30/2017
* John Dunlosky, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 09/30/2017
* USD 115,000.00

As part of NSF's Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, Science Learning+
(SL+) is a partnership among US and UK foundations. SL+ makes grant awards that
take transformational steps to inform, improve, and advance the knowledge bases,
practices, and design of informal STEM learning experiences and environments.
The long-term SL+ goals are to broaden participation in STEM and to better
understand, strengthen and coordinate STEM engagement and lifelong learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Science Learning+ Planning Project will develop a
prototype assessment tool (based on a mobile technology platform) to map STEM
learning experiences across different learning ecologies (e.g. science centers,
mass media, home environment) and to develop research questions and designs for
a Phase 2 Science Learning+ proposal. The tool will focus on the impact of the
learning ecologies on knowledge, interest, identity and reasoning rather than
emphasize learning in a specific content area. The proposing team will develop
and conduct a small scale usability study during the planning period, which will
inform what is proposed in the Phase 2 research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key
focus of the planning period will be to identify and develop the theoretical
constructs (i.e., outcomes) to be measured by the prototype App. As a starting
point, the project will start with four of the six strands identified in
Learning Science in Informal Environments (National Research Council, Bell et
al., 2009): (1) interest triggered by a STEM experience; (2) understanding
scientific knowledge; (3) engaging in scientific reasoning; and (4) identifying
with the scientific enterprise. Discussion among the project partners during the
planning process will revolve around how these strands should be measured in the
Phase 2 research across ecologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The measurement tool
will assess the goal(s) that people set as they engage in STEM learning within
each ecology and will measure the individuals' duration and level of engagement.
The project will strive to utilize measures that: (1) are nonobtrusive; (2) are
embedded in STEM experiences; (3) can be used across ecologies; (4) can be
scaled for other ecologies than the ones examined in Phase 2 research; and (5)
will be easy to use by researchers and practitioners.