* 1451652
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:Do individual differences in statistical learning predict linguistic adaptation?
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Jennifer Culbertson, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2017
* USD 12,831.00

A rich body of research has shown that statistical properties of language, like
word or sound frequencies and co-occurrences, provide crucial information used
by children to learn their native language. At the same time, there is evidence
that adults' language use is influenced by expectations - e.g., about likely
upcoming sounds, words, structures - which are dynamic and can be rapidly
updated based on the current linguistic environment. This project investigates
the idea that these abilities in children and adults reflect the same underlying
mechanism: implicit tracking of statistical information. This single mechanism
would then be used both during language learning, and continually across the
lifespan to adapt to new situations or speakers. This research aims to provide
evidence for this connection by showing that an individual's ability to track
statistical information when learning a new language is correlated with their
ability to adapt their own language under changing
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus first on learning and
adaptation of higher-level linguistic structures. The study will test whether an
individual's performance on a classic statistical learning task - implicitly
learning that the presence of one syllable depends on the presence of another -
predicts their ability to rapidly adapt expectations regarding upcoming
syntactic structures (e.g., whether a verb is likely to act as a main verb or
introduce a relative clause). The study will then look for evidence of the
generality of the mechanism in question by testing whether statistical learning
of higher-level structures predicts adaptation of lower-level sound category
information. The results of the project will have implications for second
language research and teaching; if individual differences in statistical
learning and adaptation reflect a mechanism active across the lifespan, the
kinds of tasks used here could be developed as diagnostic tools for assessment
of language ability, and how it changes with age. This project also involves
developing new open-source web-based tools for conducting cognitive psychology
and psycholinguistics research more quickly and with fewer resources.