* 1451263
* Innovation Through Propagation: Determining an Engineering Education Research Agenda
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Larry Shuman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 298,350.00

Funded by NSF's Research on Education and Learning (REAL) program, this early
concept grant for exploratory research will develop a national research agenda.
The ultimate goals of this research are to increase learning, diversity, and
more effective use of technology, via the propagation of documented innovations
throughout engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address
four major questions: (1) what accomplishments have been realized as a result of
documented innovations to date? (2) To what extent have these innovations been
propagated? (3) What remains to be done? &amp; (4) How best can future work be
propagated? To address these questions the researchers will employ a number of
interactive strategies involving both engineering education researchers and
administrators. First, they will convene a planning committee of experts to
identify individuals from engineering education who will be invited to
participate in a Delphi study designed to identify key issues and needs for the
next decade. Three writing teams, each addressing a critical area (learning in
and out of the classroom, pipeline and diversity, and technology), will prepare
white papers addressing questions (1) and (2). Versions of these papers will be
presented at the 2015 American Society for Engineering Education Conference.
Next, a cadre of invited participants will meet in early fall 2015 for a three
day workshop to address questions (3) and (4). A draft of the final report will
be available for comment from the engineering and engineering education
community for 30 days before the final report in submitted.