* 1451462
* US-Based Student Mentoring and Travel Support for Wireless Health 2014 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Donna Spruijt-Metz, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 21,910.00

The Wireless Health Conference Series is now in its fifth year and provides the
highest profile academic and industrial research forum for the Wireless, Mobile
and Connected Health fields. This year, the conference will be held October
29-31, 2014 at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in Washington, DC.
Wireless and mobile health involves a broad ecosystem of researchers whose
expertise spans health and health care, engineering, computer science,
behavioral and social sciences, as well as businesses partners. The Wireless
Health conference series is currently the only dedicated academic/research
conference that brings together leaders in the field across the entirety of the
interdisciplinary wireless and mobile health community. This mentoring and
travel grant will support travel and lodging for 15 doctoral students to attend
the Wireless Health 2014 conference. Students will attend the full Wireless
Health conference, present their projects and receive feedback and individual
mentoring sessions from conference attendees who are leaders in the field. The
fifteen students who will be supported on this grant to attend Wireless Health
2014 will benefit from: (1) unique international experience where they associate
with scientists from different countries while visiting NIH; (2) exposure to new
application areas of computer science and engineering where their skills are
particularly needed, for students in medicine and other areas of public health,
exchanging ideas with engineers; (3) learning about new types of computational
thinking when applying technologies to wireless health applications; (4)
exposure to some of the latest types of devices, robots, sensors or networks,
and new mobile technologies; (5) experience in giving presentations, explaining
their work, and discussing with persons in other disciplines; and (7) the
opportunity to discuss how to succeed in an interdisciplinary field. This award
will facilitate the establishment of research and education collaborations with
students and/or faculty who are members of underrepresented groups. Another main
aim of this award will be mentoring a diverse group of early-career health
scientists and engineers in research proposal preparation. Finally, this award
will facilitate the establishment of collaborations between disciplines and
institutions, among the U.S. academic institutions, industry and government and
with international partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 5th Wireless Health
Conference Series will be hosted by the Wireless-Life Sciences Alliance (WLSA),
in conjunction with a Steering Committee comprised of leaders from the global
academic and industrial research communities. More information on the
conference, conference leadership, and the conference program can be found at
the conference website (http://www.wirelesshealth2014.org). Foundational to the
conference is the understanding that facilitating interdisciplinary
communication, collaboration and cooperation among participants from academia,
public health, clinical practice, government and industry is crucial to address
real-world issues of the healthcare industry. Wireless Health 2014 will offer an
outstanding set of peer-reviewed papers and abstracts, interactive workshops,
demonstrations, and world-renowned invited speakers and facilitate formulation
of future research directions and collaborative efforts in wireless health.