* 1451592
* International Symposium on Science for Education: A Satellite Meeting to the International Brain Research Organization (IBRO); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil-July 5-6, 2015
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Patricia Kuhl, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 10/31/2016
* USD 69,788.00

As societies become progressively knowledge-intensive, they increasingly rely on
human capabilities to learn and innovate. How each nation's education system
succeeds or fails to prepare its citizenry to meet these challenges are topics
of domestic and global interest. Learning and innovation are critical to the
broader concerns of human and national development and the capacity of a nation
to compete in a world of globalized economies and labor markets. A primary
driver of educational innovation is basic research focused on how humans learn.
The challenge is: how to more effectively use research about how people learn to
inform educational policy and practice, and conversely, how to use knowledge and
experience gained from educational practice to raise questions that test and
refine research being conducted on learning. Dr. Patricia Kuhl proposes an
international meeting on July 5-6, 2015 as a two-day Satellite Symposium to the
International Brain Research Organization (IBRO) 2015 World Congress in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. This meeting is expected to (1) foster the development,
adoption. and adaptation of effective models of teaching that have proven
successful in various countries, (2) establish new international research
collaborations on learning that are interdisciplinary to advance methods and
theory, (3) create an understanding of the value of learning research among
policymakers and broader audiences across countries, and (4) create an
understanding of the two-way street that exists between research and practice in
the learning sciences. Sharing ideas and successes across countries offers the
rare opportunity for a global community to be exposed to entirely new ways of
thinking about the future of education.

The objective of the meeting is to connect more deeply research studies on
learning to educational policies and practice, in the belief that interactions
and long-term partnerships between neuroscientists and educators (a "network of
networks") will promote work that will alter educational practices worldwide.
Specifically, this meeting will: (1) bring together an international group of
researchers, practitioners, and policymakers to deepen the connections between
scientific research and policy and practice in education; (2) promote exchanges
between neuroscientists and educators to foster action and work that will alter
educational practices worldwide; and, (3) ignite interactions that lead to new
research collaborations and opportunities to connect research to educational
outcomes. The symposium is expected to facilitate interactivity among the U.S.
researchers, researchers from South America and around the world, and education
practitioners and policymakers, to stimulate the development of next generation
instrumentation in multi-user facilities that will improve the measurement of
brain responses during learning, and to develop theories with interdisciplinary
input that will explain why particular approaches to learning are successful and
promote an understanding of the basic brain mechanisms that underlie learning.