* 1451750
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The semiotics and social practices of constructing a "proper" Singaporean identity
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Qing McFatter, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2017
* USD 14,780.00

The proposed dissertation research investigates how "proper" language identities
are enacted in Singapore, a discussion situated within broader sociopolitical
discourse of global citizenship and local ways of being. This study treats the
practices of a "proper" identity as constitutive of a semiotic package or
repertoire - a fluid set of semiotic resources which people must balance to
enact appropriate levels of "globalness" and "localness" in Singapore.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linguistic practices are investigated through variation in
Singapore English (SgE), a complex linguistic repertoire encompassing Singlish,
the most local and colloquial English, and Standard Singapore English (SSE),
which typically indicates higher education and being extra-local. Twenty
Singaporeans will be recruited for ethnographic participant observation and
recorded in various conversational contexts ranging from formal interviews to
casual social gatherings. Casual settings will elicit the use of Singlish, which
most basically differs from SSE via the incorporation of Chinese discourse
particles and syntax. Contrastively, SSE is used in formal settings. The varied
use of SgE across conversational contexts reveals not only intra-speaker
variation but also a speaker's underlying beliefs about language and how it
should be used. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sociophonetic aspect of this research
project focuses on variation in voice onset time (VOT), an acoustic measure used
to categorize stop consonants, like the difference between /p/ and /b/. Fifty
Singaporeans will participate in a series of speech perception tasks testing how
SgE stops are categorically perceived. These tasks will provide a sociophonetic
profile of VOT in SgE as well as investigating whether VOT contributes to the
perception of a speaker's social identity as an acoustic
cue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining qualitative and quantitative methods,
this work identifies patterns of variation in the production and perception of
SgE, paying attention to processes through which variables and practices come to
be associated with global mobility or local rootedness. This study will also
contribute to existing SgE documentation in providing a sociophonetic account of
VOT. Finally, exploring micro- and macro-variation in SgE sheds light on broader
issues of language in globalization, post-colonial sociolinguistics, and New
Englishes.