* 1451491
* The Global Learning Council: a Broad Cross-Sector Dialogue about Best Practices in the Development of Learning Technologies
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Justine Cassell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

This project is supporting the first in-person meeting of the Global Learning
Council (GLC). Started in 2013, the GLC includes members from industry,
academia, non-profits, and government. At this conference they will discuss
technology-enhanced learning, focused on the application of learning science to
the development of learning tools, data on learning gains, and the science of
how students learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific conference sessions include a)
Best Practices, b) Big Data, and c) K-16. Working groups will focus on
additional topics such as a) funding for educational research in the era of
online courses and other technology-enhanced learning tools, and b) policy
challenges related to scaling research-driven outcome-based learning. The
conference will lead to several deliverables which include case studies that
demonstrate the importance of data in improving technology enhanced learning,
recommendations on the next steps and processes in using student outcome data
across different sectors (such as educational, workforce, company, and
philanthropic), announcement of a new collection of learning outcome data
donated by a number of the institutions represented in the GLC, the announcement
of a set of tools that make learning analytics accessible to an increasing
number of the stakeholders involved in the development and dissemination of
effective teaching. These and other deliverables will be made available through
the Global Learning Council site and the site for the Simons Initiative at
Carnegie Mellon. Conference attendees will provide evaluation feedback. This
project is funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education through the IUSE
program.