* 1451569
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Changes in Intonation: Perception and Production
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Brian Joseph, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2017
* USD 13,499.00

One of the most noticeable differences between the speech of different groups of
people is their prosody, the rhythm and melody of their speech. People might say
that different groups of people sound "sing song-y" or "talk too fast" or "sound
loud." Or, they they might say that they can tell, for example, where they are
from, or their race or ethnicity, based on the melody of their voice. However,
differences in prosody, as well as how these differences might change over time,
have not been studied as much as other linguistic differences. As it is known
that people can use prosody to tell the race or ethnicity of a speaker, and use
that information in a discriminatory way, understanding the nature of prosodic
differences is important to combatting that discrimination.

This project examines the prosody, specifically, the intonation (melodic
patterns) of speakers in the Midwest. One important aspect that can cause
differences in intonation is a speaker's first language. Moreover, if enough
people in a community speak another language, either as a first language or
heritage language, it can subtly change the sound of English in that community,
even among people who don't speak that other language. These changes might fade
away over time in speech production, but even if that happens, people in that
community might still be able to understand, and imitate, those differences.
Using both production and perception data gathered in Dayton, Ohio, Rachel
Steindel Burdin, under the direction of Dr. Brian D. Joseph, will investigate
these changes in the use and understanding of first and heritage language-
influenced intonation. This project will not only give us insight into how
intonation can change and into the processes that are in play in interactions
between different languages, but it will also give us valuable insight into the
nature of language contact and language change more generally.