* 1451446
* EAGER: Designing and Exploring the Impact of Learning Technologies on Youth Fitness Practices
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Robin Hunicke, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2016
* USD 268,437.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advancing what we
know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. In this
Cyberlearning EAGER project, the team is working towards design of an immersive
virtual world in which learners play themselves in a narrative as they attempt a
variety of challenges and experience how changes in their exercise and eating
behaviors lead to outcomes different from the ones that their current habits
produce. The foundational hypothesis is that tangibly experiencing what would be
possible if they adopted different habits, along with reflections and
discussions (both explanatory and identity-related) around those experiences,
would create conditions for more healthy behaviors. This project will advance
understanding of how to take advantage of the immersive possibilities technology
makes possible to foster positive changes in everyday behaviors and will
contribute significantly to understanding how to foster positive behavior in
many areas of societal importance, e.g., health, social conduct, and becoming
masterful at carrying out professional practices.

While there is much evidence that serious games can play powerful roles in
fostering learning, there is less understanding about exactly how to design such
games so that they systematically foster learning that results in taking on new
more positive habits and dispositions. The scholarly literature suggests that
fostering new more positive habits and dispositions requires taking into account
the complex contexts and practices of learners' lives and the different
meanings, preferences, and skill levels they may bring to new situations. This
project continues work towards an innovative new genre of serious games for
learning that are designed to foster and sustain positive new habits,
dispositions, and behaviors. The system uses data about learners' activities and
motivations to pose challenges to learners; learners engage and analyze that
same data as they test hypotheses and plan toward addressing the challenges, all
within a context of sense making that bridges the virtual and physical worlds.
The project team is aiming towards development of a nuanced model of learning,
taking on, and sustaining more positive health and social behaviors that is
sensitive to individual meaning making and contextual constraints. The work is
being done in the context of serious games for health, and the data learners
engage with is data about their own health, nutrition, activity, and fitness.