* 1451593
* Collaborative Research: Recrystallization of Stable Iron Oxides in Reducing Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Matthew Fantle, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2017
* USD 199,841.00

Iron (Fe) oxides are abundant in soils, sediments, and rocks. Like most
minerals, Fe oxide minerals undergo transformation reactions as their
surroundings change. These transformations can result in the incorporation or
release of toxic trace elements, metals, and biological nutrients, which affect
water quality. The transformations may also alter an oxide's isotopic
composition, which is often used to reconstruct past environmental conditions on
Earth. The proposed work will investigate a recently identified, insufficiently
characterized Fe oxide transformation reaction: "stable Fe oxide
recrystallization". This process involves a solid Fe oxide mineral that
undergoes elemental and isotopic exchange with dissolved ions in solution under
reducing conditions, which surprisingly has been shown to occur without any
obvious changes in the oxide's structure, texture, or particle size. The goal of
the proposed work is to determine how and under what conditions stable Fe oxide
recrystallization occurs for two common Fe oxide minerals: goethite and
magnetite. The outcomes of this project could fundamentally change our
understanding of Fe oxide mineral reactions with important implications for
earth surficial processes on both modern and ancient Earth.

To study this process, this interdisciplinary team will combine radioactive
isotope tracer experiments with spectroscopic, high-resolution microscopic, and
pore-scale analyses. This approach will allow us to track recrystallization
rates, extents, and spatial distributions for several natural and synthetic Fe
oxides with different particle sizes, trace element contents, and
recrystallization histories. Achieving our research goal would lead to: (i) more
effective groundwater remediation strategies by improving knowledge of how Fe
oxides interact with toxic trace metals and radionuclides under a range of
geochemical conditions; (ii) improved assessments of past environmental
conditions on Earth by examining how Fe oxide isotopic signatures change over
time; and (iii) insights into similar, poorly understood recrystallization
processes observed for other minerals. In addition to disseminating results
through the incorporation of this research into coursework and peer-reviewed
publications, this project will support the implementation of an annual week-
long summer camp program for grade 6-8 students - "Science Unearthed: The Dirty
Details" - which will provide educational opportunities for children, STEM
focused undergraduates, and K-12 teachers.