* 1451060
* 2014 MRS Symposium H: Micro/Nano Engineering and Devices for Molecular and Cellular Manipulation, Stimulation and Analysis; Boston, Massachusetts; 30 November - 5 December 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,04/30/2015
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2015
* USD 4,000.00

This award is for the partial support of the 2014 MRS Meeting Symposium H on
Micro/Nano Engineering and Devices for Molecular and Cellular Manipulation,
Stimulation and Analysis. This major international meeting will provide a single
forum for discussion of the latest developments in biomedical research in
molecular and cellular sensing, stimulation, and characterization. Regular
meetings of the key researchers in this field are necessary for the exchange of
ideas, information, and state-of-the-art technologies, in order to enable and
accelerate advances and breakthroughs in the fields of biomedical science and
nanomanufacturing. This international symposium is a key mechanism for linking
basic science with engineering towards the development of nanotechnology-enabled
biomedical applications, which are of significant importance to the US and world
economies. This symposium offers a means for the open exchange of new and
previously unpublished scientific ideas. It will include presentations and
extended discussions and interactions among international participants. This
gathering has been instrumental in the generation and incubation of breakthrough
and transformative ideas in many areas of nanotechnology, nanomanufacturing and
biomedical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will partially support
the participation of junior participants, including undergraduate and graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, and early career faculty members. The funds will
support the attendance at the conference of 12 participants and undergraduate
awards.