* 1451055
* Thermal and Structural History of the Pennine-Austroalpine Transition Zone, Alps (Eastern Switzerland)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Brian Wernicke, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 02/28/2017
* USD 233,001.00

Large-scale structures in collisional mountain belts such as the Alps or
Himalayas typically record shortening strains reflective of the collision of two
continents. However, increasing evidence is emerging that some structures in
these belts deform by extension (or stretching), a pattern opposite to the
expectation. In some cases, the extension may be consequence of collapse of the
high topography created by the collision. In this project, a research team from
California Institute of Technology and Australian National University, will test
if a major structure in the Alps deformed by extension. If so, the finding would
shed new light on the complex processes that operate in major collisional
mountain belts. The project would advance desired societal outcomes by: (1) full
participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM through a high school
mentoring program; (2) increased public scientific literacy and public
engagement with science and technology through outreach activities; (3)
development of a competitive STEM workforce through training of a graduate and
an undergraduate student; and (4) increased partnerships through international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the structural and
low-temperature thermal history of the base of the Austroalpine allochthon in
eastern Switzerland, representing the contact between the Adriatic microplate
and various tectonostratigraphic units located along the southern margin of
Europe. Published thermochronological and structural data in the region suggest
that the fault may primarily be a normal fault, juxtaposing the allochthon
against its structurally complex substrate, the Pennine Zone, at some point in
early to mid-Tertiary time. In collaboration with the Australian National
University, the research team will analyze eight transects across the southern
part of the base of the allochthon in order to constrain the thermal histories
of the Austroalpine and Penninic domains, and the structural transport
direction(s) along and near the base. This project will constrain the cooling
paths of from samples transects using (U-Th)/He and fission-track methods on
apatite, zircon and where possible, titanite. The Australian National University
group will constrain the cooling histories of the same samples, using white mica
and potassium feldspar. This multiple-method approach across key contact zones
will provide powerful new constraints on the origin and emplacement of the
allochthon. A normal fault origin for the base of the allochthon (cold rocks
emplaced over hot), if correct, will have first-order implications not only for
the assembly of this iconic orogen, but for convergent orogens in general.