* 1451628
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Questions and answers in K'iche'
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Judith Tonhauser, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2017
* USD 8,436.00

Each human language is a complex system and the languages that are still spoken
today exhibit a wide variety of complex structures. By examining linguistic
properties of human languages, e.g., sentence structure and meaning, linguists
discover fundamental properties common to all human languages. At the same time,
linguistic research reveals the diversity of language and systematic
explorations of a wide variety of languages are indispensable to understanding
this diversity. Yet, most research in formal linguistics focuses on English and
other well-studied European languages. While theoretical research on under-
studied languages has been on the rise in the past 30 years, formal linguistic
research on many topics is still hampered by very little data from a diverse
range of languages being available. Such research thus leaves unaddressed
questions about cross-linguistic universals and variation. Hence, additional
theoretically well-informed studies in under-studied languages are needed in
order to broaden our knowledge about human languages and to develop theories
that can explain a wide range of facts about them.

This project studies K'iche', an indigenous Mayan language of Guatemala, with
the goal of exploring a central topic in the formal study of linguistic meaning,
namely the interpretation of questions and answers. While there are some
preliminary studies on this topic in K'iche', there is no in-depth study that
looks at how different kinds of questions and their answers are expressed in
this language. Thus, the research will contribute to the understanding of
K'iche' grammar by significantly extending the limited previous work in these
areas and at the same time facilitating an informed comparison between K'iche'
and well-studied languages like English. To that end, a large component of the
grant work involves collecting original linguistic data in Guatemala from native
speakers of K'iche'. In addition, the research involves developing an analysis
of the question-answer exchange in K'iche' in a mathematically precise theory of
grammar with the goal of excelling not only in empirical breadth and but also in
theoretical rigor. The project aims to explore whether theoretical models of
questions and answers can account for the structure and interpretation of
questions and answers in a typologically different language like K'iche'. For
example, K'iche' differs from English in terms of having a "canonical" verb-
initial word order and allowing word order changes based on discourse-related
phenomena. Existing formal theories of discourse and of the question-answer
exchange are predominantly modeled based on data from English. Thus, this
research aims to bring theoretically interesting data from K'iche' to bear on
the broader issue of modeling the grammar of questions and answers.