* 1451135
* Conference: Education, Collaboration, and Innovation: Intelligent Biology and Medicine in the Era of Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Zhongming Zhao, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 16,004.00

The 2014 International Conference on Intelligent Biology and Medicine (ICIBM
2014) seeks to create opportunities for advancing science, technology, and
education to a varied and diverse audience, including students, faculty,
scientists, and engineers, and to provide a platform for the cross-fertilization
of ideas. This focus on educating the next generation of bioinformatics, systems
biology, and intelligent computing experts with up-to-date technologies and
knowledge creates limitless opportunities for the advancement of research and
development within computer scince as well as complex biomedical systems and
translational medical research, as well agricultural, environmental,
pharmaceutical, and zoological sciences. Now is the time to promote the
fundamental concepts of molecular biotechnology, genomics, and systems biology
for researchers seeking to understand living organisms at multiple levels, to
explore complex and dynamic functions and regulation in cellular systems, and to
improve algorithms, computational tools, and biotechniques for better diagnosis,
prevention, and treatment of diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICIBM 2014 will
continue in the successful tradition of facilitating training and informational
programs catering to various levels of research expertise in computer scince and
computational biology fields. New researchers can utilize resources to gain
higher levels of training and information from experts and innovators, while
established researchers will have continued access to collaborative
communication and new opportunities. Through increased dialogue, educational
activities, collaborative opportunities, and interactions throughout the event,
ICIBM 2014 will fuel advancements and cutting-edge research within these fields
and beyond.