* 1451202
* BRAIN EAGER: Cell-type-specific Optogenetics in Wild-type Animals
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Robert Desimone, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This project consists of engineering a system for producing selective expression
of light-inducible molecules in targeted neuron population in non-genetically
modified animals of any species. The result will be a set of reagents that will
be made freely available to the scientific community through nonprofit
repositories and service centers. This new set of tools will enable the study of
neural circuitry with greater resolution, power, and throughput than is
currently possible, allowing major advances to be made in understanding the
organization of the complex neural systems underlying perception, cognition, and
behavior. This increased understanding could also result in improved artificial
intelligence and machine learning. Finally, the future direct application of the
technology in human patients holds promise for potentially treating conditions
such as Parkinson's disease and epilepsy, by allowing the selective activation
or inactivation of distinct components of the compromised neural circuitry that
is associated with these disorders.

Over the last decade, sophisticated genetic tools have been developed that allow
control and monitoring of neuron electrical activity using light alone.
"Optogenetics", as this area of technology has become known, is only useful if
optogenetic molecules can be specifically expressed in functionally meaningful
groups of neurons instead of broadly in all the diverse neuron types that are
present in any brain region. This requirement has confined their use almost
entirely to genetically modified (transgenic) mice and rats. The approach of
using transgenic animals has three major disadvantages. First, the production
and maintenance of transgenic rodents is very expensive. Second, even within
transgenic rodents, it allows the optogenetic study and manipulation of only one
or two cell types at a time, preventing powerful combinatorial experiments in
which different neuron types are independently controlled within the same
tissue. These combinatorial experiments will be critical for deciphering the
complex interactions between cell types. Third, it restricts the experiments to
rodents, preventing studies in other important taxa including primates, in which
optogenetic experimentation during complex cognitive tasks would almost
certainly provide major insights into the neural circuitry underlying cognition.
This project aims to create engineered binding proteins that recognize selected
endogenous proteins that will then act as scaffolds for assembly of
transcription factors that will activate gene expression in specific neurons.