* 1451347
* Combined Lab, Field, and Modeling Studies Aimed to Improve our Understanding of Sources of Ice Nuclei and their Impact on Western US Precipitation Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Kimberly Prather, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2019
* USD 957,000.00

This project builds upon the CalWater study conducted in 2009-2011 in California
that investigated the impact of dust and bioparticles transported over long
distances on clouds and precipitation processes over the Sierra Nevada mountain
range. It is part of a larger project sponsored by the Department of Energy and
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. This research seeks to gain
a better understanding of the interactions between aerosols and clouds in the
atmosphere and how these interactions influence precipitation processes. The
results may be important for areas of California suffering from recent
drought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address 3 questions: (1) Under
which regimes do the ice nucleating properties of mineral dust, terrestrial, and
marine biology origin impact mixed-phase, precipitating cloud systems? (2) How
do the ice nuclei (IN) activity spectra differ between dust, bio-dust and bio-
marine aerosols, and can these differences be adequately represented in
numerical weather prediction models? And (3) Do scenarios of optimal IN number
concentration, together with cloud microphysics and dynamic responses exist such
that precipitation is enhanced? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual particle and IN
mass spectra will be measured at a ground site using aerosol time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (ATOFMS) and combined with data from other instruments on the
ground and on the DOE aircraft, including a continuous flow diffusion chamber
(CFDC), to provide information on the mixing state and sources of the aerosols.
The Weather Research and Forecast model with aerosol speciated spectral bin
microphysics (WRF-ASBM) will be run at cloud-resolving resolution and
constrained by measured aerosol chemical type, IN concentrations, cloud water
content and hydrometeor type measured by in-cloud imagery. The observations will
be used to constrain and validate advanced numerical model simulations of
aerosol cloud nucleation, hydrometeor-hydrometeor interaction, and
precipitation. The results will have major implications for the field of
aerosol-cloud interaction studies.