* 1451448
* Small Data Research Infrastructure: Workshop Proposal
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Deborah Estrin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 97,068.00

Small Data Research Infrastructure: Workshop Proposal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is for a workshop series to assess the research needs and opportunities
in small data research. Small data refers to the collection of digital traces
that individuals generate implicitly and explicitly during their everyday lives.
As the use of big data analytics has exploded, a growing community of computer
and information science researchers has started to focus on the capture,
processing, governance, and use of these small data streams. The research
challenges raised by small data cut across the computer science community and
include: 1) Personal data mining and modeling: parsing and fusion of diverse and
noisy data streams to create informative, descriptive, and predictive models of
individuals and their behaviors; 2) Data Privacy and sharing: constructs,
architecture, and policies, for protecting and sharing raw and derived personal
data streams; and 3) User-centered applications and human-computer interaction:
design methods and tools to create meaningful and engaging experiences for
individuals. In order to make progress across these three research thrusts, at a
scale and pace that matches the potential for impact to individuals and society,
this project aims to run a series of workshops to convene the technical
community. The output of the workshop series will include the articulation of a
small data research agenda, and a plan for a shared community research
infrastructure to support real world experiments with real participants and
their small data streams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together
expertise from across computer and information sciences and engineering for a
series of workshops to develop a research agenda and community infrastructure
for small data research. To develop and evaluate realistic systems using "small
data" requires user involvement and an end-to-end system test bed involving data
streams controlled by various companies and further, that such a test bed should
be a shared community infrastructure, since no single research group can afford
to build it. The infrastructure development at the center of the proposed
workshops has the potential to change how investigators do research, which
broadly impacts the research community.