* 1451037
* EAGER: Data-Driven Learning and Decision Making in Healthcare
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Mohsen Bayati, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this EArly-Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award is to create
a new generation of learning and decision making tools in healthcare systems
enabled by growing availability of data. Making data-driven learning and
decision making an integral part of healthcare has profound potential to both
improve the quality of medical care and to reduce healthcare costs. Despite
this, state-of-the art methods are still insufficient for achieving broad
acceptance, and significant impact of evidence-based decision making in medical
settings is lacking. The fundamental methodological and scientific challenges
that this project aims to investigate lie at the intersection of multiple
disciplines: decision processes, machine learning, and statistics. This project
helps advance this multidisciplinary research area and also develops teaching
units for training a new cohort of researchers in this high impact space. On the
other hand, this project has the potential to impact other domains beyond
healthcare. In particular, the emphasis on dynamic learning and optimal
decisions from large amount of data make its findings relevant to a number of
domains such as finance, marketing, and electronic commerce.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Due to advances in technology and government incentives a large
amount of data on patients' conditions is becoming available electronically. On
the other hand advances in machine learning and statistics allow the design of
"predictive systems": algorithms that can learn generalizable patterns by
sifting through a large number of patient profiles and provide accurate future
forecasts about clinical adverse events, treatment outcomes, or demand for
healthcare services. These predictions can be produced in real-time as new data
is captured and can help guide decisions in healthcare systems. However, when
statistical learning models are used to guide decisions such as medical
treatments, clinicians make decisions based on their predictions that can change
subsequent patient data that are collected and used to "re-train" the predictive
system, thereby updating the forecast probabilities at the presence of new
evidence. Current predictive systems in practice fall in one of the following
two categories: (1) they are never re-trained post first installation; or (2)
they are periodically re-trained with the arrival of new data. However, the
first approach leads to poor forecasts when the new data arrives and
circumstances around the decisions change. On the other hand, recent advances in
the theory of multi-armed bandits, reinforcement learning, and their
applications to digital advertising and recommendation systems indicate that the
second approach can also lead to low quality predictions due to the endogeneity
of the decision making process. The new dynamic-learning and decision making
tools developed in this project will be robust against these challenges by
proper modeling of the interactions between the data elements, the decisions,
and the consequences of the decisions on new data.