* 1451129
* US - Korea Joint Workshop on Collaboration in Software Defined Networking/Network Function Virtualization (SDN/NFV) for Smart Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* James Sterbenz, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2015
* USD 49,964.00

This project funds a workshop that brings together researchers from the US and
Korea, for the purpose of describing and assessing the impact of advanced
networking on the engineering of smart cities. Researchers who specialize in
programmable networking, including SDN (software defined networking) and NFV
(network function virtualization) will work with leading researchers interested
in the broad areas of smart cities, including enabling technologies such as
large-scale sensor and actuator deployment (wireless and wired) and the Internet
of Things (IoT) as applied to the smart city application domain. Research in
smart cities has a clear benefit to society, in improving the lives of people
through the use of technology, including in the domains of energy efficiency and
health-care delivery. However, techniques for how to structure secure, reliable,
and flexible networked communications in support of smart cities is poorly
understood. The workshop will explore and document key technology challenges and
opportunities that arise when next generation networking and smart cities are
considered together.

The workshop will be held August 16-17, 2014, in Chicago, Illinois. Potential US
participants will be invited to submit one-page abstracts of their interest and
ideas in the workshop areas. These abstracts will be reviewed by the US workshop
organizers, and approximately 20 participants will be selected. This proposal
supports travel expenses for the US participants only; Korean participants are
being selected and funded by their national agencies.