* 1451213
* CAREER: Low-Power Transceiver Design Methods for Wireless Medical Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Marvin Onabajo, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal Number: 1451213&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Title: Low-Power
Transceiver Design Methods for Wireless Medical Monitoring&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Wireless communication chips with lower power consumption
are needed to enable more widespread wireless connectivity for numerous battery-
powered portable and implantable biosignal measurement devices. However, reduced
power consumptions lead to degraded performance and reliability, which inhibits
the adoption of low-power circuit design approaches. Innovative integrated
circuit design techniques are required to alleviate this tradeoff in medical
applications, wireless sensor networks and chips with energy harvesting
features. The primary research objective of this project is to create design
methodologies for performance and reliability enhancements of tunable low-power
analog circuits through the incorporation of efficient digital circuits. A key
educational goal is to pioneer a unified approach through which students
collaboratively learn to combine low-power analog integrated circuit design and
digitally assisted performance tuning methods with a primary focus on cutting-
edge medical applications. New course materials will establish a long-lasting
research and education program aimed at creating reliable wireless capabilities
for various miniaturized devices. Undergraduates and high school interns will be
directly involved in research tasks. The project team will collaborate with
Northeastern University's Center for STEM Education to organize on-campus
activities with K-12 students and teachers as well as outreach visits to connect
with underrepresented groups in local schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-
the-art low-power receivers are prone to interference due to their limited
dynamic ranges, which is particularly severe when multiple wireless medical
monitoring devices coexist in close proximity to each other. To overcome this
challenge, an adaptive design methodology will be devised to enhance
interference suppression through extra filtering in the receiver path. This
research effort will address the performance deficiencies of low-power
integrated circuits such that a broader range of devices can be equipped with
short-range wireless connectivity. It will provide new knowledge to design
transceivers with better immunity to interference through the introduction of
adaptive filtering in RF front-ends, digitally assisted linearity improvements
for low-power analog circuits, and digital spectrum analysis for self-
calibrations. Novel circuit-level linearization methods will be demonstrated to
enable the design of analog circuits that include transistors operating in the
subthreshold region with substantially improved dynamic ranges. These methods
will be leveraged to achieve leading-edge performance with less than one-sixth
of the power compared to current transceivers. The research will produce
techniques to evaluate gain and linearity characteristics of analog circuits
using an efficient fast Fourier transform engine that calculates the frequency
spectrum of signals with significantly less chip area than existing methods.
This will be a foundation for new built-in test and calibration strategies that
counteract rising process variations of advanced chip manufacturing
technologies.