* 1451053
* Conference, Symposia, and Workshop: Engaging the Science Center Community in Defining and Utilizing Impact Metrics
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* John Falk, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,985.00

A growing body of research suggests that many types of institutions and
experiences contribute to science and technology learning by the public. These
include the formal education system, libraries, science centers, citizen
science, after school programs, television programs, film and video, newspapers,
radio, books and magazines, the internet, community and health organizations,
environmental organizations, and conversations with friends and family. It is
also important that research about who learns and how they learn from these
institutions and experiences is informed by and discussed within the communities
themselves. This project focuses specifically on STEM learning in interactive
science centers. It invites science center professionals from around the country
to contribute to and share findings from an on-going research study designed to
better understand the influence that interactive science centers have on youth
and adult's long-term understanding, interest and engagement with science and
technology.

The pair of workshops supported by this grant will engage science center
administrators, educators, exhibition and program designers, evaluators and
researchers in two sets of tasks. The first workshop, held prior to the start of
the larger research project, will examine and focus the research's overall goals
and help frame a set of specific research questions. Although no research study
can answer all important issues, the goal of the workshop is to ensure that the
planned investigation attempts to address the issues and outcomes considered
most critical to the broader science center community. The second workshop will
occur after completion of all data collection and initial data analysis. It will
engage a broad cross-section of the science center community in discussing
findings, brainstormind implications and usage, and developing dissemination
strategies to insure that the findings of the research reach the broader science
center and policy communities. The goal of these workshops is to use the
collective wisdom of dozens of active professionals from across the country to
develop a suite of strategies for grounding research in practice, incorporating
research results into practice as well as bringing important research findings
to a broader national audience.