* 1451919
* CAREER: Yin and yang - is there a balance between nitrogen fixation and denitrification in riverine ecosystems?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2022
* Amy Marcarelli, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2022
* USD 864,291.00

Increased nitrogen loading from human activities degrades water quality and
threatens aquatic biodiversity. It has long been assumed that as nitrogen
loading to rivers increases, nitrogen production in the stream via biological
nitrogen fixation (the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen gas to biologically
available nitrogen) would cease. At the same time nitrogen loss via
denitrification (the conversion of available nitrogen back to nitrogen gas)
would increase, causing a net reduction in nitrogen in rivers and streams. Yet,
recent work in estuaries and lakes suggests that high rates of both nitrogen
fixation and denitrification can co-occur across a range of nitrogen loadings,
challenging this widely-held assumption. This research will provide fundamental
understanding about the response of rivers to anthropogenic nitrogen enrichment
and will enable better management of nitrogen cycling at regional and global
scales. This work also seeks to create a more ecologically-informed citizenry by
integrating ecosystem ecology techniques into GK-12 and undergraduate education.
The construction of a mobile analytical lab to facilitate sampling streams
across the United States will be accomplished through a unique collaboration
among engineering and biology-oriented undergraduates and faculty at Michigan
Tech. The mobile lab will also be used to design new laboratory exercises for an
undergraduate ecology course, support student research projects, and facilitate
outreach to GK-12 students in the western Upper Peninsula of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will apply new analytical techniques
and new stream models in the context of observational and experimental
manipulations of nutrient loading to test hypotheses on the balance between
nitrogen fixation and denitrification across gradients of nitrogen loads in
streams and rivers at the continental scale. The study will address three
fundamental questions: (1) Do N fixation and denitrification co-exist in streams
across a natural range of nitrogen concentrations, as they do in other aquatic
ecosystems?, (2) Do "hot spots" and "hot moments", i.e., spatial and temporal
heterogeneity, facilitate this co-existence?, and (3) Do increasing nutrient
loads shift the balance to favor losses via denitrification? The study will
capitalize on the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) as a
continental-scale experimental framework to test the hypotheses through three
interacting research elements: a gradient study of N2 fixation and
denitrification (years 1-4), a multi-scale spatial and temporal study to
identify hot spots and hot moments of N2 fixation and denitrification (years
2-5), and an experimental study of nutrient enrichment effects on N2 fixation
and denitrification in streams (years 4-5). The project will use MIMS as a new
analytical technique along with acetylene reduction and acetylene block assays
to measure N fixation and denitrification, and to couple these measurements with
reach-scale models commonly used to estimate stream metabolism to estimate
denitrification and N2 fixation.