* 1451031
* Workshop to advance theory and use of meta-analysis in ecology in the U.S. and China; Spring, 2015, Beijing, China
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Marc Lajeunesse, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 94,202.00

Meta-analysis, the quantitative synthesis of individual scientific studies on
the same topic, can be a powerful way to reveal overall patterns in nature. In
the last two decades, the mathematical theory and statistical techniques for
meta-analysis have developed greatly. The first goal of this workshop is to
spark the further advances needed to help meta-analysis meet the special
challenges of ecological studies that involve complex systems with many factors.
The workshop will bring experts in meta-analysis together with experts on key,
complex issues in ecology. Meta-analysts will show ecologists the current
potentials of meta-analysis, ecologists will inform meta-analysts of challenges
that still exceed this potential, and teams will plan a publication on how to
advance the capabilities of meta-analysis to yield new insights on critical
ecological issues. The second goal of the workshop is to give researchers in the
U.S. better access to the very large and rapidly increasing number of ecological
studies now being conducted in China. By holding the workshop in China and
having participants based in the U.S. and China, organizers will foster the
cooperation needed to use this important source of scientific information to
advance meta-analysis on ecological issues that are common to both continents.
The anticipated longer-term outcome of the workshop will be novel meta-analyses
on these complex issues using large literatures. The expected broader impacts of
the workshop include advanced training of post-doctoral scholars and graduate
students in meta-analysis in ecology, strengthening of scientific collaboration
between disciplines and nations, and provision of new scientific information to
guide environmental policy and management in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
six organizers are two leading practitioners of meta-analysis in ecology in the
U.S. and four experts on complex ecological issues, two from the U.S. and from
China. The three target issues will be maintenance of biodiversity, ecological
effects of human uses of natural resources, and ecological consequences of
changes in climate. Anticipated advances in meta-analysis include new techniques
for dealing with missing information, non-independence of measures or studies,
phylogenetic constraints, variation in rigor of experimental design, and uneven
coverage of different systems, taxa, and regions. The five-day workshop is
planned to take place by the spring of 2015 in Beijing. Approximately 26
participants will be invited, including about 8 post-doctoral scholars and
graduate students.