* 1451033
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: A Computational Model for Evaluating the Quality of Citizen Science Contributions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Tom Yeh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2016
* USD 39,900.00

Citizen science is a form of research collaboration that involves members of the
public in scientific projects, bringing multiple voices and ideas to problem
solving and community participation. Citizen science can be powerful because
while specific individuals may lack formal expertise and be limited in their
ability to contribute high-quality data and new directions, a crowd of
individuals may collectively possess the expertise and creativity necessary for
identifying and solving difficult problems. However, a major concern for
collecting scientific data from the crowd is the varied quality of the
contributed data and their relevance to scientific hypotheses. The PIs will
explore the potential for deriving metrics from research on computational
creativity to automatically assess the quality of citizen science data as a
complement to existing research on human assessment of data quality. The project
will also explore how the automated assessment of quality can be incorporated
into an agent that makes suggestions to individuals in the crowd about the
quality of their data, resulting in a prototype for a computational agent that
measures the novelty and value of a cizen science contribution. This project
will inform future research in computational agents that learn from and
contribute to the crowd in order to address challenges associated with the
quality of the data and ideas from crowdsourcing in citizen science.

More specifically, the project includes a) development of a model of citizen-
science-data quality based on the notion that good contributions are not just
reliable and accurate but also novel and surprising; b) an evaluation of the
model against citizen-science data that has been labeled by humans for quality;
and c) initial studies of the effect of computational quality feedback on the
behavior and perception of members of the crowd. Extending quality assessment to
include creativity and being able to make such assessments automatically is
potentially tranformative for citizen science projects. The PIs will demonstrate
their agent-based model of quality in citizen science projects including their
own NatureNet project, which involves crowd participants in data collection in
nature preserves and also in the design of scientific challenges and interaction
experience that facilitate data collection.