* 1451757
* Adolescent Information Management with Parents and Siblings
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Nicole Campione Barr, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 06/30/2019
* USD 273,098.00

Children whose parents are knowledgeable about their children's activities tend
to have better outcomes, with reduced delinquency. It is commonly believed that
most parental knowledge about their children's activities comes through active
efforts of parents to monitor or solicit information from their children. Recent
research indicates that voluntary disclosure of information, not parental
monitoring or solicitation, is most predictive of how much parents know about
their children's activities. The current research investigates two additional
questions about how disclosure within families relates to adolescent well-being.
First, do siblings within a family show similar patterns of disclosure with
their parents? Second, does disclosure between siblings, as well as between
children and parents, impact adolescent well-being? Parent-adolescent
relationships do not occur within a vacuum; the broader family system and
adolescents' roles within it may influence these processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the use of a three-year longitudinal study of
first- and second-born siblings during adolescence (and their parents), the
research team aims to investigate the developmental processes involved in
adolescent disclosure within the broader family system. Specifically, the
differences in frequency of disclosure and the topic domains about which
adolescents disclose to parents versus siblings will be examined, as well as
family demographic and sibling relationship variables which may influence this
process. Possible positive and negative individual adjustment outcomes
associated with adolescent disclosure to siblings, separate from those
associations with disclosure to parents will also be examined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will also conduct family communication
workshops through partnerships with local PTA and community groups within the
mid-Missouri area. The sessions will focus on how best to create a family
environment that encourages adolescents to disclose information about their
daily lives and activities. Such an environment should increase trust within
multiple family relationships, generally strengthen the family bond, and be
protective for adolescent adjustment.