* 1451619
* EAGER:  Exploratory role of microRNA-induced dysregulation of FOXO and Sirt1 in aging muscles
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Aladin Boriek, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 03/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

PI: Boriek, Aladin M.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1451619&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies explore the effects of
mechanical stretch on intracellular signaling pathways that protect from
oxidative stress and address how these pathways are affected by aging. Data
generated in the course of the proposed project have the potential to uncover,
for the first time, the involvement of specific intracellular regulatory
molecules in the function of anti-oxidative pathways in the aging respiratory
pump. The proposed studies are expected to provide novel insights into
understanding the functional impairment of respiratory muscles and potentially
guide interventional strategies for slowing aging.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this early stage developmental research project is to
investigate how mechanotransduction is disrupted in aging muscles of the
ventilatory pump and whether microRNAs play an important regulatory role in this
process. The following specific aims are proposed. 1. To explore mechanisms
responsible for loss of mechanosensitivity of signaling pathways regulating
Sirt1 in old skeletal muscles of the diaphragms. 2. To explore possible
dysregulation of specific mechanosensitive Sirt1 targets in the aging muscles of
the ventilatory pump. 3. To explore a potential role of a particular microRNA,
miR-200c, in the regulation of FOXO and Sirt1 in aging muscles of the
ventilatory pump. Results from this developmental research project could provide
for the first time new fundamental information on the novel signaling role of
specific microRNAs in the regulation of the anti-aging gene, Sirt1. In addition,
the proposed studies are likely to uncover new mechanisms that are responsible
for the dysregulation of mechanosensing signaling pathways, and could spur
further signal mechanotransduction work on the aging cardiac and smooth muscles.
Hence, the proposed studies may generate information that could potentially
contribute to guide interventional approaches for slowing aging. The
investigators will attract undergraduates through Baylor College of Medicine
SMART Program that supports under-represented students to pursue research
careers initially as undergraduates. The investigators will continue to work
with the graduate students in molecular physiology at Baylor College of
Medicine. The proposed project will provide a working model of a successful
integration of education and research training for strengthening the ongoing
multidisciplinary collaboration between molecular physiology and cell biology at
Baylor College of Medicine. Additionally, the PI plans the development of a new
graduate course, and to continue his outreach activities with the Iman Academy
High School students in the Houston area and with the Michael DeBakey Museum at
Baylor College of Medicine.