* 1451313
* Investigating the Long-term Impacts of Informal Science Learning at Zoos and Aquariums
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Nicole Ardoin, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 11/30/2015
* USD 114,997.00

Based on the number of visitors annually, zoos and aquariums are among the most
popular venues for informal STEM learning in the United States and the United
Kingdom. Most research into the impacts of informal STEM learning experiences at
zoos and aquariums has focused on short-term changes in knowledge, attitudes and
behaviors. This project will identify the opportunities for and barriers to
researching the long-term impacts of informal STEM learning experiences at zoos
and aquariums. The project will address the following overarching research
question: What are and how do we measure the long-term impacts of an informal
STEM learning experience at a zoo and aquarium? While previous research has
documented notable results, understanding the long-term impacts of zoo and
aquarium learning experiences will provide a deeper and more nuanced
understanding of the impact of these programs on STEM knowledge, skills and
application. This study is funded as part of NSF's Advancing Informal STEM
Learning program, Science Learning+ (SL+). SL+ is a partnership among US and UK
foundations. It funds projects that take transformational steps to inform,
improve, and advance the knowledge bases, practices, and design of informal STEM
learning experiences and environments. The long-term SL+ goals are to broaden
participation in STEM and to better understand, strengthen and coordinate STEM
engagement and lifelong learning. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will use a
participatory process to identify: (1) the range of potential long-term impacts
of informal science learning experiences at zoos and aquariums; (2) particular
activities that foster these impacts; and (3) opportunities for and barriers to
measuring those impacts. First, an in-depth literature review will document
previous research efforts to date within the zoo and aquarium community. Second,
a series of consultative workshops (both in-person and online) will gather ideas
and input from practitioners, researchers, and other stakeholders in zoo and
aquarium education. The consultative workshops will focus on two questions in
particular: (1) What are the different types and characteristics of informal
science learning experiences that take place at zoos and aquariums? and (2) What
are the long-term impacts zoos and aquariums are aiming to have on visitors in
relation to knowledge, attitudes, skills and behaviors/actions? Finally, visitor
surveys at zoos and aquariums in the US and UK will be conducted to gather input
on what visitors believe are the long-term impacts of an informal STEM learning
opportunity at a zoo or aquarium. The data gathered through all of these
activities will inform the design of a five-year, mixed-methods study to
investigate long-term impacts and associated indicators of an informal STEM
learning experience at a zoo or aquarium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the aims
of the five-year study will be to test instruments that could eventually be used
by the global zoo and aquarium community to measure the long-term impacts of
informal STEM learning programs. Designing tools to better understand the long-
term impacts of informal STEM learning at zoos and aquariums will contribute to
our ability to measure STEM learning outcomes. Additional benefits include
improved science literacy and STEM skills amongst visitors over time and an
understanding of how education programs contribute to wildlife conservation
worldwide.