* 1451345
* CAREER: Experimental Investigation For the Characterization of the Geophysical Response of Rock-Fluid Interactions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Tiziana Vanorio, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2020
* USD 532,439.00

This is a time when our nation must think strategically, and globally, about how
to use the resources of our planet. An important task is to predict the changes
that this use will cause, so we can act wisely while flourishing as a community.
The mechanical and chemical interactions of fluids throughout the earth's crust
are believed to drive many geological and anthropogenic processes, the
ramifications of which raise major societal concerns, from contaminating ground
and surface water to triggering seismic activity and deformation. Time-lapse
monitoring with seismic methods is an effective approach to recognize such
variations in physical properties in the ground. However, quantitative
interpretation of such data is not reliable for predicting changes that result
from complex, dynamic interactions of thermal, chemical, and mechanical
processes due to lack of fundamental laboratory data. Current models for the
seismic response to pore fluid changes stem from a purely mechanical approach,
which is inadequate for predicting the effects of coupled physical and chemical
alterations. This is a challenging problem, because of its complexity and multi-
disciplinary nature. A major shift is required in the way experiments are
conceived so to dynamically track changes both in the rock and the fluid, and
how they feedback upon each other. To succeed students also need to be trained
across multi-disciplines as well as the design and operation of laboratory
instruments-this task can be a mission by itself. Experimental investigation is
an indispensable element of scientific inquiry and must play a central role in
the way current and future generations of scientist make decisions. The
objective of this project is thus twofold. It leverages research by integrating
innovative experiments that simulate earth conditions and chemo-mechanical
processes with a combination of measurements and computations on 3D printed
models of CT-scanned rocks. The project also aims to broaden education
opportunities through the creation of an online laboratory that can facilitate
the process of learning experimental techniques and adapt its content to the
high-tech student's lifestyle. The virtual laboratory reproduces in form and
function the PI research laboratory at Stanford University through interactive,
3-D animated renderings of instruments used in a geophysics laboratory that
students can virtually assemble and operate. The objective is to build the
necessary infrastructure allowing students to appreciate more easily the dual
functions of laboratory systems: learning what these systems do and how they
work, and actually using them for future research endeavors. The project will
provide fertile ground for a series of new technologies and cyber capabilities
both in classes and research and help turn the complexity of laboratory work
into dexterity, engagement, and expanded learning opportunities to anyone,
anywhere. The overall goal is to make it possible to teach introductory
laboratory classes in geoscience facilities lacking research laboratories and
raise awareness of professional practices among early-stage or inexperienced
students so that they can hit the ground running and efficiently take on the
challenge of becoming future geoscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whether the
goal is fluid disposal or storage, the thermal and chemical stimulation of
reservoirs, or healing or weakening processes across geothermal and seismogenic
areas, real-time geophysical monitoring is emerging as a way to rapidly control
processes at depth and turn data observations into decisions. The proposed
research aims to improve our fundamental understanding of how to decipher
changes in the earth's crust due to fluid movement and rock-fluid interactions
using remote geophysical monitoring methods. Currently, quantitative
interpretation of 4-D seismic data is not successful for predicting the behavior
of dynamic systems underlying thermo-chemo-mechanical processes, because we lack
fundamental laboratory data. Conventional laboratory experiments as well as
models for seismic signatures of pore fluid changes stem from a purely
mechanical approach, which is inadequate for predicting the effects of reactive
transport fluids on the microstructural properties of the rock skeleton-the pore
space of the rock deforms chemo-mechanically while the fluid reacts and flows
through a deforming pore space. The innovative aspect of this proposal is to
interlace the rock elastic properties with deformation and reactive transport
flow through basic-science experimentation and multi-scale imaging. The proposed
research will use laboratory experiments and time-lapse, multi-scale imaging to
track both geochemical (fluid chemistry and flow, mass balance, pH) and physical
parameters (transport and elastic properties, pressure buildup, dissolution-
driven strain) in rocks during chemo-mechanical processes. This research will
advance our knowledge by (a) measuring chemical and physical quantities
continuously and simultaneously to truly couple cause and effect in the time
domain and (b) complementing the experimental measurements with time-lapse,
multi-scale imaging techniques to correlate the trends in the geophysical
observables with the spatial changes occurring in the rock. The education
component of the project leverages a current PI project to create a virtual
laboratory through interactive, 3-D animated renderings of rock-physics
instruments for the geophysics community. Complementing time-consuming high-
pressure/high-temperature experiments and time-lapse imaging with the 3D
printing of actual rock models is a way to open research to innovative tools,
and possibly, to new learning perspectives through the skills of the high-tech
students of this nation and abroad.