* 1451722
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Influence of Orthography on the Development of Functional Phonological Units in Spoken Word Production
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Min Wang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 03/31/2017
* USD 17,675.00

The ability to process phonological information (i.e., the sounds of one's
language) is critical in language and literacy development. Phonological
processing is important for literacy development, and in turn, literacy
experience promotes phonological skills. Phonological retrieval and encoding in
spoken word production is an important component of phonological processing;
however, little research has been conducted to examine how literacy experience
influences phonological retrieval and encoding. The functional phonological
units refer to the units that speakers use to organize and construct a spoken
word, and investigation in this area can inform researchers on how speakers
retrieve and encode phonological information. This research aims to investigate
the development of the functional phonological units and the influence of
literacy experience. The results of this research can help educators develop
educational methodologies to promote children's language development,
particularly those with disfluency or other speech-related difficulties.
Involving literacy training that is consistent with the nature of a language may
help improve children's speech fluency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
be conducted among native Mandarin speakers. In Mainland China, children first
study an alphabetic writing system called Pinyin in Grade 1, and begin to study
morphosyllabic Chinese characters afterwards. Five groups of participants will
be recruited, including 1) preschool children at 4 years of age, 2) Grade 1
children at 7 years, 3) Grade 2 children at 8 years, 4) Grade 4 children at 10
years, and 5) adults. For each group, three experiments will be conducted. In
each experiment, a simple picture naming task with the form preparation paradigm
(the names of a list of pictures may share the same onset, same initial syllable
or nothing systematically in common) will be conducted. Experiment 1 examines
the onset preparation effect (i.e., faster naming latency when the picture names
share the same onset) using monosyllabic picture names. Experiment 2 examines
the onset preparation effect using disyllabic picture names. Experiment 3
examines the syllable preparation effect (i.e., faster naming latency when the
picture names share the same initial syllable). An onset preparation effect
would suggest that the functional phonological unit is the segment, whereas a
syllable preparation effect would suggest that syllable is the functional unit.
It is expected that the syllable is the unit preschool children naturally access
for planning a spoken word, so preschool children selects the syllable as the
functional phonological unit. Grade 1 children are extensively exposed to
Pinyin, and the alphabetic characteristic of Pinyin will lead them to shift the
functional phonological unit from syllable to segment. Higher-grade children and
adults read characters which correspond to syllables directly, so the functional
phonological unit for these age groups may change back to syllable. The findings
of this research will improve the scientific understanding of the influence of
literacy experience on the development of phonological representation and
processing. Furthermore, based on the results of this research, educators may be
able to develop more efficient educational methodologies to improve children's
development of phonological skills by combining children's phonological training
and their literacy experience. For example, children who learn Chinese as a
second language may benefit from language training involving character
instruction that emphasizes the syllabic unit.