* 1451036
* EAGER: Topology Control for Enhancing the Reliability of the National Power Grid
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Erick Moreno-Centeno, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,998.00

Nowadays, fulfilling the demand for electric power is of utmost importance from
economic, security, and societal standpoints. Paradoxically, there are very few
control actions available to guarantee the power grid's reliability (i.e., to
prevent unexpected power outages). This is due in part to the energy industry's
conception of the electric transmission network as a static entity. In most
situations, the corrective actions in response to a contingency event (i.e., a
component failure) consist only of dispatching unused generator capacity and of
starting up additional generation units. Conversely, topology control is an
innovative approach that equips grid operators with the ability to switch each
transmission line's on/off status. Previous research has shown that finding and
implementing the best grid configuration (i.e., the best grid topology), in
conjunction with the best respective generator dispatch, can decrease energy
production/delivery costs. This EArly-Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
award supports fundamental research to enhance both the proactive and reactive
reliable operation of the power grid without costly infrastructure investments.
Specifically, this research will show that controlling the grid's topology can
enhance the grid's reliability. In addition, this research will also develop the
procedures required to find the most reliable grid topology in response to
changes in energy demand. Thus, the primary societal impact of this research is
to increase the capability to prevent and resolve unexpected blackouts, which
account for approximately $80 billion in losses each year for U.S. businesses
and consumers. This research involves several disciplines including power
systems, parallel computing and optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
aim of this award is to enhance the transmission grid reliability. This will be
accomplished by incorporating the innovative concept of topology control into
representative mathematical programs to optimize the minute-by-minute operations
of large-scale power systems. Specifically, the problem that needs to be solved
every few minutes is a mixed integer nonlinear problem (MINLP). Three directions
are planned to solve the MINLPs that arise when including topology control into
the energy system's operations: (1) Combine alternative expressions for modeling
alternate current power flows; (2) Devise new decomposition algorithms and
combine them with parallel computing; (3) Exploit the fact that, to improve the
reliability of the power grid, one needs to solve a MINLP every few minutes;
however, since consecutive problem instances are very similar to each other, one
can reuse several properties of previous optimal solutions (for example, binding
constraints and other properties such as transmission-line switches that have
been recurrently effective).