* 1451706
* Selective Sustained Attention and Learning in Young Children
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Anna Fisher, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 05/31/2020
* USD 702,894.00

Selective sustained attention is the ability to maintain focus on some aspects
of the environment over time while ignoring others. The ability to engage in
selective sustained attention is crucial for learning and processing important
information. This ability is influenced both by exogenous factors (relating to
the characteristics of the environment, such as how noticeable, interesting, or
novel an object is) and endogenous factors (relating to the characteristics of
the individual, such as motivation or remembering the task goals). Over
development, children become less easily influenced by exogenous factors, and
endogenous factors begin to play a more important role. This project
investigates how developmental change in the relative contributions of
endogenous and exogenous factors influences different kinds of
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Selective sustained attention develops throughout
childhood, such that endogenous factors become more powerful in guiding
attention. There are numerous experimental paradigms for studying sustained
attention in infancy and adulthood. However, few experimental paradigms are
appropriate for use with children between the ages of approximately 2 and 7
years, the period of heightened development of endogenous regulation of
selective sustained attention. The investigators have developed a task --the
Track-It task-- appropriate for studying selective sustained attention in
children in this age range. In the Track-It task, children visually track a
moving object on a screen, surrounded by either homogenous or heterogeneous
moving distracters, and report the location of the target's disappearance.
Performance on this task can distinguish between the contribution of endogenous
and exogenous factors to sustained attention. This project will use response
accuracy and patterns of eye movements in the Track-It task to: (1) investigate
the development of endogenous regulation of selective sustained attention, and
(2) investigate how exogenous and endogenous attention regulation contributes to
implicit versus explicit learning. This research will advance understanding of
the development of attention regulation and its implications for different types
of learning.