* 1451751
* Experimental and Theoretical Approaches to Prosody: Workshop on Prosodic Variability - U. of Illinois, Urbana Champaign; May 21-23, 2015
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Duane Watson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2016
* USD 13,938.00

Successful communication requires not just choosing the correct words and
grammar, but also emphasizing the right words, pausing in appropriate locations,
and using appropriate intonation and rhythm. This aspect of language is called
prosody and it can convey important information about the syntactic structure of
a sentence, which words in the conversation are given and new, and which aspects
of the sentence are important. Understanding the rules for how prosody is used
is important for building artificial speech systems that produce and understand
natural language, designing interventions for individuals with speech disorders,
and creating curriculum for language learners. A challenge for the field is the
fact that the acoustic cues that signal which words are emphasized and where
prosodic boundaries occur are highly variable, changing across both speakers and
contexts. This variability is pervasive, yet researchers know very little about
how the brain accommodates it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The special theme of this
conference is understanding how speakers navigate pervasive variability in how
prosody is realized in natural speech. Prosodic information varies significantly
due to physiological and language-internal factors, dialect, idiosyncratic
speaker preferences, and speech context. As a result, prosodic features lack
acoustic cues that are constant across contexts. Nonetheless, human language
users can readily use prosodic information in conversation. This puzzle
constitutes one of the fundamental issues in prosody research. New approaches to
these problems have recently emerged both in linguistic research on prosody and
neighboring fields such as speech perception and recognition. The goal of this
conference is to bring prosody researchers together with researchers in
neighboring fields to discuss problems in prosodic variability. With invited
speakers and participants from theoretical linguistics, psycholinguistics,
sociolinguistics, phonetics, phonology, language acquisition and computer
science, this meeting attempts to provide a holistic picture of prosodic
variability and a venue for discussions that may lead to solving this core
question in prosody research.