* 1451100
* Linking Constitutional Content and Civil Society Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kiyoteru Tsutsui, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 178,760.00

This project seeks to understand how the contents of national constitutions
change over time and how those changes affect civil society relationships in
different countries. It focuses specifically on content related to strategies
toward incorporation of minority groups into public and private domains and
examines what consequences they might have on majority-minority relationships.
The history of a national constitution represents changing understanding of the
model of a nation. In many countries over time, it is the case that, with the
rise of rights discourse, cultural rights of ethnic, linguistic, and religious
minority groups often become constitutionally recognized, enabling citizens
freedom to practice their culture to the extent such practice does not undermine
the cultural unity of the nation. This research will propose to answer the
following questions: How have these transformations changed over time? Who were
the leading countries in these transformations, and what precipitated them to
make those changes? Furthermore, have these changes in constitutional provisions
about civil society relationships produced any changes in the actual practice of
minority rights protection? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tackles these
questions by collecting data on all national constitutions in the world from
1789 to 2010 and coding them into three indexes of majority-minority
relationships: the cultural homogeneity model, which emphasizes congruence of
cultural and civic units; the individual cultural rights model, which allows
minorities to practice individual cultural rights primarily in the private
sphere; and multiculturalism, which promotes and protects minority groups'
collective cultural rights. Using these indexes, and drawing on insights from
sociology of law and globalization studies, the project will examine the causes
and consequences of changes in constitutional stipulations of minority rights.
The project will reveal the influence of global factors on seemingly national
legal processes. The project will also use innovative methodologies -- multi-
dimensional scaling and plagiarism detection software -- to examine more
precisely how legal models diffuse globally and will present a model for future
research on legal changes. As a detailed effort to collect comprehensive cross-
national data on how constitutional minority rights provisions have changed over
the last two hundred plus years, it will advance scholarly and public
understanding of minority and ethnic relations, especially as they relate to
globalization. The results of the research will be disseminated broadly and
globally in presentations and publications that are accessible to policy makers
and lay audiences.