* 1451635
* Computational and psycholinguistic investigations of covert dependencies
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Ming Xiang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 12/31/2020
* USD 327,133.00

Language is a window into the inner working of the human mind. A great deal of
previous work has examined how English speakers understand their mother tongue,
and how English speaking children develop their reading, writing and
conversational skills to become sufficient English users. Comparatively little
is known about whether speakers of different languages adopt qualitatively or
quantitatively different strategies in language communication. A good
understanding of potential cross-linguistic differences bears directly upon a
variety of important issues relevant for U.S. society, including the development
of more efficient learning and teaching strategies for foreign languages, and of
sophisticated technological tools to extract information from foreign text,
websites, and written or spoken corpora. The language under investigation in
this project is Mandarin Chinese, which, as the official language of China, is a
language with significant national interest to the U.S., due to the growing
influence of China's economic and political power. Chinese immigrants also form
one of the largest foreign-born groups living in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular empirical domain of the current project is
on the structure of questions in Chinese. The project consists of two major
components. First, a series of behavioral experiments will investigate how
Chinese speakers, conditioned by the particular grammatical properties of the
Chinese language, make decisions about how to best memorize, recall and
anticipate linguistic information encoded in Chinese questions. Second, detailed
computational and statistical models will be developed to provide a framework to
explain these behaviors. Technological tools will also be developed to work with
Chinese corpora. The combination of the behavioral and computational methods
makes it possible to answer questions about what differences exist between
English and Chinese, and how language users adapt to these differences so as to
maximize communicative efficiency in each language. A substantial part of the
project also includes training students in cutting-edge research questions,
methods, and establishing close international collaboration with leading
language researchers and institutions in China.