* 1451932
* CAREER: An Adaptive Approach to Oxidize Emerging Organic Contaminants in our Drinking Water
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Christina Remucal, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 500,093.00

1451932 Remucal

CAREER: An adaptive approach to oxidize emerging organic contaminants in our
drinking water

As pressure on our water resources increases in response to population growth
and a changing climate, we will be forced to rely on lower quality water sources
to meet our needs. In particular, our existing drinking water treatment systems
are poorly equipped to deal with contamination from organic pollutants. This
project will develop and optimize a chlorine photolysis advanced oxidation
process that could be used to upgrade existing chlorine-based disinfection
systems in response to decreased source water quality. The photolysis of
chlorine, the most commonly used drinking water disinfectant in the United
States, produces a series of reactive oxidants, including hydroxyl radical and
ozone, which are capable of simultaneously oxidizing numerous organic compounds
and inactivating chlorine-resistant pathogens. The hypothesis underlying this
research effort is that the irradiation wavelengths and solution conditions
(e.g., pH) in a chlorine photolysis-based advanced oxidation process can be
optimized to maximize organic contaminant removal while minimizing disinfection
by-product production. The research themes will be integrated into formally
assessed educational initiatives that will: (1) foster enthusiasm for the field
of environmental engineering by engaging K-12 and undergraduate students in a
novel interactive learning environment; (2) increase the number of highly
qualified students from diverse backgrounds pursuing careers related to
environmental engineering and water quality; and (3) raise public awareness of
water quality issues.

The objectives of the research plan are to: (1) characterize the formation of
reactive species during chlorine photolysis using UV light and light in the
solar spectrum; (2) assess the formation of conventional disinfection byproducts
during chlorine photolysis; and (3) identify changes in dissolved organic matter
and the formation of novel disinfection byproducts during chlorine photolysis
using two complementary state-of-the-art mass spectrometry techniques. This
transformative work will provide the first systematic evaluation of chlorine
photolysis for contaminant oxidation and disinfection by-product formation.
Unique project outcomes will be: (1) the development of a kinetic model that can
be used to predict reactive species production and target contaminant oxidation
during chlorine photolysis, and (2) an increased understanding of the formation
of disinfection by-products and changes in dissolved organic matter composition
on a molecular level during reaction with chlorine in the presence and absence
of light.