* 1451957
* Entrainment and Deposition of Surface Material by Particle-Laden Flows: From the Laboratory to the Hillslope
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Kimberly Hill, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 03/31/2019
* USD 324,999.00

A non-technical description of the project's broader significance and
importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A debris flow is a dynamic moving mass of water,
mud, soil and larger objects up to boulder size that is the main ingredient in a
landslide. In steep hillslopes and mountainous regions a debris flow can travel
over 160 km/hour (100 miles / hour) and can grow to over 20,000 m3 (700,000
cu.ft.), posing significant hazards to human life and infrastructure. Debris
flows often begin as relatively small landslides that grow in size and speed as
a result of the incorporation or entrainment of surface materials along its
path. Knowing what influences the path, speed, and size of a debris flow will
contribute toward the development of effective hazard mitigation practices. This
project focuses on building a scientific basis for the processes that contribute
to entrainment of surface materials by debris flows. Over much longer time
scales, debris flows have contributed to shaping the landscape and directing the
placement of certain mineral deposits, so documenting the controlling processes
can contribute to more efficient location and acquisition of mineral resources.
In addition, changing patterns of land use, climate, and human settlement may
alter the magnitude and frequency of debris flows, so that knowledge of their
mechanistic behavior will enable better modeling and prediction of their
occurrence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use experiments, simulations, and
field data to determine the importance of various mechanisms in debris flow
entrainment and deposition, and the subsequent mobility from particle-scale
effects to macroscopic dynamics. The research activities will determine the
dominant mechanisms for entrainment as they may vary with scale. Experiments
will be performed in smaller and larger flumes at the University of Minnesota
and at the University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences in Vienna. The
flumes are instrumented to monitor details such as pore pressures and stresses
in the bed, and high-speed high-resolution cameras will capture flows as well as
the evolution of the structure and entrainment of the bed materials. Field data
will be gathered at an instrumented site with capabilities to measure forces,
erosion, and kinematics such as the flow depth. Simulations will be performed
with Discrete Element Method to help interpret dynamics inaccessible to the
experiments. Results will be incorporated into a depth-averaged continuum model
capable of predicting large scale debris flow dynamics. The relevance of the
proposed research extends to a wide range of particle-fluid flows in nature and
industry, including both subaerial and subaqueous flows, and particle processing
across many industries. The educational and outreach component seeks to broaden
participation and public comprehension of granular physics in general and
applications to geophysics in particular through: (1) culturally sensitive
educational materials developed for Fon du Lac Tribal camps for middle and high
school students, (2) materials developed for the public through Science Buzz, an
on-line site of the Minnesota Science Museum, where the investigator and
students will post regularly and answer questions of the public about research
and related current events and (3) actively involving undergraduates in research
and outreach components, recruiting students of underrepresented groups through
an established network of mentors at minority serving institutions and
elsewhere.