* 1451321
* Affinity Spaces for Informal Science Learning: Developing a Research Agenda
* EHR,DRL
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Richard Hudson, Twin Cities Public Television
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 05/31/2016
* USD 114,979.00

Researchers and practitioners in the US and the UK, organized by Twin Cities
Public Television in collaboration with co-PIs from Indiana University and the
University of Bradford in the UK, will develop a research agenda focused on
understanding how participation by youth in various online environments, called
"affinity spaces," can promote and enable new approaches to informal STEM
learning. Affinity spaces provide opportunities for youth to develop deep
interest and engagement in specific topics as well as to interact in groups with
others who share common interests. By focusing on affinity spaces, this project
will contribute to the collective understanding of how digital media supports
STEM learning. Of particular interest is the potential of these spaces to offer
multiple interest-driven trajectories, opportunities to learn with others, and
paths toward becoming authentic participants in the discussions. Specifically,
the collaborators will: (1) produce a literature review on affinity spaces and
informal science learning; (2) organize and convene a two-day workshop to review
and refine primary research questions; and (3) produce a white paper summarizing
outcomes.

Affinity spaces have the ability to connect millions of learners. Developing a
research agenda to learn how these spaces can involve youth in experiences
across the entire spectrum of STEM disciplines promises to reveal new ways to
enhance and enrich the entire ecosystem of informal science learning. In
addition, the project will enhance the international research and education
infrastructure by facilitating collaborations among researchers in the U.S. and
the UK who work at the frontiers of social media and learning. This project is
funded as part of NSF's Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, Science
Learning+ (SL+). SL+ is a partnership among US and UK foundations. It funds
projects that take transformational steps to inform, improve, and advance the
knowledge bases, practices, and design of informal STEM learning experiences and
environments. The long-term SL+ goals are to broaden participation in STEM and
to better understand, strengthen and coordinate STEM engagement and lifelong
learning.