* 1451292
* EAGER: Multi-modal human gait experimentation and analysis on unconstrained terrains
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Dimitris Metaxas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This project explores a new direction to analyze human gait. The project obtains
high accurate gait data, movement and high resolution ground reaction forces on
different terrains, which has not been possible to measure and acquire
previously. The project enables to produce the first ever detailed and
multimodal gait database that can be used for research and education. It can
assist computer scientists and biomedical researchers in addressing complex
questions such as understanding, analyzing and simulating the kinematics and
dynamics of walking in natural settings. The resulting research and datasets can
be incorporated in the curriculum of many fields such as computer science,
biomedical engineering and medicine and will result in significantly better
educated future researchers, professors, and employees in gait analytics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focus on collecting novel, accurate, multi-
modal gait data on unconstrained terrains and developing a novel approach to
analyze the gait data. The research team develops predictive models to create
realistic simulations of human gait, which is important for many industries such
as healthcare, sports, footwear, and entertainment. This requires accurate human
movement data and ground reaction forces on different terrains. Currently the
most common method to collect the gait data is to put surface markers on human
subjects. Due to the skin movement, surface marker data collected by this method
contain a significant error. Gait kinematics estimated from the surface markers
are not accurate and may be quite off from the real human movement. Moreover,
the most common methods to collect the ground reaction forces use a simple force
plate. However, a simple force plate can only measure the ground reaction forces
on one simple type of terrain and cannot measure the ground force close to real
daily life. The ground reaction forces on the terrains similar to real life are
unknown. This exploration project enables many new studies and applications.