* 1451492
* Understanding Age-Related Changes in Relationship Maintenance Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Jennifer Beer, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2020
* USD 511,623.00

A wealth of research indicates that high quality romantic relationships allow
individuals to thrive both emotionally and physically. In fact, the impact of
close relationships on health has been shown to be larger than the impact of a
variety of negative health behaviors, such as smoking, excessive drinking, and
obesity. Unfortunately, longer life expectancies and high divorce rates have
contributed to a new social reality in which older adults (i.e., age 60+)
increasingly find themselves unpartnered and searching for companionship.
Despite these societal trends, research on how older adults form and maintain
satisfying new romantic relationships is scarce. Although the close
relationships research has much to say regarding the relationship processes that
create a happier, healthier relationship, this literature has focused
overwhelmingly on relationship formation in young adults, leaving open questions
regarding the generalizability of these findings to an older population.
Similarly, although the aging literature has developed influential theories
about age-related changes in interpersonal skills, applications of these ideas
to the romantic domain have focused on older adults in longstanding marriages
(e.g., 20+ years), and thus may not extrapolate to newly-formed romantic
relationships. Thus, the proposed research is designed to fill this gap, and
will test if there are potential age-related changes in the way individuals
navigate the inevitable ups and downs of a new romantic relationship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the goal of the current proposal is to
examine whether the life experience that comes with age facilitates positive and
constructive responses when relationship conflicts arise. Integrating insights
from both the aging and the close relationships literatures suggests that the
answer to this question may depend on the relational context. Although the
increases in socioemotional expertise that come with age should equip older
adults with enhanced ability to successfully manage relationship challenges in
longstanding relationships, older adults' advantage over younger adults may
diminish in the context of newly-formed dating relationships. Efforts to
minimize relationship conflict often prove more difficult in the early stages of
relationship development; unfortunately, when relationship conflicts are not
effectively averted, older adults tend to be more vulnerable than younger adults
to the emotional and physical costs such challenges can bring. Thus, the current
project aims to provide a more comprehensive understanding of relationship
maintenance efforts across the lifespan through a multi-method study comparing
the maintenance strategies of older adults in longstanding marriages, older
adults in newly-formed romantic relationships, younger adults in longstanding
relationships, and younger adults in newly-formed romantic relationships, as
well as the implications of these strategies for emotional and physical well-
being. Results from this study will be informative for improving happiness and
health throughout the lifespan.