* 1451303
* Planning a Design-based Implementation Research Agenda to Investigate Digital Badges as Transformative Assessment in Informal Science Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 12/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Katherine McMillan, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 03/31/2016
* USD 115,000.00

Young people's participation in informal STEM learning activities can contribute
to their academic and career achievements, but these connections are
infrequently explicitly recognized or cultivated. More systemic approaches to
STEM education could allow for students' experiences of formal and informal STEM
learning to be aligned, coordinated, and supported across learning contexts. As
part of NSF's Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, Science Learning+ (SL+)
is a partnership among US and UK foundations. SL+ funds projects that take
transformational steps to inform, improve, and advance the knowledge bases,
practices, and design of informal STEM learning experiences and environments.

This specific planning project brings together stakeholders in two digital badge
systems--one in the US and one in the UK--to plan for a study to identify the
specific structural features of the systems that may allow for the alignment of
learning objectives across institutions. Digital badge systems may offer an
inventive solution to the challenge of connecting and building on youth's STEM-
related experiences in multiple learning contexts. When part of a defined
system, badges could be used to represent and communicate evidence of individual
learning, as well as provide youth and educators with evidence-supported
indicators for other activities in the system that might be interesting or
valuable. Properly designed and supported badge systems could transmit critical
information within a network of informal STEM programs and schools that (1)
recognize context-dependent, interest-driven learning and (2) provide
opportunities to explore those interests across multiple settings.

This project advances the field of informal STEM learning in two ways. First,
the project documents and analyzes the processes by which two small groups of
informal science education organizations and schools negotiate the meaning and
value of badges, as proxies for learning objectives, and how they decide to
recognize badges awarded by other institutions. This process builds capacity
within the target systems while also beginning to identify the institutional,
cultural, and material capacity issues that facilitate or constrain the
alignment process. Second, the project conducts a pilot study with a small
number of youth in the US and UK to investigate factors associated with an
individual youth's likelihood of: a) identifying badges of interest; b)
connecting the activities of various badge systems to each other and to non-
badging institutions, such as school or industry; c) determining which badges to
pursue; and d) persisting in a particular badge pathway. Findings from this
pilot study will help identify institution- and individual-level factors that
might be associated with advancing student interest and progression in STEM
fields. Deepening and validating the understanding of those factors and their
relative impact on student experiences and outcomes will be the focus of
investigations in future studies.