* 1451027
* BRAIN EAGER: Analysis of brain circuits with optically controlled synaptic GPCRs
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Ehud Isacoff, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The connectivity of brain circuits is central to how sensory information is
processed, motor activity coordinated, memories stored and retrieved, and how
behaviors emerge. While new physical connections can form and old ones be
eliminated, much of brain processing depends on how synaptic inputs are
integrated and how their strengths are dynamically adjusted. To understand
neural connectivity one must develop the means to directly manipulate synaptic
transmission by controlling the neurotransmitter-gated receptors of synapses. We
propose to do this by engineering optical control into neurotransmitter-gated
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). These light-controlled receptors can answer
questions at every scale of analysis of the nervous system, from elucidating the
contribution of a specific subtype of a neurotransmitter receptor to
transmission and plasticity, to the events in a single dendritic spine, to
understanding the role of pre- and postsynaptic receptors in neural
computations, to understanding the synaptic basis of circuit operations and the
role of those circuits in behavior and sensation. An additional and critical
part of the project is tool dissemination and web-based tutorials, which will be
a high priority for the researchers. Training will be provided to the broader
scientific community during the annual Berkeley Advanced Imaging and Microscopy
workshop. The proposal involves an international collaboration in research and
training with Israel, which will expose students from the US and Israel to the
expertise of the labs in the collaborating countries.

GPCRs form the largest class of membrane signaling proteins. They respond to a
wide-array of stimuli. The roles of many GPCRs in neural circuits and behavior
are not well-understood. Part of the problem is that the same GPCR may be found
on presynaptic excitatory and inhibitory nerve terminals, postsynaptic dendritic
spines and on associated glial processes. Another is that even though multiple
GPCRs in a cell may couple to the same G-protein they often activate distinct
targets due to molecular interactions that localize them to specific protein
complexes. Thus, to determine the function of a GPCR one needs tools for that
are subtype and cell-type specific, that are spatially precise, and that are
rapid and reversible. In this project, individual full-length GPCRs that can be
activated or blocked by light will be developed. Specifically, light-gated
versions of the group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) will be
engineered and then used to study synaptic plasticity.