* 1451830
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Sampling and Reconstruction for Computer Graphics Rendering and Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ravi Ramamoorthi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Sampling of high-dimensional signals is at the heart of graphical rendering and
computational photography, but current approaches unfortunately still tend to be
brute-force and require large numbers of samples, which is time-consuming and
costly. In this project, which involves researchers at two institutions, the
Principal Investigators will build on their prior work to develop a
comprehensive theoretical, algorithmic and systems foundation for sampling and
reconstruction in computer graphics rendering and imaging. A key goal is a
unified sampling theory that considers the type of coherence in the visual
signal (such as low rank, locally low rank, low frequency, sparsity) and the
type of measurement (such as point samples in rendering or projection of generic
patterns for light transport acquisition, or acquisition of full light field
imagery). This will provide a unified framework for choosing the best sampling
strategy, and for comparing different approaches. It will also enable the
establishment of rigorous lower bounds and optimality results. The work has
immediate connections to signal-processing, applied mathematics and photography,
and will have broad impact in connecting these domains with computer graphics.
The Principal Investigators will disseminate project outcomes in part by
incorporating the findings into their online courses that have large enrolments.
They will also make datasets and software available, and will work to include
them in industrial applications by exploiting their strong ties with a number of
high-tech companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physically-based rendering algorithms
are now widespread in production, but photorealistic rendering is still
inefficient since it involves the evaluation of a high-dimensional 4D-8D Monte
Carlo integral for each pixel considering antialiasing, lens effects, motion
blur, soft shadows and global illumination. Typically, each pixel is treated
separately, with many samples needed for each integral dimension. Similar
challenges arise in other areas of computer graphics, such as precomputed
rendering (explicit tabulation of a 4D-8D light transport operator), light
transport acquisition (measurement of high-dimensional 4D-8D functions like the
BRDF or BSSRDF), and computational photography or imaging that acquires higher-
dimensional 4D functions in consumer light field cameras. The traditional
approach is to (pre)compute or measure the data by brute force, followed by
compression. However, this incurs unacceptable costs given the size and
dimensionality of current visual appearance datasets. In this work the Principal
Investigators will leverage the sparsity in the continuous (rather than discrete
Fourier) domain, coherence and structure of light transport to sample,
reconstruct and integrate, reducing the amount of data needed by orders of
magnitude, while developing new reconstruction schemes for computational
imaging. Within rendering, the PIs will explore a novel method that combines
motion blur, depth of field, and global illumination in a single algorithm for
real-time rendering based on adaptive Monte Carlo sampling and filtering of
different effects. A key challenge in such approaches is robust sampling of
difficult paths; the Principal Investigators will address this issue with
conservative adaptive sampling and Graduated Metropolis. Finally, new systems-
level software will be developed that enables easy integration and
implementation of light transport simulation methods for rendering and imaging.