* 1451595
* Collaborative Research: What hydrogeochemical processes control weathering in the deep critical zone of unburied karst landscapes?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* John Jenson, University of Guam
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2019
* USD 59,875.00

Limestone provides 25 percent of the world's population with drinking water and
contains more than 50 percent of the world's known hydrocarbon reserves.
Limestone's high solubility allows for the formation of caves that control the
flow of water and hydrocarbons below-ground. Understanding the processes that
contribute to the formation of caves is thus necessary for improved
characterization of water and hydrocarbon resources. In carbonate platform
environments where limestones form (e.g. Bahamas, Yucatan and Florida), zones of
unsaturated rock (vadose zone) that exceed 60 m in thickness have been proposed
to limit movement of organic carbon from soil to the water table, where
oxidation to carbon dioxide (CO2) would otherwise drive corrosion of limestone
bedrock. In contrast to this interpretation, cave systems occur in carbonate
platforms at depths of more than 100 m below modern sea level. These caves are
thought to have formed in contact with fresh groundwater at times in the past
when sea level was lower than it is today. Because vadose zones would have been
much thicker than 60 m when these caves formed, the geochemical processes
responsible for their formation are poorly understood. In this project, the
movement of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and CO2 gas to the water table via
vadose zone fast flow routes is hypothesized to provide a mechanism for
corroding limestone and create caves beneath thick vadose zones. This hypothesis
will be tested on the island of Guam, where tectonic uplift has created vadose
zones that are up to 180 m in thickness. Cave formation by CO2 that is produced
by biological processes in the deep vadose zone runs contrary to the paradigm
that caves in carbonate platforms form as a result of mixing waters of different
chemical composition. Concepts explored by this proposal thus have potential to
transform understanding of the geomorphology and biogeochemistry of the vadose
zone by challenging canonical views that mixing dissolution is the principal
agent of dissolution and cave formation in carbonate platform landscapes. This
project supports STEM education via the training of two PhD students, providing
research opportunities for three undergraduate students as well as developing
lesson plans about carbonate aquifers for K-12 teachers and hands-on activities
for university-led community outreach programs.

The hypothesis that subsoil respiration of CO2, rather than mixing, dominates
dissolution in eogenetic limestone will be tested by collecting vadose gases,
infiltration and water at water tables on the island of Guam. Uncased monitoring
wells provide access for sampling vadose gases and the aquifer. Air-filled caves
allow infiltrating recharge and gases to be collected throughout the vadose
zone. Sampling before and after a large rain event will test the influence of
fast-flow routes on dissolution. DOC in water samples will indicate whether DOC
is transported to the water table and thus whether its oxidation could result in
dissolution. CO2 profiles through the vadose zone will be used to determine the
depths at which CO2 gas is produced. The overarching hypothesis tested here
predicts production of CO2 in the vadose zone and at the water table by
oxidation of DOC. CO2 and oxygen concentrations will be used together to
determine 1) if vadose zone CO2 is produced by respiration or is degassed from
recharging water and 2) if CO2 has been lost to the atmosphere by diffusion
(typical of soils and a possible tracer of soil respiration). Dissolution of
limestone will be traced using Strontium (Sr) isotopes; Guam was selected for
this study because differences in the age of limestone that comprises the vadose
and phreatic zone allow use of Sr isotope ratios to discriminate between
dissolution in the phreatic zone from dissolution that occurs in the vadose zone
followed by transport of solutes into the aquifer.