* 1451743
* Systems Engineering Education Workshop; Washington DC; November 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2016
* William Scherer, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 10/31/2016
* USD 27,602.00

It is widely accepted that systems engineering is a key element of all large
engineering projects; however, one estimate is that the Department of Defense
alone loses about $200 million per day as a result of poor systems engineering,
and other Federal agencies acknowledge that they cannot meet their projected
missions using current systems engineering practices. There has been a
proliferation of calls for systems engineering, including the Secretary of
Defense and the National Academies. Simultaneously over the past 25 years,
elements of a theory of systems engineering have emerged. These elements point
to an opportunity to formulate systems engineering as a rigorous engineering
discipline. The elements span mathematics, economics, business, and psychology,
as well as significant elements of engineering and the sciences. Numerous
Universities and professional societies offer diverse educational programs and
certifications in systems engineering. This workshop on systems engineering
education will assist in the unification of these disparate perspectives and
help the systems engineering community move forward via improving the overall
systems engineering education function.

A survey of systems engineering related programs identified a diversity of
systems engineering educations programs, without a consensus on how to create
better systems engineering processes and the associated underlying educational
foundations. The primary purpose of the workshop is to investigate the future of
systems engineering education and not conduct a review of the history nor the
current state of systems engineering education, but a look forward. The workshop
will bring the leaders of the systems engineering community in the US together
to investigate the following issues: 1) the needs of government and industry in
terms of the tasks and roles that belong to systems engineering, 2) the elements
of the skill and knowledge sets required to meet the systems engineering needs,
3) the organization of these elements into coherent systems engineering
curricula at all levels, 4) the underlying theories that provide the needed
skill and knowledge sets and that will form the basis of systems engineering
education, and 5) the knowledge gaps that need to be researched that would
enhance systems engineering education. Results of the workshop will be
disseminated via a report and an archival publication.