* 1451399
* Liberal Studies in Engineering: Broadening the Path to the Profession. Phase I
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Louis Bucciarelli, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 11/30/2016
* USD 54,200.00

This project addresses an important need to seek a wider range of approaches
toward broadening participation in engineering. The traditional pathway into
engineering careers is based on a series of mathematics and science prerequisite
courses that have proven to be a barrier for many interested and potentially
capable engineering students. This project will explore the possibility of
developing a version of the undergraduate engineering degree that is based on
the perspective of the humanities, arts, and social sciences but also includes
content from the traditional undergraduate engineering curriculum. A workshop
will be conducted to explore opportunities to establish an undergraduate, pre-
professional, bachelor of arts degree for undergraduate students interested in a
career in engineering but who enter college uncertain about their degree of
commitment to engineering. For these students a liberal studies in engineering
degree might serve as an alternative, smoother pathway into engineering. Upon
completion, these students could pursue options that include direct employment
in technical areas, entreprenurial endeavors, and the pursuit of additional
specialized training or advanced degrees in engineering, business, law, or
medicine. In this workshop potential collaborator institutions will meet to
clarify objectives, suggest content, and examine the structure such a program
might take at their respective institutions. The workshop participants will
develop a plan to move forward with program development. It is anticipated that
a diverse group of approximately 50 educators from a variety of institutional
types will participate in the project.

This workshop is the beginning of a multi-phase process to explore and develop a
potentially transformative step in broadening participation in engineering by
offering a pathway into the discipline, and route to a degree, that is markedly
different from the traditional path but still encompasses comparable content.
Traditionally engineering education heavily emphasizes mathematics and science
prerequisite topics for beginning students and addresses the broader social,
economic, cultural, and ethical aspects much later in the curriculum and often
in an indirect manner. The planned liberal studies in engineering degree
envisions reversing the process, offering students an approach to the discipline
from a humanistic, artistic, and social perspective. Specific issues to be
resolved are aimed at advancing knowledge along pedagogical, epistemological,
and sociological dimensions. Pedagogical issues to be clarified in this work
include identifying the means for faculty to effectively collaborate in teaching
across liberal arts and engineering in a mutually beneficial way.
Epistemological topics will address the question of what must students know to
successfully engage the engineering sciences that are at the core of the
traditional engineering major. Sociological analysis will investigate the
institutional and cultural values, beliefs, and norms that both guide and
constrain the renovation of programs. Initiatives such as this workshop will
identify the steps needed and challenges to be overcome in creating
opportunities for individuals whose initial interests in engineering are
different from those of the currently established demographic of the discipline.
As such it holds the potential to provide a model for other STEM disciplines
facing similar challenges.