* 1451959
* CAREER: Surface and Interparticle Forces for Improved Virus Removal
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2022
* Caryn Heldt, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 04/30/2022
* USD 525,684.00

1451959&lt;br/&gt;Heldt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project proposes a
shift in the design and creation of next-generation virus removal and detection
technologies. Instead of screening large libraries of chemistries to determine
the ones that will most efficiently remove viruses, this project will first
examine the surface chemistry of the viruses. This will lead to targeted
chemistries that will attract viruses and exponentially increase the efficiency
of screening processes. The process to be followed will benchmark new surface
evaluation techniques with currently established surface chemistry analysis to
determine if chemical forces of viruses can be determined at the single-particle
scale. The CAREER education plan will train undergraduate and graduate students
to be role models to high school and community college students in order to
attract and retain underrepresented minorities to STEM fields. The main focus of
the education plan is a collaboration with Wayne County Community College in
Detroit, MI to provide engaging and hands-on research opportunities to community
college students. The goal is to use research as a vehicle for sustained STEM
engagement and to encourage B.S. degree completion. This unique program will
expose over 500 inner city students to research opportunities and expanded
career options. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is built upon the
hypothesis that an advanced understanding of viral surface chemical interactions
and interparticle forces will enable a significant transformation in virus
removal and detection technologies, dramatically reducing the cost while
simultaneously increasing efficiency. The outcome may result in an increase in
availability and accessibility to life-saving biotherapies. The overall goal of
this CAREER project is to transform virus removal processes by creating a
fundamental framework of viral surface and interparticle forces. The specific
goals to be accomplished are: 1) Analyze the surface chemistry of several model
viruses, 2) Quantify interparticle forces of model viruses and 3) Prototype a
surface and interparticle force-informed method for virus removal. This study of
surface and interparticle forces will benchmark traditional techniques against
novel surface characterizations. Quantitative surface chemistry and
interparticle force data will inform an innovative design of virus removal
processes. Three relevant viruses will be used in this study, an enveloped
mammalian virus, a non-enveloped mammalian virus and a bacteriophage.