* 1451215
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Breathing Uncertainty: Risk, Exposure, and Air Pollution Management in Mongolia's Capital City
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Chisato Fukuda, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 10,507.00

General Audience Summary

This dissertation research project will examine how urban residents develop,
dispute and deploy knowledge about risk in interaction with air pollution
controls In Ulaanbaatar, the largest city in Mongolia. The project focuses of on
a colossal investment in new air quality surveillance devices and fuel-efficient
stove technologies. The investment is a part of a long term, sustained
commitment by industry, the state, and citizens to improve urban living
conditions in Ulaanbaatar, where pollutant levels are far beyond internationally
acceptable standards. This project will ethnographically examine the following
two research questions. How do experts interact with air pollution mitigation
technologies to produce knowledge about risk and exposure? As recipients of new
stove technologies, how do citizens who are most vulnerable to air pollution
produce ideas about risk? The investigator will share specific findings with
scientists and project coordinators to help improve both technical methods and
to foster stronger partnerships among scientific fields, the private sector, and
slum communities. She will also give lectures, develop curriculum materials, and
give conference and public-event presentations to inspire future generations of
local scholars in the field of urban environmental health. Finally, she will
share her research findings to help district communities to engage citizens in
making informed decisions about how to protect their health against air
pollution exposure.

Technical Summary

This research puts technologies in dialogue with the social processes of risk
formation. The goal of the project is to expand enable medical anthropology to
better understand how the influx of small-scale technologies is intertwined with
the ongoing privatization of global health. The project will also enhance the
concept of risk in social science by investigating specific sites and processes
of risk construction, and it will provide a rich ethnographic account of how
global environmental health interventions affect vulnerable, urban
communities.To meet these goals the investigator will conduct research for 12
months following one full cycle of the stove-replacement program in Ulaanbaatar.
Unlike other studies on risk and environmental hazards, this study will
illuminate how risk is constructed, marketed, and experienced by connecting the
micro-politics of everyday life with macro-scale process by engaging with key
scientists, private companies and slum residents involved in the intervention.
By highlighting the everyday practices of the scientific process, marketing of
energy-efficient stoves, and daily experiences of slum communities, this project
will also serve as an important case study of how technologies are changing the
landscape of global health.