* 1451424
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Nonnative Phonetic Perception in Adult L2 Learners
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Natasha Tokowicz, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 05/31/2018
* USD 18,480.00

Even with years of practice, adult learners have trouble perceiving and
producing sounds in a second language (L2). Adults tend to need more focused and
targeted input to achieve native-like perception and production of L2 sounds
than do children. The work proposed here aims to clarify the mechanisms through
which L2 perception is influenced by first language (L1) sounds, the neural
basis of this perception, how learner differences can influence learning, and
how different training paradigms modulate both the neural and behavioral basis
of L2 sound perception. This work has the potential to clarify specifically what
mechanisms affect L2 sound perception and how different types of feedback and
instruction can help learners perceive differences better, allowing for better
L2 instruction in the classroom and immersion
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will have participants from two native
speaker groups, English and Spanish, participate in a five-day training paradigm
during which they will learn to discriminate Hindi sounds that do not belong to
their L1 sound categories. During the five days, participants will come in to
complete electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings from the scalp, baseline
discrimination tasks, training, and several memory and attention individual
measures. The researchers expect that the L1 will modulate the EEG waveform
known as the mismatch negativity (MMN) at approximately 150-200ms after sound
onset. This measure indexes early phonetic learning and previous research has
shown that the waveform's amplitude can change or shift with new phonetic
learning, indicating a reorganization of early acoustic and phonetic processing
with new input. Furthermore, the researchers will examine how the L1 and
different training and feedback paradigms influence this MMN change. The
analyses will highlight previously unexplored differences in L2 behavioral and
neural processing that arise from prior L1 knowledge and representations.
Furthermore, final analyses will link behavioral and neural measures by
correlating performance during behavioral training with neural responses to
investigate the time course of adult L2 phonetic acquisition. By using both
behavioral and neural methods to explore the effects of L1 influence on
nonnative phonetic perception (in the first such training paradigm to examine
and clarify the time course of phonetic acquisition), this work will contribute
valuable information for models of L2 perception and acquisition, and relevant
data for the instruction and teaching of L2 sound contrasts.