* 1451258
* RAPID:  Support for Multi-sUAS Evaluation of Techniques for Measurement of Atmospheric Properties (MET MAP)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Brian Argrow, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 18,519.00

This award will provide funding for participation in a small field project
making use of unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) for atmospheric observations. UASs
are attractive platforms for atmospheric scientists due to their ability to fly
into regions where other observation systems can?t, such as under the base of a
supercell thunderstorm. This award will allow researchers the opportunity to
compare four different small UASs and their instrument payloads. This work has
broader impact through the development and testing of new technologies which
will help to improve the understanding of atmospheric processes and the
capability to forecast weather and climate.

The project will take place at the Boulder Atmospheric Observatory (BAO) in
Colorado. The four UASs will be flown near the instrumented BAO tower and also
in the range of the Colorado State University CHILL radar and the Texas Tech
University Ka-band mobile radar. This will allow the researchers the opportunity
to compare the UASs against proven, ground-based measurements. The second step
will be to fly all four of the UASs on a target of interest, such as a cloud or
a thunderstorm. The data will be used to refine the current systems and as a
benchmark for the development of future systems.