* 1451659
* EFRI-SEED 2015 Workshop and MRS Symposium Travel: Innovating Next Generation Building Materials that Adapt and Respond to Users and the Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Maria Paz Gutierrez, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 10/31/2015
* USD 33,420.00

This symposium and associated workshop will bring together architects,
scientists and engineers who are pioneering new models for collaboration towards
the innovation of next generation building materials that adapt and respond to
users and the environment. Importantly, this symposium will feature an
associated workshop that will bring together for the first time the architects
who are a part of the ten winning NSF Emerging Frontiers for Research Innovation
Program (EFRI), Science of Energy and Environmental Design (SEED): Engineering
Sustainable Buildings, projects across the US. The EFRI-SEED principal
investigators will discuss the successes and failures of these new collaborative
models and next steps for implementing design research infrastructure in our
architecture schools to ensure that this type of cutting edge research has
longevity and long-term impact upon the field of sustainable design. Deans and
Chairs at participating schools will be invited to the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there have been tremendous innovations
in design, material sciences, bio and information technologies, and engineering,
direct interactions and collaborations between scientists, architects and
engineers are rare. Scientists, engineers and architects all share the need to
comprehend key social, environmental and technological issues associated with
the buildings we live and work in. The research is considered particularly
important as it represents a fusion of disciplines working towards a common goal
for the public interest. The intent is that research of this nature will allow
scientists, engineers and designers to engage the public in the excitement of
new technologies and the basic research that bears them out, as well as,
offering an effective tool to recruit and train students. This symposium
provides a singular opportunity for intellectual exchange between investigators
pioneering this frontier and to involve next generation researchers in this
discussion.