* 1451582
* Student Travel for 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Los Angeles, CA, December 15-17, 2014
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Faryar Jabbari, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 10/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

Student Travel Support for 2014 Conference on Decision and
Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is to support student travel to the
53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), to be held in Los Angeles,
CA, December 15-17, 2014. For over fifty years, the CDC has been the world?s
leading annual forum for scientific and engineering researchers who share an
interest in systems and control theory and the foundations of systems and
control technology. As in previous years, the 53rd CDC will feature the
presentation of contributed and invited papers, tutorial sessions, as well as
plenary and semi-plenary sessions and workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The range
of topics covered at the annual CDC is extremely broad, mirroring the varied
applications of control and systems theory. The systems theoretic approaches
have played a critical role in the development of many contemporary
infrastructures and technology affecting everyday life. Systems and control
theoretic tools are central in the design, operation, and security of cyber-
physical systems, where they can inform engineers about ways to control large
networks such as power systems, communications systems and traffic management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will afford a unique opportunity for
students to interact with members of the professional community in a stimulating
setting, and to exchange ideas with a broad group of colleagues. The large
number of workshops before the conference and the interactive format of many of
the presentations will allow additional opportunity for training and learning.
Outreach effort will be devoted to advertising the conference and the student
travel award program to under-represented minorities.