* 1451171
* BRAIN EAGER: Toward a Theory of Real Neural Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* William Bialek, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Project: Our perception of the world seems a coherent whole, yet it is built out
of the activities of many thousands or even millions of neurons, and similarly
for our memories, thoughts, and actions. It seems difficult to understand the
emergence of behavioral and phenomenal coherence unless the underlying neural
activity also is coherent. But if the neurons are not independent, how do we
describe their collective activity? In this work, The PI takes several
approaches to this problem. In each case the PI is reaching for a theoretical
framework with a generality that transcends the details of particular systems,
but in each case the work is grounded by intimate collaboration with several
experimental groups. It is now conventional to assert that the emergence of new,
larger data sets in the study of biological systems creates a need for new and
more efficient methods of data management and analysis. Thus, it is widely
expected that the BRAIN initiative, which will provide substantial resources to
advance our ability to record simultaneously from many neurons, will also have a
significant "computational" component related to the storage, handling, and
analysis of the huge bodies of data that will be generated. It is much less
widely appreciated that making sense of the collective behavior in systems with
many interacting degrees of freedom requires theory, not just analysis. The goal
of this work is to develop such a theoretical
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's collaborators are using
multi-electrode arrays to monitor activity in populations of ganglion cells in
the vertebrate retina, as well as optical methods to monitor activity in
mammalian cortical and hippocampal circuits, and in the whole brain of the
nematode C elegans. The PI will use maximum entropy ideas, which have had some
success in such problems, to build models of the joint distribution of activity
across the hundreds of neurons in each of these experiments. The entropy of this
distribution determines the capacity of the network to carry information, and
the geometry of the distribution captures intuition about network function.
Beyond exploring the distribution of activity, the PI will construct a
"thermodynamics" for these networks that will allow to place real networks in a
phase diagram of possible networks. Finally, the PI will turn to dynamical
aspects of network behavior, focusing on the encoding of predictive information.
The PI's research is well integrated with teaching at the graduate and
undergraduate level, and there will be a special effort to create a "current
topics" course that brings issues at the interface of physics and biology to the
attention of a broader group of students. In addition, the PI is engaged is a
series of public outreach efforts, which will culminate in a book for a general
audience.