* 1451571
* EAGER: CortiCore - Exploring the Use of An Automata Processor as an MISD Accelerator
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Mircea Stan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2017
* USD 179,995.00

A novel computational accelerator architecture - the Automata Processor -has
recently been introduced by Micron, that extends the computational paradigm of
non-deterministic finite automata with important new capabilities. This
architecture is particularly well suited for tasks involving pattern matching.
Preliminary results suggest speedups as high as 1000X are possible, especially
applications that entail combinatorial search, i.e., searching among many
possible patterns to find the best match. This project evaluates the suitability
of this novel architecture for accelerating combinatorial search, using cortical
learning algorithms (i.e., algorithms for machine learning that are inspired by
observations and/or theories of how the brain works) as a case study. Until now,
cortical learning algorithms have primarily been implemented only in software,
which leads to solutions that are slow, large, expensive and power hungry, and
thus limits their applicability. In particular, this project initially focuses
on accelerating hierarchical temporal memory, a cortical learning algorithm that
has recently been shown to be highly effective for analysis and integration of
high-data-rate, multi-modal sensor and video data. It embodies many
characteristics of a variety of combinatorial search tasks, combining and
extending techniques from Bayesian networks, clustering, and decision trees.
This project is the first to evaluate the ability of the "enhanced automata"
paradigm to accelerate cortical learning algorithms, and one of the first to
explore the capabilities of the Automata Processor. In the process of evaluating
the best way to accelerate cortical learning algorithms, this project will yield
insights into the suitability of the Automata Processor for other artificial
intelligence algorithms. It will also lead to development of new algorithms,
software libraries, programming guidelines, and a new programming interface, to
help speed the mapping of other applications to the Automata Processor and
future accelerators. It will also yield techniques to improve the performance,
flexibility, and energy efficiency of future accelerators, and new insights into
the design and programming of heterogeneous systems with diverse accelerator
hardware units.

This project has potential to lay the foundations for a novel acceleration
framework that enables efficient solutions to a large set of intractable
problems, with orders-of-magnitude improvements in performance and energy
efficiency, and to guide development of future accelerators. As a consequence of
these acceleration capabilities, portable, low-power artificial intelligence
solutions could become ubiquitous. This project creates tools that facilitate
research and product development involving accelerator-based computing. This
project contributes to education and outreach through new course materials and
assignments, hands-on research and training opportunities in cutting-edge
acceleration paradigms, and new academic-industry collaborations.