* 1451589
* DDRI: Intervention Effects in Raising and Control: Evidence from Spanish-speaking children data
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Nina Hyams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2018
* USD 10,613.00

An important objective of language acquisition research is to understand why
certain grammatical constructions take longer to acquire than others. This
research proposal investigates two constructions that are not fully mastered
until school age: raising verbs such as 'seem', e.g. "Mary seems (to John) to be
smart"; and control verbs such as 'promise', e.g. "Mary promised (John) to be
cautious". Although semantically and structurally different, these verbs show
interesting similarities: i) both involve an interpretative dependency between
the subject in the upper clause, 'Mary', and an unpronounced subject in the
lower clause -- Mary is the smart/cautious one, and ii) in both cases there is
an argument intervening between the two dependent elements, '(to) John'.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the extensive literature on the acquisition of
these constructions in English, there is no consensus on why they are late to
develop. One prominent explanation holds that the delay is due to the presence
of the intervening argument, either for grammatical or processing reasons.
Interestingly, in Spanish an intervener is possible with 'prometer' (as with
'promise') but not with 'parecer' (in contrast to 'seem'). Therefore a
comparison of Spanish and English acquisition could be extremely helpful is
evaluating the 'intervention' account. This experimental study is the first to
investigate the development of raising and control in Spanish-speaking children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three comprehension experiments will be conducted on each
language in order to determine whether the protracted development of these
constructions comes from a common underlying source, namely intervention
effects. Two additional experiments designed to measure linguistic processing
and memory span will be used to determine whether children's difficulties with
these constructions are due to a non-adult syntactic representation, or due to
verbal working memory limitations. Discriminating between grammatical or
processing deficits has the potential of aiding in the progress of other related
domains, such as speech therapy or computational linguistics. This project will
also provide research opportunities for undergraduate students, which is
expected to have a direct impact on their research education.