* 1451540
* Honor as Goal Pursuit: A Cross-Cultural Investigation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Susan Cross, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/2020
* USD 589,947.00

Humans have a fundamental need to feel they are respected by others. In some
cultures (termed "honor cultures"), the concern for having others' respect and
positive moral standing is so central to individuals' identity that it can take
primacy over other motives. As a result, serious conflicts can arise if
individuals feel that they have received an insult or threat to their honor. In
such cultures, the importance of defending one's honor can lead to behavior that
can seem irrational and excessively aggressive to outsiders, with members of
honor cultures striving to assert and protect their honor even when it leads to
costly consequences such as injury or death. The objective of the proposed
research is to understand and attempt to reduce the dangers that arise when
those from honor cultures feel their honor has been threatened by an insult or
false accusation. The proposed studies compare members of honor cultures within
and outside the U.S. to members of cultures that lack strong honor norms. The
research tests the hypothesis that concern over maintenance and protection of
honor among members of honor cultures can interfere with other goal-related
behavior, and that these behavioral consequences can be reduced by interventions
that restore honor. The proposed research seeks to develop a better
understanding of the seemingly "irrational" ways that members of honor cultures
respond to perceived affronts and is therefore relevant to people involved in
public policy and economic interactions with members of honor-based cultures.
Moreover, a better understanding of honor with respect to goal-related behaviors
has important implications for organizational behavior, negotiation, and
conflict management.

The research involves a collaboration of researchers based in different regions
of the U.S. and researchers from a non-U.S. honor culture. Two studies test
whether individuals from honor cultures are more likely to use economic
incentives to punish someone who impugns their honor (by calling them dishonest)
even when such punishment is costly for the actor. Three studies examine whether
honor threats derail goal attainment by creating a distraction which affects
goal setting, initiation, and persistence. Two final experiments examine whether
an honor threat's negative consequences for goal pursuit can be reduced by brief
experiences in the lab that allow participants to behave honorably and receive
recognition for doing so, or by recalling experiences when they were accorded
honor by others. By understanding these honor-related processes, this research
will help U.S. businesses, governmental agencies, and non-governmental
organizations deal with conflict and miscommunication when working in honor-
based cultures.

The international component of this research was supported by co-funding from
the Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE).