* 1451218
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Investigation of Micrometeoroid Ablation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Zoltan Sternovsky, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 08/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

In this project, a laboratory a study aimed at measuring the evaporation rate
and ionization efficiency of particles representing interplanetary dust
particles will be combined with models to interpret radar measurements of meteor
head echoes in the Earth's atmosphere, which are generated by ablation. Much of
the laboratory work, which utilizes a dust accelerator facility at the U. of
Colorado, is being funded by NASA. The NSF project will focus on interpreting
meteor radar measurements performed at sites including Poker Flat, AK, Arecibo,
PR, Jicamarca, Peru, and radars in Argentina, Japan and Norway. NSF will support
the coordination between the laboratory results, modeling, and radar data
interpretation, as well as undergraduate student participation in the laboratory
measurements.

Layers of neutral metal atoms, such as Fe, Mg, Ca, K and Na, which peak between
85 and 95 km and are ~20 km in width, are produced by the daily ablation of
Interplanetary Dust Particles. Once the meteoric metals are injected into the
Earth's upper atmosphere they are responsible for a range of phenomena in
addition to the formation of layers of metal atoms and ions, such as nucleation
of noctilucent clouds; impacts on stratospheric aerosols and ozone chemistry;
and fertilization of the ocean with bio-available iron. Current estimates for
the total mass of the micrometeoroid input that is ablated in the upper
atmosphere vary by two orders of magnitude. The accurate determination of the
total incoming mass is relevant to determining vertical transport in the middle
atmosphere and to the surface, and our understanding of dust evolution in the
solar system. Radar detection of micrometeors is a widely used technique to
constrain the mass input. The laboratory work undertaken by the U. of Colorado
will provide much improved measurements of the key parameter needed to interpret
these measurements: the ionization efficiency during the ablation process upon
atmospheric entry.