* 1451954
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Learning Relations between Extreme Weather Events and Planet-Wide Environmental Trends
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Claire Monteleoni, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,993.00

Extreme events, such as heat waves, cold spells, extreme precipitation, and
severe storms, play a significant role in the loss of lives and damage to
ecosystems and infrastructure, presenting fundamental challenges to
sustainability. Under anticipated trends in planet-scale environmental trends,
there is considerable uncertainty in the projected changes in the intensity,
duration, and frequency of extreme events. Reducing these uncertainties is a
grand challenge that will require substantial advances in both the environmental
and data sciences. The proposed research seeks to advance both the environmental
science that underpins predictions of extreme events, and the data science
required to identify relations between variables in massive data sets. The
results of this research will provide a basis for improving predictions of
extreme events for use in sustainability planning. This project will educate and
cross-train graduate students in both disciplines, allowing them to contribute
to this new emerging field. The proposed research will also inform course
development, and will be disseminated through tutorials, conferences, and
seminars. The team's involvement with workshops, the GW Sustainability
Institute, and GW Planet Forward will help to broaden the impact through public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will advance machine
learning and statistical modeling of large-scale and regional events by: (1)
using new tools in sparse regression in high dimensions, (2) identifying
nonlinear relations in data, and (3) learning relations in spatiotemporal data
that are non-stationary over space and time. The results of this research will
advance understanding of extreme weather events and their relation to planet-
wide environmental trends. Such relations will be learned by applying new
statistical algorithms to analyze extensive climate model simulations which
generate very large data sets. The findings will be validated against
observations, and the learned relations will be compared between different
models to assess consistency and robustness, and to validate models.