* 1451916
* EAGER: US IGNITE: A Virtual Crisis Information Sharing and Situational Awareness Platform for Collaborative Disaster Response
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Raju Gottumukkala, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2018
* USD 294,198.00

A picture is worth a thousand words; this is especially true during emergencies
where images and video can provide better awareness than simple text. By
exploiting community broadband infrastructure and by extending an existing
emergency management system to allow for emergency personnel to transmit crisis
related information in the form of sensors, photos, and video streams across
local, regional, and federal emergency management and law enforcement agencies,
this project expands the ability to respond to emergencies. It also recognizes
that communication outages are one of the most broadly shared characteristic of
all disasters. The failure of communication infrastructure creates serious
situational awareness gaps for emergency managers that can lead to preventable
loss of life, property damage, and serious economic impacts. The project
utilizes advanced networking technology in the form of Software Defined
Networking (SDN) to address communication failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project builds upon the Next Generation Incident Command System (NICS) - a
system developed by MIT Lincoln Laboratory with support from DHS S&amp;T. The
NICS platform provides a collaborative situational awareness platform for (1)
First responders in the field to report data to incident commanders in near
real-time, and (2) Emergency managers and first responders to share map-based
situational awareness in near real-time. NICS was designed to operate on low-
bandwidth networks and does not support sharing video among users - which is
essential to get an accurate assessment of picture on the ground. This project
extends NICS so that it leverages the existing ultra-fast networks available in
US Ignite communities. It builds a situational awareness platform that provides
the ability to view and share multiple high-resolution videos, images and
documents, and provides reliable network connectivity by using Software Defined
Networking technology to reroute traffic in the event of network problems.