* 1451476
* Transforming Undergraduate Education in Engineering (TUEE) - Phase IV: Enhancing Women Participation and Success in Engineering Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Ashok Agrawal, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2018
* USD 224,171.00

While the percentage of women earning engineering B.S. degrees has increased in
the past few decades, the gender gap is still significant, especially among
women from underrepresented minority groups. In this project, the American
Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) will address the chronic problem of low
female participation and success in the U.S. engineering undergraduate programs.
It is important to bring stakeholders together to create a support community of
like-minded individuals to share ideas of effective content, pedagogy and
institutional practices and ensure all change agents support goals of increasing
female participation and success in engineering. This project is the fourth
phase of an anticipated five-stage Transforming Undergraduate Education in
Engineering (TUEE) initiative by ASEE to bring about engineering education
transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to bring together
a group of mostly women engineering faculty, practicing engineers, and other
professionals to share their views and observations, and develop a set of action
items for the academy and the nation to improve female participation and success
in engineering programs. This project will be implemented as a two part-plan
with the aim to build consensus and buy-in among stakeholder communities. The
first part is a two-day meeting of the planning group of national leaders,
comprised of three primary consultants from senior leadership of ASEE women and
diversity committees and five additional members, to develop the initial issues
to be addressed with a larger group. In the second part, a one-day workshop with
approximately 40 participants, primarily women, from a diverse pool of
influential advocates, practitioners, and researchers from academia,
professional societies and federal agencies. Participants will provide feedback
on the culture of engineering education and engineering programs as well as a
set of issues and action items on recruiting, retaining and graduating more
female students. Findings from Phase IV will be summarized in a widely-
disseminated report and also presented at the 2015 ASEE Annual Meeting. An
appropriate evaluation plan for the workshop is planned to collect feedback on
the workshop process and additional comments on the recommendations for the
effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on results from an earlier
phase of the TUEE initiative focusing on the perspectives of industry, as well
as coordinate with anticipated parallel activities that will involve the
perspectives of students and of professional societies and selected federal
agencies, respectively. ASEE plans to bring together the multiple phases of the
TUEE initiative through a culminating activity that will involve a large group
of invited stakeholders convened to share the findings for the first four phases
of the initiative and to create a set of recommendations and actions to identify
the critical components of and to foster transformative changes in the
engineering curricula, pedagogy, and educational culture necessary to support
the education of diverse engineers over the next decades.