* 1451034
* BRAIN EAGER: Tagging the Genetic, Synaptic, and Network Origins of Learning from Social Experiences
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Todd Roberts, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

How we learn from social experiences and during social interactions is poorly
understood, but it is thought to involve intricate changes to nerve cells in the
brain and the connections between these cells. Cells involved in social learning
are intermingled and intertwined with cells that may have completely different
functions. Because of this complexity, identifying and studying the specific
cells and networks involved in social learning remain a major challenge, and new
methods are required to address this needle-in-a-hay-stack problem. This
research will build a new set of genetic tools that allow researchers to mark
cells in the brains of mice and zebra finches that are specifically involved in
learning during social interactions, and will apply cutting-edge imaging,
physiological, and genetic methods to dissect how the marked cells change during
learning. This research is of fundamental importance because it will shed light
on the brain mechanisms involved in social learning and build a new set of
genetic tools that can be used by the scientific community to study brain
mechanisms involved in learning and memory. The research also is of importance
because developmental disorders and head injuries can severely compromise
circuits in the brain and individuals' ability to learn from social encounters
and navigate complex social interactions. The tools and methodologies developed
in this research will be made freely available to other scientists through the
world-wide web (http://www.utsouthwestern.edu/education/medical-
school/departments/neuroscience/index.html) and through the Addgene public
repository (http://www.addgene.org/). Funding for this research will also be
used to educate and train young scientists in novel genetic, molecular, imaging
and behavioral methodologies.

The proposed research will identify neuronal mechanisms involved in social
learning from olfactory and auditory cues in mice and zebra finches,
respectively. The proposal takes a highly interdisciplinary, collaborative
approach involving four independent laboratories. The researchers will
fluorescently "tag" neurons in mice and zebra finches that are selectively
activated by olfactory and auditory social experiences using novel genetic
strategies and viral tools that leverage the immediate-early gene c-Fos. Within
brain regions of interest (olfactory and vocal learning circuits), these viral
tools will differentially label neuronal populations depending on cellular
activity and the specific social cues animals experience. In vivo Ca2+ imaging
will be used to identify and map populations of neurons involved in processing
and learning from social encounters. Novel optical methods will be used to map
synaptic connectivity among tagged neuronal populations in vivo.
Electrophysiological and transcriptomic analyses will be used to identify
physiological and genetic factors unique to each tagged population, and identify
neural subtypes and subpopulations responsible for social learning. These
combined approaches will help reveal the network-level plasticity induced by
social experiences. This collaborative, high-risk/high-impact research will
generate novel in vivo molecular tools that allow fine and selective dissection
of the network components of social learning.