* 1451489
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying post-fire aeolian sediment transport and nutrient redistribution using rare earth element tracers
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Junran Li, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 02/28/2019
* USD 125,724.00

A nontechnical explanation of the project's broader significance and
importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arid and semiarid landscapes are dynamic and can
undergo rapid changes in vegetation, soil composition, and topography. Some
climate models indicate an increase in aridity and changes in the timing of
seasonal precipitation in many semi-arid regions, including the North American
deserts. This potential climate change, together with human activities, may
increase the frequency and intensity of wind erosion and fire. This project will
provide a quantitative assessment that examines both fire and wind erosion
effects on vegetation change, soil characteristics, air quality, and landscape
evolution. This study will help in the sustainable management of desert
grasslands under changing climate and wildfire scenarios.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grasslands and rangelands in arid and semi arid
regions of the world, which provide fundamental ecosystem services, are
undergoing rapid changes in fire activity and are highly susceptible to post-
fire accelerated soil erosion and redistribution by wind. Currently, many
grassland systems are being encroached by woody plants leading to decline in
grass productivity with the potential to jeopardize food security and
environmental quality. Even though many ecosystems worldwide exist in transition
between shrublands and grasslands and are affected by episodic fires, a
comprehensive understanding of the rates and patterns of post-fire wind erosion
and subsequent sediment redistribution is still missing. The proposed project
will quantify post-fire wind erosion and subsequent nutrient redistribution from
a shrub-grass system in the Chihuahuan desert (New Mexico) using a combination
of extensive manipulative field experiments, laboratory analyses and modeling.
We will test the hypothesis that vegetated microsites, which capture aeolian
sediments in arid landscapes, may become active sediment sources following
fires. This post-fire modification of sediment sources and sinks in the
landscape may impact rates of resource redistribution and soil patterning, and
therefore, lead to a more homogeneous landscape and reverse grassland
degradation. This project will investigate the applicability of rare earth
element tracers and Unmanned Aerial Systems-based LiDAR in order to monitor
landscape responses to natural and human-induced disturbances and to guide
future management practices.