* 1451018
* IRNC: Backbone: AmLight Express and Protect (ExP)
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Julio Ibarra, Florida International University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 6,749,900.00

Science research and education activities between the U.S. and nations in South
America have been evolving, benefiting from the shared investments between the
U.S., Brazil and other nations in Latin America. Astronomy, High-Energy Physics,
Comparative research in Biodiversity, Ecology and Genomics, Materials Science,
Seismology, Future Internet Research, Ultra-High Definition (UHD) video and
streaming research collectively represent a suite of collaborative science
research communities, with resources and cyberinfrastructure geographically
dispersed across the U.S. and the nations of Latin America with diverse network
services requirements. As data production of science applications increases, so
to is the demand for high-throughput production network services to transport
data from where it is collected, processed, then archived.

In response to the network requirements of these U.S.-Latin America
collaborative science research communities, the AmLight Express and Protect
(ExP) implements a hybrid network strategy that combines optical spectrum
(Express) and leased capacity (Protect) that builds a reliable, leading-edge
diverse network infrastructure for research and education. Researchers will be
able to leverage the resources of AmLight ExP to foster network innovation and
to address increasing network services requirements between the U.S. and the
nations in South America.

AmLight ExP is a reliable, leading-edge infrastructure for research and
education. With significant investments from the Academic Network of São Paulo
(ANSP), and Rede Nacional de Ensino e Pesquisa (RNP) and the Association of
Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), the total bandwidth provided by
AmLight ExP between the U.S. and South America is expected to grow to more than
680 Gibabits per second in aggregate capacity between 2015 and 2020. This serves
as a flexible inter-regional infrastructure, enabling communities of scientists
to expand their research, education, and learning activities uniquely empowered
through access to unlit optical spectrum on submarine cables, and through
AmLight ExP's use of dynamic circuits in a production environment. AmLight ExP
increases the rate of discovery in the U.S. and across the Western Hemisphere.
Faster discovery means quicker focus on the greatest benefit for society.
AmLight ExP acts as a catalyst for new communities of researchers and learners
with a bridge linking Latin Americans of the Western Hemisphere, benefiting U.S
Hispanic students, teachers and researchers. FIU is committed to serving the
needs graduate and undergraduate education through models that bring together
students and the networking community with scientists from all domains.