* 1451737
* EAGER: Provably Efficient Motion Planning After Finite Computation Time
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kostas Bekris, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2017
* USD 175,000.00

Motion planning is a fundamental capability needed for robots to operate
autonomously. This project advances the understanding of state-of-the-art
methods for robot motion planning and uses results from analysis to develop
increasingly more capable and practical solutions, which are relevant to
important applications such as driverless cars and automated
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern sampling-based algorithms for robot
motion planning asymptotically converge to optimal trajectories. In practice,
however, their execution is stopped after a finite amount of computation. This
project reasons about the properties of these popular methods after finite
computation time instead of an asymptotic analysis. Based on this progress,
methods are developed with improved practical computational efficiency and
formal probabilistic near-optimality guarantees. These techniques address a wide
set of planning challenges, including problems that involve significant
dynamics. This is an especially important direction, for which it is harder to
apply existing solutions with near-optimality guarantees. If successful, this
work will result in a paradigm shift in algorithmic motion planning and its
application domains, since it provides more efficient methods with stronger
formal guarantees. This project includes outreach and educational activities to
disseminate research results and integrate them into curriculum.