* 1451007
* BRAIN EAGER: A Massively Parallel Electrocorticographic Recording, Stimulating and Chemical Detection Device to Understand Neural-Network Functioning in Behaving Animals
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Christy Haynes, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

------------------------------------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #1451007&lt;br/&gt;This award is being made jointly by the
Neural Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative and Organismal Systems and
the Instrument Development for Biological Research program (IDBR) in the
Division of Biological Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How an animal
renders a correct decision to select an appropriate behavior to express over
another is not well understood at the level of individual brain neurons. Such
decision making, however, is not always easy to study or understand because a
number of factors can bias behavioral choice in dynamic ways (for example,
fluctuating neurohormones or environmental conditions). Even in simpler
invertebrate animals, with a reduced number of brain neurons, the operational
state of their neural networks is neither easy to follow nor predictable. Thus
to solve some of the most pressing questions in the field of neuroscience,
technological advances must be made so that the functioning of brains can be
studied under more naturalistic conditions. To this end, a team of scientists in
engineering, nanoscience, chemistry, computer science, and biology will work
together to design, fabricate and test a novel brain recording and stimulation
device that, in parallel, will detect fluctuations in neuroactive substances.
The team will begin by making prototypes of the device and testing it on leech
and insect brains that have fewer neurons, but have well defined correlations
between nerve cell activity and behaviors. The team is committed to the
interdisciplinary cross-training of graduate and undergraduate students,
especially females and underrepresented minorities. The goal of team mentoring
is such that students will be well versed in both the biological and engineering
aspects of the device. School visits are also planned to engage K-12 students in
neuroscience, chemistry and engineering-related demonstrations, encouraging them
to participate in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cross-disciplinary team
will fabricate and test a novel multi-electrode integrated ElectroCorticoGraphy
(ECoG) device and chemical sensing system having high temporal resolution.
Patterned brain activity will be collected in parallel with neuromodulatory
substances such as dopamine (DA), serotonin (5-HT) and octopamine (OA). The
team's aim is to fabricate a device that will be 2 x 2 mm square, micron-level
thin, flexible and biocompatible for extended use, with a minimum of output
wires; our future goal will be to develop a completely remote sensing/monitoring
capability. Such post-fabrication modification will be conducted at the
University of Minnesota's Nano Center. Furthermore, the team aims to identify
conserved neural algorithms or rules for context-dependent decision making that
span the invertebrates (leech and honey bee) to non-human primates. Fabricated
devices will be placed: 1) around dorsal and ventral aspects of the brain of the
leech while it makes a decision to crawl or swim (DA and 5-HT-dependent
switching); 2) over the Kenyon cells of the honey bee brain during a modified
PER (proboscis-extension) learning-and-memory task (potential DA, 5-HT, and OA
involvement); and 3) over the Prefrontal Cortex of monkeys during a spatial-
cognitive task that will mimic one used for the honey bee (measuring DA
changes).