* 1451629
* NeTS: EAGER: A Cross-layer End-to-End Performance Modeling Approach for Large-Scale Random Wireless Networks with Node Cooperative Behavior
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Honggang Wang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 03/31/2018
* USD 109,619.00

This project provides theoretical framework analyses, engineering design rules,
and guidelines for large-scale cooperative implementation and deployment of
Random Wireless Networks (RWN). The research advances the understanding of
emerging wireless networks and contributes to the RWN research community by
meeting the future data capacity demand and the goals of quality of service, and
has the potential to transform the findings to a broad range of complex network
applications spanning transportation, disaster recovering, healthcare, and other
sectors. In addition, an important education objective tightly coupled with the
proposed research is to recruit and educate the next generation of network
engineers. The findings from this project are disseminated via various public
and academic venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project conducts
end-to-end performance analysis of large scale RWN in the presence of node
cooperation. It aims at estimating and optimizing the performance of multi-
layer-designed RWN to meet the required quality of service prior to network
deployment. The project addresses new challenges in modeling multi-hop
cooperative RWN through three tasks: 1) integration of Markov Chain with point
process for cross-layer modeling; 2) identification of the optimal condition of
RWN based on its randomness, dynamics and network cooperative characteristics;
and 3) model validation and a case study in mesh networks. Unlike previous
studies where cooperative wireless networks or random networks are modeled
separately, this project integrates Markov chain and point process for modeling
large scale cooperative RWN. This is challenging due to the complexity of
cooperative behavior of multiple layers, network randomization and scalability.
This modeling approach is crucial for self-organized RWN, because many network
applications favor this cooperation in order to improve their quality of service
and reliability, reduce their power consumption and interference, and increase
their spatial or frequency reuse. The success of this project can significantly
advance RWN design and deployment, improve quality of service, capacity, and
coverage of the next generation wireless networks.