* 1451366
* BRAIN EAGER: A Chemical Strategy for Identifying Functional Neural Circuits
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Scott Laughlin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2016
* USD 308,000.00

With this award, Scott T. Laughlin from Stony Brook University, funded by the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division of the National
Science Foundation, will investigate the use of synthetic molecules for mapping
the connections between neurons in the brain. The human brain's ~90 billion
neurons allow us to think, move, and respond to stimuli. The brain's amazing
properties stem from neural circuits, which perform logical operations based on
the timing of neural activity and the specific connections between neurons in a
circuit. Strategies for visualizing and controlling neural activity abound, but
there are very few methods that enable direct imaging of neural circuit
connectivity, and those that exist are imperfect. Bridging the fields of
chemistry and neuroscience enables a novel strategy that will facilitate the
direct visualization of neural circuit connectivity in order to better
understand the brain. Importantly, this work will expose graduate and
undergraduate students to cutting-edge methods and ideas in chemistry and
neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to create
small molecules that illuminate the neurons that are connected to each other in
a neural circuit. Currently, there are no known small molecules that display
this property. However, there are a variety of naturally-occurring entities that
mark neural circuits by moving through neural synapses, which are the functional
connections between neurons. For example, some proteins called lectins can cross
the synapse by virtue of their affinity for synapse cell surface sugars, but
they are large, toxic, not easily altered, and slow to label consecutive neurons
in a circuit. Interestingly, diverse lectins, from different organisms and with
different sugar affinities share the ability to cross the synapse, suggesting
that the most important property that endows lectins with the ability to cross
the synapse is their general sugar affinity, and not a particular protein
feature or specific sugar affinity. This research explores the idea that small
molecules that mirror the trans-synaptic lectin's affinity for sugars will be
able to cross the synapse and serve as tracers for mapping the brain's neural
circuitry. The use of these trans-synaptic small molecules has the potential to
enable an improved and detailed understanding of the brain.