* 1451198
* EAGER: Improving the Quality and Editability of 2D and 3D Shapes via Crowdsourcing and Self-Crowdsourcing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Yotam Gingold, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 70,116.00

Two-dimensional curves and three-dimensional surfaces lie at the core of
computer graphics, but current approaches to creating and editing them are
limited by the user's expertise. Many of these tasks can be performed by anyone
at a basic level, but expert performance is difficult to achieve. The PI's goal
in this exploratory research is to seek ways to transcend this limitation based
on crowdsourcing, in which a crowd surpasses the skill of the individual (by
many individuals each contributing a single input), and an individual surpasses
his or her own abilities (by contributing many inputs) in what might be termed
self-crowdsourcing (the PI points out it has been shown that the improving
effects of crowdsourcing apply even to a crowd of one). Project outcomes will
positively impact not only the myriad applications of computer-aided design but
also fields such as computer-assisted surgery, where the quality of a cutting
path can take on life-or-death importance. Individuals with a variety of motor
impairments should also benefit from the ability to achieve high-quality
physical performance in tasks as routine as signing a document. To ensure broad
dissemination of his findings, the PI will open source the software developed as
part of this research.

The PI's approach is interdisciplinary, fusing human-computer interaction,
experimental psychology, and computer graphics. The wisdom of crowds has been
studied for scenarios where a single number is estimated, such as the weight or
price of an item; however, techniques for averaging (or otherwise aggregating)
high-dimensional physical or creative inputs have not been studied. This
research will involve three complementary thrusts: divide-and-conquer approaches
for combining small contributions from a crowd of (novice) individuals to create
a high-quality 3D shape from a 2D image; algorithms for preserving the temporal
record of image and shape creation in a reusable representation called a time
channel, to improve editability; and algorithms for aggregating repeated 2D and
3D curve drawings (self-crowdsourcing). The work will lay the foundation for an
understanding of the limits of crowdsourcing; in particular, the crowdsourced
2D-to-3D algorithm will test several long-standing hypotheses relating to novice
creation of 3D shapes.