* 1451495
* Conference: Variation at the Crossroads - Toronto, Ontario, Canada; October 23-25, 2015
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Kirk Hazen, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2017
* USD 25,879.00

Modern science has become highly specialized, even within the study of everyday
spoken language. This trend has fostered wonderful discoveries and a better
understanding of our world, but it has a down side. If specialists do not work
with other kinds of specialists, new realms of knowledge cannot be crafted. This
problem is addressed within linguistics by bringing together experts from
several complementary fields in order to identify promising and important
research directions for the next decade. This event is organized by an
international panel of scholars and pulls together experts from around the
world. They will explore five important areas of language study. First, some
scholars will examine how babies acquire language with so much sound variation
around them. Second, some scholars will explore the two qualities that uniquely
define human language, variation and syntax. Third, scholars will develop ways
that new computational powers can be best used in linguistics. The fourth and
fifth areas are documentation of lesser-studied languages and the effects of
language contact, two domains of increasing importance to Americans as English
increases its global reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will showcase
current sociolinguistic models of language variation intersecting with
endangered language documentation, formal theory, acquisition, language contact,
creole studies, and big data, with the aim of fostering cross-disciplinarily.
The workshop will take place during the conference New Ways of Analyzing
Variation (NWAV) 44, which we expect to attract ~400 participants. NWAV is
recognized worldwide as the major forum devoted to research in the Variationist
Sociolinguistic framework. The workshop will work in concert with the
conference, with four cornerpost special sessions and a plenary lecture. Each
cornerpost session will be a collaborative event with participants whose
abstracts are vetted by the cornerpost leader and workshop committee. The
purpose of each cornerpost session is to design the goals of their subfield of
linguistics for the next decade. The plenary speaker is a captivating speaker
with infectious enthusiasm and zeal for her work. She was trained by a founders
of the discipline and will describe her research which cuts across Variationist
Sociolinguistics (the central focus of the host conference), bilingualism,
endangered language documentation, creole studies and language contact. In
contrast, the other invited speakers are all are high-profile researchers and
innovators who come from outside Variationist Sociolinguistics. Collectively,
the invited presentations will deepen and broaden the questions that will occupy
Variationist Sociolinguists in the next decade and set the agenda for future
research.