* 1451103
* Conference: Language Variety in the South (LAVIS IV): The New South
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Walter Wolfram, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2017
* USD 32,180.00

Apart from a few urban centers (e.g., Atlanta, GA; Washington, DC; and Memphis,
TN), the South has had largely a rural history, but the region has become
increasingly complex over the past half-century. Raleigh, NC, for example, where
Language Variation in the South (henceforth, "LAVIS IV") will be held, has more
than quadrupled in size over this period, growing from 100,000 to 435,000
residents due to an economic and cultural transformation. Other Southern cities
are experiencing similar growth, and by most accounts, the majority of the
fastest growing American cities are now found in the US South. But the story is
more complex than uniform demographic and economic boom; many traditionally
important Southern cities, including Birmingham, AL; Knoxville, TN; and
Richmond, VA, have grown little over this period. Further, non-metro regions
have also undergone other cultural changes. The Appalachian Mountain region and
Creole culture in Louisiana, for example, has been changed in part due to
tourism, making the local history and dialect a potential cultural commodity
even as the number of economically distressed counties in these regions has
grown. "The New South" is, in part, a story of demographic and economic boom
alongside population and financial recession, but many other compelling
narratives exist as well, including the cultural and demographic transformations
brought by immigrants from all over the world including Asians (Chinese,
Vietnamese, Hmong, Indian, Pakistani, etc.), Middle Easterners (Lebanese, Iraqi,
Egyptian, Saudi, Yemeni, etc.) and Southern and Eastern Europeans (Albanian,
Bosnian, Bulgarian, etc.). Clearly the most visible new group in the region is
the recently arrived Hispanic population, which has resulted in the region
having the largest percentage of monolingual non-English speakers of any in the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fourth decennial meeting of LAVIS brings
together top sociolinguistic researchers from around the US to draw scholarly
and public attention to the most prominently recognized regional variety of
English in the United States. The examination of an array of factors (e.g.,
regional, ethnic, urban, rural, status, gender, style, etc.) demonstrates how
diverse and complex Southern language variation is, and the impact that language
variation has on social perception of the South, including persistent and
unjustified stereotypes of Southern speech. The themes explored by the panelists
span regional groups (Appalachian) and ethnic groups (African Americans,
Latinos, Cajuns, etc.); long standing minority groups (African Americans and
Cherokee) and new immigrant populations (Chinese Americans, Hungarians,
Italians, and Hispanics); urban and rural groups, etc. The specific objectives
for LAVIS IV consider sociolinguistic issues related to social, economic, and
political change embedded in the construct of "The New South" for both
longstanding populations (e.g., Native American Indian, African American, Cajun)
and more recent immigrants, all of which lay the foundation for the continued
linguistic research on language stability and change in the American South.