* 1451078
* EAGER:  Sustainability in Supply Chain: An Innovative and Systemic Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Cong Shi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hearn
* 08/31/2016
* USD 272,984.00

Sustainability is one of the top priorities for the United States and the United
Nations. Environmental, economic and social indicators alarm us that our current
model of progress is unsustainable. Increasing social concerns over the
environmental externalities of business or daily activities urge us to seek
better strategies to mitigate the negative environmental impact. Sustainable
issues in today's long and complex value/supply chain should be immediately
addressed. The current practice on sustainable supply chain lacks a holistic
evaluation of the price of sustainability from a systemic point of view. Instead
of measuring sustainability in terms of the entire product life-cycle, companies
generally stay within their traditional approaches, which focus mainly on
internal processes such as manufacturing and logistics. This EArly-Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) award provides funding for the development of a new
framework for analyzing the price sustainability from a systemic view point. The
outcome of this research, if successful, can fundamentally impact government's
and companies' perception on sustainability issues in supply chain and also
contribute to the field of Operations Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project's product life-cycle approach to sustainability considers a wider range
of activities and makes cross-functional cooperation compulsory. Each stage of a
product life-cycle will be analyzed: raw material supply, product design,
manufacturing, transportation, retailer distribution, consumer usage and
disposal. Once the trade-off of each stage is fully understood, we can design an
index for the price of sustainability. Upon computing these indices over the
entire value/supply chain, given the limited amount of budget and resources,
managers can identify bottlenecks and optimize on the total reduction of
negative impacts on the environment. Mathematical programming techniques (e.g.,
solving a stochastic knapsack problem, or a dynamic resource allocation problem)
can be readily applied to solve these potentially multi-objective or multi-stage
optimization problems. In this research, innovative methodologies to analyze
such complex systems and devise feasible solutions in a most cost-effective way
will be developed.