* 1451017
* BRAIN EAGER: Integrative Cross-Modal and Cross-Species Brain Models: Motivation and Reward
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Katherine Heller, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Motivation translates goals into action, and significantly impacts cognition
along several dimensions. The motivation for reward biases attention,
perception, and memory, and enhances learning, with effects evidenced
behaviorally as well as in specific brain regions. However, given such broad
effects of reward motivation, the question remains: how does reward motivation
propagate throughout the brain and how does it dynamically change the greater
neural circuitry to prime us to behave appropriately? In order to answer these
questions we develop statistical models for the effect of motivation on neural
circuitry, which combine data recorded using different instruments across a
variety of species. A fuller understanding of the neural effects of motivation
would elucidate how it impacts important cognitive processes, yielding insights
that are useful for better performance in various arenas, from education to
therapy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to gain a more complete understanding of
the neural network dynamics underlying the behavioral and cognitive effects of
motivation, it is necessary to integrate research in human subjects, and in
animal models. While extensive and crucial research has been carried out on
reward motivation separately in humans and animal models, there is a clear need
for improved translation across species. An overarching analytical framework for
translation is extremely important, due to the complexity of the problems being
addressed, and to leverage the strengths offered by each species and available
technology. The aim of this work is the development of dynamic, hierarchical
Bayesian models to discover functional neural networks that can translate across
species and data collection modalities. Bayesian models of human behavior, and
Bayesian machine learning inspired methods for neural network modeling, have
been extremely successful, making Bayesian methods fertile ground for
explorations into translational neural network discovery.