* 1451045
* IRNC: ENgage: Building Network Expertise and Capacity for International Science Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2021
* Dale Smith, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 5,939,839.00

The Network Startup Resource Center (NSRC) develops network communications
infrastructure and local engineering capacity in areas of the world where
inadequate research and education network connectivity poses a significant
barrier to collaborations with US scientists and educators. By helping to
establish and improve underlying cyberinfrastructure, both physical (network
connectivity) and human (technical capacity), NSRC plays an effective role for
the US science community by helping to incubate and build sustainable Internet
infrastructure to enable international scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of NSRC's activities are global in scope. NSRC's
focus on teaching and training about network design and operations, combined
with technically supporting international colleagues, results in the development
of stable computer networks, managed by local hands, in many countries all over
the world. NSRC achieves this through targeted capacity building activities and
partnerships with universities, Internet service providers, industry, government
and supranational agencies in Africa, Asia-Pacific, the Middle East, Latin
America-Caribbean, and North America.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NSRC exemplifies the
NSF's stated strategic goal of "encouraging collaborative research and education
across organizations, disciplines, sectors, and international boundaries."
Through coordinated training programs, NSRC builds institutional capacity to
support the research community, and leverages US research infrastructure to
bring value to international researchers and educators. Through hands-on, lab-
based curricula and a train-the-trainers approach, NSRC provides technical
capacity development to thousands of network engineers working in hundreds of
R&amp;E institutions to augment networking expertise in regions of interest to
NSF and the International Research Network Connections (IRNC) community.