* 1451996
* Mineral Formation by Cluster Self-Assembly: Schwertmannite as a Partially Crystallized Nanomineral
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Frederick Marc Michel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2018
* USD 271,687.00

Our ability to understand crystallization processes is a key to interpreting the
past, present, and future evolution of our planet. Yet our scientific
understanding of crystallization - the transformation of dissolved species into
solids - is incomplete. Recent research is revealing a diversity of new
"nonclassical" pathways and mechanisms by which crystals, particularly
nanocrystals, form and grow through attachment of intermediate and precursor
particles. However, immense gaps remain in our understanding of these processes.
This project will investigate the assembly of clusters to form the ferric
oxyhydroxide mineral schwertmannite in order to understand how it forms via
nonclassical route. Schwertmannite is pervasive and of broad interest in acidic
environments because it exhibits high surface area and an affinity for a variety
of potential pollutants. Additionally, because schwertmannite and other poorly
crystalline minerals are so abundant and important at and near Earth's surface,
understanding their formation is the key to interpreting the geologic record and
the interaction between organisms and geologic media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching objective of this research is to document the nature of
schwertmannite precursor clusters as a function of solution composition and
growth conditions, and then to use that information to construct a general model
that shows how dissolved iron and sulfate react in solution forming
schwertmannite. Preliminary in situ synchrotron scattering data show the
formation of clusters (~1.5 nm) having schwertmannite-like structural
characteristics. These clusters are stable in solution as long as the solution
remains turbulent (for up to 40 hours), but quickly aggregate and transform to
schwertmannite under static fluid conditions. Based on preliminary data, the
investigators hypothesize that schwertmannite forms via a nonclassical pathway
involving self-assembly of schwertmannite-like precursor particles. They also
hypothesize that the composition and properties of schwertmannite should reflect
the structure and composition of the particles that aggregate. The investigators
will apply a suite of in situ laboratory and synchrotron mineral
characterization techniques to study the real-time formation of synthetic
schwertmannite precursor clusters in solution and their aggregation into
schwertmannite solids. The investigators will also collect and characterize
water samples and sediments from an active AMD system and evaluate
schwertmannite formation in nature. The structural, chemical, and physical data
from these experiments will be used to develop a general crystallization model
for schwertmannite that is consistent with thermodynamic and chemical
principles, and with observations in the literature and this project of
schwertmannite formation in nature.