* 1451111
* GLOBE Program Online Teacher Professional Development Conference
* GEO,ICER
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* James Short, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2015
* USD 49,164.00

This award is being used to convene an expert workshop on STEM educator
professional development using online and blended delivery methods and their
potential application within the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the
Environment (GLOBE) program. GLOBE is an international science and science
education program, jointly managed by NASA and NSF, that engages educators and
students in collecting protocol-driven data on more than 55 different
environmental parameters and contributing those observations to a global
database. Elementary and secondary students in more than 110 countries
participate in the program. The workshop will identify the current state of
knowledge regarding effective online and blended professional development models
that have the greatest potential to be used by the GLOBE program. Switching to a
mostly online format for training teachers in the GLOBE protocols - currently
done through face-to-face workshops - will allow the GLOBE program to continue
growing in a more cost effective way. The workshop will also identify a set of
important education research questions that can leverage the large and diverse
GLOBE community as a research platform. These include issues such as how
effective online professional development links to student achievement in STEM,
cultural factors that may influence the effectiveness of educator professional
development, and how to scale-up effective professional development practices.

The "GLOBE Program Online Teacher Professional Development Conference" is being
convened at NSF headquarters in early September 2014. It will bring together 20
participants with expertise in STEM educator professional development, online
learning, and the GLOBE program. The main deliverable of this workshop will be a
report identifying the most appropriate and best strategies for using online and
blended training for GLOBE program educators and a preliminary education
research agenda that might leverage the unparalleled opportunities offered by
the extensive and culturally diverse community that engages in GLOBE activities.