* 1451508
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Influence of Fe2+- catalyzed recrystallization on Fe oxide reactivity and C stabilization
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Drew Latta, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2019
* USD 203,592.00

Iron (Fe) is the fourth most abundant element on Earth and a critical nutrient
for all life (from microorganisms to humans). Iron minerals are an important
part of our lives: they are part of the soil beneath our feet; the rust on our
cars; the hard drives in our computers; and the rocks on Earth and Mars. These
tiny, often nanoscale, particles are responsible for most of the red, yellow,
green, and black colors around us and they profoundly influence the quality of
our water, air, and soil through biologically-driven redox cycling between
oxidized ferric iron (Fe3+) and reduced ferrous iron (Fe2+). These Fe minerals
trap much of the organic carbon (C) in soils and sediments and can also take the
place of oxygen in anaerobic respiration, oxidizing and mineralizing organic
matter to CO2 in anoxic soils and sediments. Increasing concerns about carbon
driven climate change provides strong motivation to better understand the
coupling between Fe and C processes that govern storage of carbon (C) in soils
and sediments. The research findings from this work will benefit society by
providing important insights into terrestrial response to climate change, as
well as water quality preservation (such as arsenic release), and engineered
water treatment systems. This project will provide authentic research
experiences for individuals from groups underrepresented in the sciences at the
upper high school (HS) and undergraduate (UG) levels. This will be accom-plished
by involving long-term UG researchers in the project; providing HS junior and
seniors from schools with historically low-college enrollment opportunities to
participate in authentic summer research activities; and providing direct
faculty-student instruction for HS and UG students as part of a ?Scale-Matters?
workshop and Summer Soil Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this research project is to understand the complex redox dynamics between Fe and
organic C soils and sediments. In reducing environments, dissolved Fe2+ can
catalyze Fe oxides to recrystallize into new mineral phases with similar or
drastically different chemical properties. This process, Fe2+- catalyzed
recrystallization, has been observed for pure Fe phases, but has yet to be
explored as a pathway for mobilizing (or sequestering) organic C. Additionally,
the presence of organic C is also likely to alter the recrystallization process
with important implications for the Fe reactivity and isotope fractionation. The
investigators will investigate how Fe2+- catalyzed recrystallization influences
organic C and Fe mineral reactivity. To do this, the investigators will conduct
a series of Fe isotope tracer experiments to quantify the extent of Fe2+-
catalyzed recrystallization in model Fe-C assemblages synthesized from a range
of Fe oxides and diversity of natural organic matter. Changes in Fe oxide
susceptibility to microbial and chemical dissolution will be measured, along
with Fe isotopic fractionation, and C availability following recrystallization
of the Fe-C assemblages.