* 1451461
* A Descriptive and Theoretical Analysis of Complex Predicates in Iranian Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Simin Karimi, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2019
* USD 287,364.00

Verbal information is conveyed differently in the world languages. In English,
this information is mostly expressed by a simple verb, while in some other
languages it is conveyed by a complex structure consisting of two or more
components linguists call complex predicates. For example, gerye kardan 'cry
doing' (Farsi) translates as the single verb 'to cry' in English. This project
focuses on a descriptive and theoretical analysis of complex predicates in
seventeen Iranian languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of complex
predicates has been the subject of many linguistic studies in the last 5-6
decades. One major question is whether they are word-like, or rather phrase-like
with each component revealing independent properties. Furthermore, the
contribution of each part to the meaning of the whole have long been a central
issue in linguistic theory. Crucially, complex predicates reveal distinct
behavior with respect to certain constructions compared to those observed in
well-studied languages such as English. These constructions include passives
(The apple was eaten), resultatives (John wiped the table clean), and causatives
(John made Mary leave). The nature of these differences, and the reasons for
their existence, are not well understood. New data and the microparametric
comparison of the Iranian languages will break new ground in our understanding
of the underpinnings of complex predicate formation and their behavior in human
language. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collection will be conducted via linguistic
elicitation with native speaker consultants as well as Complex Predicate
Questionnaires to be filled out by native speaker consultants trained in
linguistics. One of the goals of this project is to transcribe, catalogue and
enter the data into a database. All the textual material that forms the basis
for the descriptive analysis and pedagogical material will be stored in an
accessible format available to public for further study, in addition to a web-
based encyclopedia for the target languages. This study promises many benefits.
It trains several students as experts in Iranian languages, provides
understanding of languages and cultures Americans are interested in, but do not
know much about, and fosters research relations between linguists in three
continents, which will enrich collaborative activities.