* 1451245
* EAGER: I-Corps for Learning (I-Corps-L): Curriculum Development and Implementation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Ann McKenna, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 296,880.00

This project addresses the problem of how to promote effective educational
innovations so they become more widespread and therefore can have substantial
impacts among students and educators. The principal investigators are developing
an entrepreneurial approach to helping teams of educational innovators develop
strategies to be more successful in scaling up their NSF-funded educational
innovations. The project is called the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning
(I-Corps-L) and is modeled after the successful NSF Innovation Corp (I-Corp)
teams program. The current work seeks to improve the ability of the I-Corps
program to accomplish widespread dissemination of NSF funded education
activities. Thus far, desirable levels of adoption of educational innovations
have proven difficult to achieve. This project is focused on redesigning the
I-Corps program materials specifically for educational innovations. The
principal goal of I-Corps-L is to foster an entrepreneurial mindset within the
education community such that it has the potential to impact the way education
innovations are designed and implemented. The intent of this project is to
produce lasting instructional materials, strategies, and programs that can be
used with future faculty and teams in the I-Corps
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project work will be directed at several
specific objectives. The materials developed for the NSF I-Corps program will be
customized to better reflect the circumstances encountered within an education
network. Examples and case studies will be developed illustrating the successful
scale-up and sustaining of innovations in the educational domain. The project
team will develop an instructional approach that maintains the earnestness of
the entrepreneurial mindset, but builds on best practices in instructional
design and current knowledge of how people learn. The enhanced I-Corps-L
curriculum will be tested with a cohort of twenty-four teams. In addition to
using new materials, the cohort will be developed using the established I-Corps
application and selection process. The project plan is informed by earlier
findings which made it clear that the I-Corps-L course materials and concepts
should be illustrated with examples from educational enterprises, non-profits,
or social entrepreneurial endeavors. This customization will allow participants
to better understand what constitutes an educational ecosystem, and to more
effectively understand and apply the entrepreneurial concepts. One significant
output of this work is learning materials customized to the education
environment that can be used for future cohorts and within the I-Corps network
of nodes and sites. Outcomes will also include a comprehensive evaluation
focused on formative, summative, and forward-looking outcomes of I-Corps-L.
Outcomes of particular interest include a determination of the extent to which
the I-Corps-L course motivates as well as prepares teams to effectively design
learning innovations so they will be scalable and sustainable. Evaluation will
also investigate what other actions are needed for the I-Corps-L approach to
contribute effectively to scaling and sustaining learning innovations and
promoting transformation in STEM education.