* 1451465
* EAGER: Towards the New Making Renaissance: Tools for Creative Making
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Eric Paulos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2016
* USD 175,000.00

The emerging ubiquity of low cost digital fabrication technologies such as 3D
printing and laser cutting tools coupled with the popularity of local and online
making communities such as Tech Shops, Maker Spaces, Fab Labs, Esty,
Thingiverse, and Ponoko, have empowered individuals and groups to participate in
the creative act of making in new and remarkable ways. This "maker movement" as
it is often called, is radically transformative, affecting education,
manufacturing, healthcare, and the economy. However, the creative design tools
and mechanisms for knowledge capture and sharing lag behind. This project will
develop new software tools for promoting creative and rapid design exploration
using digital fabrication equipment as well as a novel sensor for capturing and
identifying workshop activities for learning and tutorial creation. The software
and hardware approaches proposed will broaden participation by a new community
of non-engineers, enabling everyday individuals to not just easily enter the
emerging world of digital fabrication but to be leading participants in this
important technological and cultural phenomenon.

This project includes a set of focused studies and the design of several new
physical interactive technologies for capturing and expressing a broad range of
physical making and prototyping activities. Specifically, it involves building
and evaluating two technologies: first, MetaMorphe, a web-based system to enable
more rapid and dynamic design exploration of 3D physical designs for digital
fabrication, and second, FabSense, a ring-worn wireless inertial sensor for
capturing and identifying a user's activities scoped within the landscape of
making with workshop hand tools. While this proposal plans to provide
significant functionality in these system, it also argues for an increased
foregrounding of the creative process, an improved inclusion of everyday tools,
and a capturing of the analog experience of making.