* 1451839
* CAREER: Targeted genome elimination by a selfish B chromosome in the jewel wasp Nasonia vitripennis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Patrick Ferree, Claremont McKenna College
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 03/31/2021
* USD 850,352.00

This project seeks to understand how selfish genetic elements can alter patterns
of genetic inheritance at the molecular level. In the jewel wasp, Nasonia
vitripennis, a special so-called B chromosome can induce elimination of all the
genes inherited from the paternal parent, producing progeny that contain genes
just from the mother's genome, along with the B chromosome itself. How this
happens is not clear, but this research should provide important clues that
might shed light on how selfish DNA elements promote their own propagation in
this and other systems. The project will provide training opportunities for
undergraduate students and a postdoctoral researcher. Data generated by the
project will be used for original research in a new module to be incorporated by
the PI into his developmental biology course; the new course will provide the
students with experience in both bioinformatics and fluorescence microscopy
approaches. The course module will also be incorporated into the biology
curricula of two-year colleges in the Los Angeles area. A scientific outcome of
the collective efforts of students in these courses will be to establish a new
gene expression resource for the research community. Educational outcomes of
engaging students in research are expected to include: increased student
interest and conceptual understanding of scientific inquiry; higher rates of
retention as biology majors; higher academic performance of two-year college
students in subsequent upper-level biology courses; and enhanced rates of
transfer of students from two- to four-year institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Normally, all parts of the eukaryotic genome function in
unison to insure normal organismal function. However, in some cases, individual
chromosome regions and even whole chromosomes can alter normal reproductive
processes in order to become transmitted at abnormally high levels to new
progeny at the expense of the genome as a whole. Currently little is known about
how this condition, known as intragenomic conflict, occurs at the molecular
level. This project will employ modern molecular and cytological methods to
investigate how a supernumerary ("extra") B chromosome completely destroys the
paternal genome in the jewel wasp Nasonia vitripennis, thereby achieving near-
perfect B chromosome transmission. Preliminary data suggest that genome
elimination is targeted through a mechanism involving differences in the
configuration of chromatin associated with the paternal vs. maternal genomes.
Experimental approaches will test this hypothesis as follows: (1) define how the
B chromosome and the paternal genome differ in their chromatin states when the
paternal genome undergoes elimination; (2) determine whether and how the B
chromosome initially alters the chromatin state of the paternal genome; and (3)
explore the role of novel B chromosome-expressed non-coding RNAs as potential
effectors of paternal genome elimination. This research will provide insights
into unknown aspects of chromatin dynamics, address whether genome elimination
by the selfish B element is mechanistically distinct from genome elimination
events in other organisms, and help to discern how intragenomic conflict can
arise from a functionally unified genome.