* 1451297
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and Improving Predictions about Future Feelings
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Heather Lench, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/28/2019
* USD 134,344.00

People try to make decisions that will improve their lives and make them happy,
and to do so, they rely on affective forecasts--predictions about how future
outcomes will make them feel. The greater the emotional impact people expect a
future outcome to have, the more effort and resources they invest in attaining
or avoiding it. Understandably then, inaccuracy in affective forecasting has
been identified as a major obstacle to making good decisions. Decades of
research suggest that people are poor at predicting how they will feel and
commonly overestimate the impact that future events will have on their emotions.
Although the simplicity of this idea is intuitively attractive, recent studies
have revealed that people are actually very good at forecasting some features of
their emotional reaction. The proposed research will provide a more precise
understanding of when and why people are biased in their predictions about
future feelings and how bias affects the quality of decisions. The results will
inform interventions designed to improve decision-making in applied domains
including health, public policy, education, and economics. People making
important decisions--such as whether to undergo surgery, listen to public health
warnings, or pursue a specific career-- will be better informed if they can
accurately predict how the outcomes of their decisions will make them feel.
Thus, interventions that improve forecasting are critically important for
helping people make informed choices with implications for the length and
quality of their lives.

Preliminary findings from the investigators, Heather Lench (Texas A & M
University) and Linda Levine (University of California, Irvine) support the
hypothesis that people overestimate in predicting the frequency and duration of
their emotional reactions. However, their results also indicated that people
were far more accurate at predicting the intensity of their reactions and,
indeed, showed a slight but consistent tendency to underestimate emotional
intensity. The proposed research tests a new theoretical model developed by the
investigators to explain such results. In four studies, the investigators will
clearly differentiate forecasts of emotional intensity, frequency, and duration
for the first time both in laboratory and real-world settings. By allowing
researchers to achieve greater precision about the features of emotion being
predicted, these studies will clarify when and why people overestimate,
underestimate, and accurately predict their emotional reactions. The proposed
studies will also be the first to analyze the differing causes of bias when
people predict distinct features of emotion, the features of emotion that people
spontaneously consider when making decisions in their daily lives, and the
consequences of forecasting biases for decision quality. Addressing these
questions is essential, not only for a theoretical understanding of how people
think about their futures, but also for understanding how to intervene to
improve decisions.