* 1451274
* Collaborative Research: Testing for physiological and genetic independence of rapidly evolving lifecycle components in the apple maggot, a model for seasonal adaptation
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Gregory Ragland, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Hammond
* 11/30/2016
* USD 536,116.00

Organisms must time their lifecycles to avoid stressful periods of the year
(e.g., winter cold and lack of resources) and to exploit the good times of the
year when weather is favorable and resources are abundant. Dormancy responses
have evolved in many organisms, from plants and microbes to mammals and insects,
to achieve synchrony with local seasonal conditions. Organisms are increasingly
challenged by new seasonal regimes caused by 1) contemporary climate change, 2)
habitat modifications from human development and urbanization, and 3) movement
of species into new areas through managed or accidental introductions. Thus,
understanding how dormancy responses rapidly evolve and compensate for shifts in
seasonality will be a critical component for understanding the persistence and
spread of native and invasive species in our rapidly changing world. This
research will characterize the mechanisms that allow rapid adaptation to novel
seasonality via changes in dormancy in the apple maggot fly, Rhagoletis
pomonella, a major pest of apples and a textbook example of rapid species
formation. Within the last 200 years, R. pomonella has shifted from its native
host hawthorn (Crataegus mollis) to introduced, domesticated apple (Malus
domestica), and in the process has formed new, partially reproductively isolated
populations on apples. Seasonal fruiting time differs substantially among plant
species in a given region, so adapting to a novel fruit requires adaptation in
insect seasonal timing. In R. pomonella, the newly derived apple population has
become established on their novel host fruit via evolved differences in timing
of the overwintering dormant stage, which results in temporal matching of insect
growth and reproduction with earlier seasonal availability of apple compared to
hawthorn fruits. Physiological mechanisms that evolve to adjust dormancy timing
are poorly understood, and this research will leverage variation among the fly
populations to quantify physiological differences in gene and protein expression
and differences in the genome that underlie adaptation at key regulatory points
across the fly life cycle. Additionally, experiments will address whether common
physiological mechanisms underlie adaptation across the three phases of dormancy
(dormancy induction, maintenance, and termination) potentially constraining the
rate or direction of evolutionary responses to changing seasonality. This
fundamental research has implications in numerous contexts from preserving
biodiversity to forecasting agricultural production and the spread of invasive
species. Beyond identifying important features facilitating rapid responses to
seasonal change, the project will also enhance a pre-collegiate education
program in evolutionary biology. Host race formation in R. pomonella provides a
clear and intuitive example of ecological adaptation and the genesis of new crop
pests, making the flies excellent ambassadors for evolution, a subject poorly
understood by many students and the general public. The research team previously
developed a workshop and outreach program for STEM education to enhance the
evolution knowledge of high school teachers and students from Florida and Puerto
Rico, providing materials for science curricula. The current grant will expand
the high-school teacher training, add freely accessible web-based curricular
materials, and most importantly, formally evaluate the impact of the educational
program. Survey-based assessments delivered before, during and after the
workshop will assess changes in perception of frequently misunderstood concepts
in evolutionary biology.