* 1451172
* EAGER: Cognitive modeling of strategies for dealing with errors in mobile touch interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Robert St. Amant, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 281,076.00

Touch interfaces on mobile phones and tablets are notoriously error prone. One
plausible reason for slow progress in improving the usability of touchscreen
devices is that research and design efforts in human-computer interaction take a
relatively narrow focus on identifying, understanding, and eliminating human
error, focusing primarily on the specific individual touch interactions rather
than the broader task knowledge that a person needs to use a device to do a
real-world task. This project takes a different perspective, suggesting that
usage errors represent breakdowns in a person's efforts to adapt to the
complexity of the tasks and devices, and that many of these problems can be
traced to interface designers not inadequately considering the cognitive task
knowledge that a user will need to do a task. Many touchscreen design guidelines
are arbitrary and based on common practice and established user expectations.
This project aims to change the shape of research and practice for touch
interaction on mobile devices by introducing sound scientific principles of
cognitive task analysis and error analysis to the design and analysis of such
interfaces. This project could benefit society by dramatically improving the
user interface design of touchscreen interfaces.

The project will develop cognitive models, which are computer programs that
behave in some way like humans. The project will specifically develop cognitive
models of touch interaction that could be used by designers when designing new
touchscreen interfaces, to identify where users are likely to encounter problems
with the new interface. The project includes three stages. The first stage will
develop a small set of instrumented interfaces on mobile platforms to collect
human data for error-prone tasks. The experiments will examine the variation of
the probability of error at specific points during a sequence, the visual
feedback provided for specific actions, and the user knowledge of error recovery
and avoidance actions. The second stage will follow other successful efforts in
cognitive modeling to analyze user data from our exploratory experiment with the
goal of developing a representation of the strategies we have observed. An
automated process will explore a search space of plausible cognitive strategies
to identify models that explain the performance data collected during the first
stage. The third stage will validate the hypotheses pertaining to the cognitive
strategies that contribute to the successful and unsuccessful use of touchscreen
devices that are established during the first two stages. The results will have
much wider implications than current models of touch accuracy (which produce
little more than target size and spacing guidelines) by focusing on the bigger
picture of expertise and failure. The project takes a large step into the
cognitive modeling of pervasive but not-yet-unexplored interface problems.