* 1451803
* RUI: Development of Executive Function in Pre-Crawling Infants: The Effect of Robotic-Assisted Locomotor Experience
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Nancy Rader, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 02/29/2020
* USD 374,995.00

Executive function refers to a range of abilities involved in focusing and
maintaining attention, and planning actions to achieve goals. The mastery of
these abilities influences children's cognitive and social success. Research
suggests that infants' movements, such as reaching, crawling and walking, may be
important for the development of executive function. The purpose of this
research is to examine the effect of locomotor experience on the development of
executive function in typically developing, pre-crawling infants. The research
uses new technology that lets a baby "drive" a robot by leaning in the direction
that the baby wants to travel. This gives babies an early opportunity to develop
enhanced locomotor experience which may accelerate the development of executive
function. If enhanced locomotor experience also enhances executive function,
this may provide an important avenue of support for individuals with conditions
that involve motor impairment, such as Down syndrome, developmental coordination
disorder, spina bifida, and cerebral palsy, who often exhibit poor executive
function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five-month old infants will be randomly assigned
to an experimental group that drives the robot during each session or to a
control group that does not. Infants will complete twelve 20-minute sessions,
followed by a battery of tasks including versions of a Visual Cliff, Means-End,
A-not-B, and Switch Task that assess aspects of executive function using eye
gaze technology. The hypothesis is that infants who have experience with
independent locomotion using the robot will show higher levels of executive
function than those without this experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from
this research will provide insight for understanding basic mechanisms involved
in the development of executive function. The outcome of this research may also
provide a rationale for reconsidering the role of mobility experience for very
young children with delayed or limited independent locomotion. Because the
research is being conducted at an undergraduate-oriented institution, the
project will provide significant hands-on research experiences for numerous
undergraduate students.