* 1451098
* Lynen Fellowship - Case and Coordination
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Jonathan Bobaljik, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2017
* USD 34,600.00

This project, funded primarily by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation
(Germany), affords an opportunity for an international collaboration, allowing a
German post-doctoral scholar to conduct research in theoretical morphosyntax at
the University of Connecticut, with a research group led by Dr. Jonathan
Bobaljik. The research project aims to provide a better understanding of
unbalanced case forms in coordination. In major European languages, two
conjoined noun phrases normally bear the same case forms - in a sentence like
"The prize will be given to [us and them]," both pronouns in the bracketed
expression are in the accusative form as both serve as the object of the
preposition to. It is known that in many languages, only one of the noun phrases
in a conjunction will bear the case form appropriate to the conjunction as a
whole in this way. For example, in the Uralic language Mari, only the second
noun in a conjoined object phrase bears the regular case for the syntactic
context the other expression is unmarked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While sporadic
examples are known, this project on the one hand undertakes a cross-linguistic
survey of these constructions (which have not been systematically surveyed in
the literature) and on the other hand develops case studies of selected
examples, particularly from Uralic, a theoretically rich group of understudied
languages. Theoretically, the research builds on Weisser's (2014) doctoral
research on asymmetries in clausal coordination, where it is argued that
apparently symmetrical coordinations have an internal hierarchical structure.
Research questions to be asked bear on a number of broad themes in linguistic
theory including the relationship between case and agreement (asymmetries in
coordination are much more well studies in agreement than in case), the role of
linear order versus structure in morphological and syntactic generalizations.
More broadly, by conducting a broad, cross-linguistic survey along with selected
case studies informed by specific research hypotheses, the project contributes
to a more refined understanding both of cross-linguistic diversity and the
limits of such variation.