* 1451288
* Laboratory Experiments in Geomorphology: The 46th Annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Sean Bennett, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 01/31/2016
* USD 40,445.00

Non-technical Explanation of the project's broader significance and importance

The study of the processes that shape the Earth's surface and their associated
landforms has been dominated by field-based research, yet the scales of time and
space over which landscape processes operate often are very large and pose
difficult challenges. Experimental facilities and physical analogues can
compress time and shrink scale to examine more closely the dynamics of these
systems. This award supports the 46th annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium,
entitled "Laboratory Experiments in Geomorphology." The symposium will bring
together a strong and diverse group of leading experts and emerging scientists
actively engaged in experimental geomorphic research. Eight themes have been
selected based on important phenomena, and the contributors have been asked to
highlight the unique capabilities of their facilities and how their experimental
research may transform the study of Earth-surface processes. The broader
implications of the symposium include the promotion and enhancement of the
education of future science professionals, the fostering of diversity within the
discipline, and the discussion of topics having relevance to society, such as
landslides and river restoration. Technical Description

The 46th annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium will provide a concentrated
opportunity for the exhange of ideas among researchers actively engaged in
experimental geomorphic research. Eight themes have been selected based on
significance to advancing the knowledge of Earth-surface processes and how
experimental research in these areas may transform the discipline of
geomorphology. The intellectual merit of this symposium is three-fold. First,
the symposium provides a prominent forum for scientists to present, exchange,
and disseminate methods, techniques, and results on geomorphic research to the
global community. Second, because of its size and focus, the symposium offers an
unrivalled opportunity to engage actively in discussion with a broad range of
scientists linked not necessarily by a research focus, but by a methodological
approach, which in this case is laboratory experimentation. Third, all papers
presented orally at the symposium will be published in the internationally-
recognized journal Geomorphology, which ensures the effective transfer of
knowledge to the broader science community.