* 1451661
* EAGER: Exploring Appropriate 3D Printing Paradigms in Special Education
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Amy Hurst, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2018
* USD 159,884.00

Three-dimensional (3D) printing is a promising technology that is gaining
acceptance in mainstream education as a means to engage students in real world
problem solving, design, and STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math)
topics. This technology offers unique and exciting benefits in special education
classrooms allowing students, instructors, and therapists to quickly design and
produce customized physical objects such as tangible learning aids or custom
assistive technology. For example, instructors can 3D print objects to visualize
abstract scientific concepts, or create custom grips and handles to help
students access classroom technology. This technology also offers the
opportunity for individuals who cannot safely operate traditional manufacturing
machines to build and customize physical objects. While there are many promising
opportunities for this technology to impact special education, the needs and
abilities of students with disabilities and their instructors have been largely
ignored in the design of existing 3D modeling tools, machine operation, and
instruction. Specifically, many of the existing tools have a steep learning
curve, are not accessible, or are time consuming to use. In this project, the
investigators will work closely with special education instructors to evaluate
existing tools and develop new ones that serve the needs of this diverse and
unique population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Requirements analysis will be conducted
using observations and interviews; evaluation of existing design tools; and the
development and testing of new tools. Researchers will observe an established
technology-rich classroom, provide technical support for 3D printing, and
through these activities learn the unmet needs of people with disabilities and
their instructors for 3D printing in an instructional setting. Through workshops
and classes, the researchers will evaluate existing tools for 3D modeling, and
provide support and training in these contexts, noting the content and kinds of
training that are most needed and useful. The researchers will collaborate and
co-design with stakeholders to design and test new 3D design tools, which will
be iteratively developed and deployed in the field, and their adoption observed.
Follow-up interviews and evaluations will measure how these new tools have
addressed the challenges posed, and how they are perceived by the stakeholders.
Potential metrics include accuracy of design contrasted with expectations and
needs; satisfaction with 3D models and printed outcomes; time savings related to
the design process; and actual and perceived benefits of printed artifacts.
These steps will reveal what types of support are necessary for modeling and 3D
design in these contexts, and afford a better understanding of how to provide a
3D printing instructional and design environment that is accessible by people
with disabilities.