* 1451412
* EAGER: Leveraging Structure to Realize the Promise of Transfer Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Fei Sha, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 97,000.00

The success of statistical machine learning relies critically on having access
to a large amount of data for training. Learning algorithms become much less
effective in data-poor situations. Examples of such challenges are recognizing
uncommon visual categories from their images, understanding rare languages where
both text and audio corpora are expensive to collect, adapting and personalizing
assistive robots to new environments and owners, and identifying rare forms of
diseases. Transfer learning has been emerging as an appealing framework to
address the challenge of being poor in data. The essential idea behind transfer
learning is to leverage a cohort of related tasks, whose training data are
abundant, to help to learn target tasks. The research project has several
broader impacts. The most recent advances in transfer learning will be
incorporated and integrated with the PI's teaching and research activities for
graduate and undergraduate students from diverse scientific backgrounds. The
project will actively engage undergraduate students in research. The results of
the planned research will be rapidly and broadly disseminated to scientific
communities via tutorials, review articles/surveys, invited talks and open-
source software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite progress, transfer learning
methods are largely limited to classification tasks where the goal is to learn a
labeling function for data samples represented as points in the Euclidean space.
In contrast, data in many application problems are complex and rich in
structure. Examples include complex visual scenes where there are strong
contextual dependency among object categories, and multimodal data where each
modality is complementary to the others. Effectively exploiting the dependency
and structures in such data will likely improve the effectiveness of transfer
learning relative to methods that ignore them. This project develops statistical
methods for structured transfer learning, with applications to problems in
computer vision and robotics. The project focuses on two directions: (1)
transfer learning for structured prediction problems, and (2) cross-modal
transfer learning. The research develops new statistical learning methods that
deepen understanding and invents practical statistical algorithm to tackle
transfer learning problems for data with complex types. Secondly, the invented
methods are applied to practical applications problems in computer vision and
robotic perceptions. The project will show that proper of structure in data
advances the state-of-the-art of intelligent and autonomous systems in
perceiving complex and challenging real-world environments.