* 1451574
* AF: Small: EAGER: Negating Net-Neutrality: A Game-Theoretic Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Sanjiv Kapoor, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 110,000.00

In this project the PI plans to investigate a game-theoretic analysis of network
flows with heterogeneous delays, the principal application being to analyze the
impact of prioritization of traffic on the internet and consequently, to shed
light on the debate on net neutrality. With the internet becoming an essential
aspect of communication and big data transfers becoming more frequent, Quality
of Service (QoS) becomes an important aspect of network design and usability.
The consequent network traffic prioritization has given rise to the debate on
net neutrality and the PI will investigate the impact on the efficiency of
networks as a consequence of negating this principle, given the rational self-
interests of the users. While the inefficiency of selfish routing has been
studied in the past, this project will extend the state of the art by utilizing
heterogeneous delay models that reflect traffic prioritization as well as
bandwidth reservations. Economic aspects will also be considered. The results
will also have applications in the field of transportation networks.

The project aims to model the routing of multiple types of traffic arising from
independent autonomous agents on a network via multi-commodity network
congestion games with heterogeneous delay functions. Heterogeneous delay
functions, such as polynomial delays and the generalized processor sharing (GPS)
queuing function, model the impact of differentiated or heterogeneous traffic
such that prioritizing a commodity increases its impact on the delays of all the
commodities on the link. Other applicable delay functions and consequent results
from queuing theory will also be applied. The project will study the existence
of Nash equilibrium and properties such as the price of anarchy in the context
of both heterogeneous traffic as well as service classifications that will
induce bandwidth partitions. Equilibrium pricing in network markets will also be
considered.

Results obtained in this project will further current research in the theory of
congestion games and may shed light on the debate over net neutrality.
Educational impact of the project will be via the training of graduate students
in algorithmic game theory and development of related courses.