* 1451754
* Role of the Mai1 Protein Kinase in Connecting Host Recognition of Pathogen Effectors to MAPK Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Gregory Martin, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2019
* USD 558,000.00

Diseases of crop plants pose serious economic and environmental challenges to
U.S. agriculture. The goal of this research is to generate knowledge that
contributes to a comprehensive understanding of the plant immune system and
enable innovative methods for the generation of crop plants that are naturally
more resistant to pathogens. Such plants will reduce dependence on chemical
pesticides, produce economic benefits for farmers, provide food for U.S.
consumers that has fewer pesticide residues, and will contribute to the long-
term improvement and sustainability of U.S. agriculture. The project focuses on
the interaction of tomato with a bacterial pathogen, Pseudomonas syringae pv.
tomato, which results in speck disease. This plant-pathogen interaction will be
used to investigate how plants recognize specific pathogens and activate their
immune systems in order to decrease the damage caused by diseases. The
investigator will train a postdoctoral associate and a graduate student in
cutting-edge molecular and biochemical methods used for the study of plant-
pathogen interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important unanswered question in
our understanding of plant immunity is how recognition of pathogen effectors by
disease resistance (R) proteins is transmitted to mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) cascades. These cascades consist of three sequentially activated
protein kinases (MAPKKK-MAPKK-MAPK) and play a central role in immunity-related
signal transduction leading ultimately to localized cell death and other defense
responses that limit the infection process. A MAPKKK (hereafter M3Ka) was
identified previously as a positive regulator of the immune response.
Subsequently Mai1, a protein kinase with a tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR)
domain, was discovered to be an interactor of M3Ka. Plants with reduced
expression of Mai1 are unable to activate immune signaling in response to three
R proteins. In this project multiple experimental approaches will be used to
test the hypothesis that Mai1 is a molecular bridge between recognition of
effectors by R proteins and MAPK signaling. The project objectives are to: 1)
Develop plants with reduced expression of Mai1 and characterize the contribution
of Mai1 to immunity; 2) Investigate the physical interaction of Mai1 with
immunity-associated host proteins; 3) Characterize the possible role of post-
translational modifications and the TPR domain in Mai1 activity. Mai1 provides
an entry point into understanding how host recognition of pathogen effectors is
transmitted to an important immunity-associated MAPK cascade and on to defense
responses that limit disease. The proposed research will build on a well-
understood plant-pathogen system to generate new insights into the molecular
mechanisms underlying immunity-associated signal transduction in plants.