* 1451431
* EAGER: Towards Knowledge Curation and Community Building within a Postdigital Textbook
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Edward Finn, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 315,034.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. In this Cyberlearning
EAGER project, the team is exploring the idea of the post-digital textbook. They
envision the post-digital textbook being used in many of the same ways textbooks
are used now and, in addition, providing a platform for collaboration, curation,
and personalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The imagined post-digital textbook
will go beyond digitizing print books and adding animations and simulations
where there were once pictures and may be radically different than today's
textbooks. The term "textbook" is used, however, to connote that this new genre
of technology will assume the persistent, powerful role textbooks currently
play. Several theoretical perspectives (cognitive, constructivist, and socio-
cultural) are being leveraged to develop foundations for what the post-digital
textbook might be. The team is combining such theory with a study of existing
educational technologies and pedagogical practices to develop an understanding
of the possibilities and then refining those ideas using design charrettes. The
investigation centers on two core behaviors that they want the post-digital
textbook to address: facilitating knowledge curation and serving as a
collaborative resource. The team is iterating on an initial set of goals,
affordances, and behaviors to create an initial design spec for this new genre
using four activities: synthesis of the literature, user-centered design,
participatory design, and expert consultation. This work will serve as the
foundation for a follow-up project to explore the design space of the post-
digital textbook within the formal learning environments for which it is being
designed.