* 1451848
* The Social Neuroendocrinology of Status
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Pranjal Mehta, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/29/2020
* USD 430,796.00

Status hierarchies are a part of our everyday social interactions, and those
with higher status have numerous advantages, including access to resources and
improved health. A key area of research within social and personality psychology
is to understand how status hierarchies are formed and maintained. Who attains
higher status positions within their groups (e.g., leadership positions), and
how? Because higher status in social hierarchies confers benefits compared to
lower status, answers to these questions have fundamental implications for
explaining disparities in outcomes such as hiring, pay, and health. Traditional
biosocial theories of status propose that elevated testosterone concentrations
should lead to higher status by enhancing dominant behaviors (e.g., confidence,
assertiveness), but evidence in support of these theories is inconsistent.
Recently Pranjal Mehta (University of Oregon) and his colleagues have proposed
that testosterone may interact with contextual factors and other hormones to
regulate behaviors implicated in the pursuit of social status. Building on this
dual-systems approach, the proposed research investigates the extent to which
testosterone's influence on social status depends on cortisol, a hormone
released during periods of physical and psychological stress. This research will
generate novel insights into the fundamental biosocial mechanisms of social
status. These studies have numerous implications for designing psychological
interventions aimed at improving professional and health outcomes among lower
status, marginalized individuals and groups.

According to the dual-hormone hypothesis, testosterone should enhance social
status only when cortisol is low. The proposed research will test the novel
hypothesis that testosterone and cortisol should jointly strategically motivate
behaviors that improve one's status depending on the social context, through
both dominance and pro-social behaviors (e.g., friendliness, generosity). The
proposed research will test this biosocial mechanism of status attainment in a
mock job interview setting, group-based social interactions, and real-world
status hierarchies. The studies integrate cutting-edge methodologies within
social-personality psychology and behavioral neuroendocrinology to address the
research aims, including hormone administration, endogenous hormone measurement,
experimental manipulations of social context, and behavioral observation. The
research examines both baseline hormone concentrations as well as context-driven
hormone fluctuations over time in order to understand how endocrine systems
dynamically influence and are influenced by status-seeking behaviors and social
status.