* 1451197
* BRAIN EAGER: Closing the Loop on Social Behaviors, From Mathematical Models to Neural Circuit Dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Joshua Shaevitz, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 11/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Animals, from insects to humans, are inherently social, and brains have evolved
to be most sensitive to sensory cues that carry social information (for example,
speech sounds or pheromones). Very little is known regarding how animal brains
process information in the context of social interactions. This proposal seeks
to address this complex issue by focusing on the relatively simple nervous
system of the fruit fly Drosophila, and takes advantage of the wealth of tools
available in this system to dissect the mechanisms underlying social behaviors.
The three principal investigators (Murthy, Shaevitz, and Bialek) are experts
with behavioral analysis, theory/modeling, and neural circuit analysis, and will
use several new methods to study courtship, a robust social behavior that has
been shown to involve a complex interaction of a male and a female. This work
will not only uncover the mechanism by which sensory inputs and internal states
interact to generate behavior, but also benefit studies of disorders (e.g.,
autism spectrum) that impact the social brain. The research project is
complemented by outreach efforts targeted at educating undergraduates, and in
particular young women, in modern methods in computational neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animals, from insects to humans, spend a majority of their
time engaged in social behaviors, and brains have evolved to be most sensitive
to these dynamics and timescales, as they are important for survival. Social
interactions involve both sensory perception (detecting cues generated by
another individual) and coordinating motor outputs (to generate social
behaviors). Most studies examine sensory and motor pathways in an "open loop"
framework; however, social interactions are inherently "closed loop", as data
gathered through the senses of each individual is profoundly shaped by his/her
own actions and those of the other individual. With new methods and new
theoretical frameworks, this proposal aims to solve the closed loop aspect of
sensory perception between animals using the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster
as a model system. The investigators have pioneered several new methods to
facilitate these studies and are experts with behavioral analysis,
theory/modeling, and neural circuit analysis. They will combine unbiased
behavioral quantification, whole-brain imaging in behaving animals, controlled
sensory stimuli, and theoretical modeling to uncover the neural circuit dynamics
underlying social behaviors and decision-making. A detailed analysis of the
simultaneous behaviors of two courting flies will lead to the first rigorous and
quantitative analysis of the dynamic sensory cues and interactions between
individuals that shape social behaviors. Theoretical work on these data will
reveal the dynamic neural computations that must be active during courtship.
Finally, neural circuit recordings in animals engaged in closed loop fictive
social interactions will be used to link brain activity to specific courtship
behaviors and decisions.