* 1451081
* BRAIN EAGER: Discovery and characterization of neural circuitry from behavior, connectivity patterns and activity patterns
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Carey Priebe, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Johns Hopkins University is awarded a grant for research leading to an improved
understanding of how the brain is connected. Drosophila larvae, with 10000
neurons (and about 1000 neuron types), offer an opportunity to determine how an
entire nervous system generates behavior. The research combines information from
three sources: a neuron activity map of the entire Drosphila larval nervous
system; a library of neuronal lines yielding a neuron behavior map; and a
"wiring diagram" or connectome for the entire larval nervous system. Together,
the neuron-behavior map, the neuron-activity map, and the connectome complement
one another, laying the groundwork for a brain-wide understanding of the
principles by which brains generate behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
goals for this project will be to develop principled statistical pattern
recognition &amp; machine learning methods for clustering neurons based on three
different data sets, both individually and jointly. The extent to which clusters
obtained from the three datasets agree, and the manner in which they disagree,
will reveal how the structure of neural circuits relates to their function and
how brains generate behavior. Current methods for discovery and characterization
of neural circuitry from behavior, connectivity patterns and activity patterns -
fusion and inference from multiple disparate data sources- are insufficient; the
approach developed in this project will yield improved methods developed in
conjunction with neuroscientists.