* 1451767
* 3-Methylhopanoids in modern bacteria: molecular fossils of stress survival?
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Paula Welander, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2018
* USD 393,133.00

Earth's history is marked by dramatic climate changes that have had a
significant impact on the evolution of life. Of particular interest to earth
scientists is how ancient microbes have responded to such dramatic events.
Because microbial organisms do not leave readily recognizable fossils, alternate
strategies are needed to investigate ancient microbial communities. One approach
is to study certain biological molecules (lipids) that can be preserved in
ancient rocks. These lipids function as molecular fossils, or biomarkers, that
can inform us about ancient microbial communities and environmental conditions
under which they used to live. One such group of biomarkers is the
3-methylhopanes, cyclic molecules that are often assumed to be indicators for
methane-oxidizing bacteria. However, these assumptions may not be robust and
further studies are needed. This proposal will utilize molecular and biochemical
tools to study how 3-methylhopane production is genetically and environmentally
controlled in modern bacteria. This research will provide valuable information
to better interpret 3-methylhopane patterns in the rock record and will
ultimately lead to a better understanding of how ancient microbial communities
responded to atmospheric change in the past and how similar microbial
communities may respond to future climate events. The investigator will involve
summer students recruited through the Summer Undergraduate Research in
Geosciences and Engineering (SURGE) program at Stanford University. This
proposal will provide funding for low-income summer high school interns to
perform research in the researcher's laboratory through the General Earth
Sciences Internship program at Stanford. These activities will provide
underrepresented students with the opportunity to experience geobiology research
first hand and encourage them to pursue a career in the Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methylhopanoids are pentacyclic bacterial lipids
whose diagenetic products, methylhopanes, are readily detected in sedimentary
rocks. Based on the production of methylhopanoids in modern bacteria,
methylhopane signatures in the rock record have the potential to function as
biomarkers that can link bacterial taxa and their metabolisms to a specific time
or event in Earth?s history. In particular, it has been proposed that
3-methylhopanes are reliable proxies for aerobic methanotrophs and indicators
for significant methane biogeochemical cycling. However, recent studies have
demonstrated that the diversity of extant 3-methylhopanoid producers extends
beyond aerobic methanotrophs. These findings have also revealed that an
understanding of the function and regulation of methylhopanoids in modern
bacteria is needed in order to properly interpret the occurrence of methylhopane
biosignatures in the rock record. To this end, the investigator and
collaborators have begun investigating 3-methylhopanoid physiology in the
aerobic methanotroph Methylococcus capsulatus. In this organism, a gene (hpnR)
required for C-3 methylation has been identified and subsequently deleted.
Physiological studies of the methylase mutant, which only produces unmethylated
hopanoids, have revealed a potential role for 3-methylhopanoids in stationary
phase survival. In this project, the investigator aims to directly pinpoint the
role of 3-methylhopanoids in stationary phase survival in hopes of providing the
foundation needed to properly interpret 3-methylhopane signatures in the rock
record. The following three lines of investigation are proposed: 1.
Physiological studies will be pursued with the M. capsulatus 3-methylhopanoid
mutant to determine whether 3-methylhopanoids are involved in stationary phase
survival under oxygen limited conditions, 2. Ã„hpnR suppressor mutants that
exhibit stationary phase survival levels similar to the wild type strain will be
isolated. Utilizing high-throughput whole genome sequencing the investigator
will identify intergenic mutations that restore viability of the methylase
mutant, and 3. To determine if 3-methylhopanoid function is conserved in other
bacterial taxa, physiological and genetic analyses of 3-methylhopanoid
physiology will be undertaken in the alkaliphilic, halotolerant aerobic
methanotroph Methylobacterium alcaliphilum and the actinomycete Streptomyces
ghanaensis.