* 1451221
* BRAIN EAGER: Socially Situated Neuroscience: Creating a suite of tools for studying sociality and interoception
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Andrea Chiba, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The social world exerts a powerful influence on our behavior and our brains.
Yet, much of our knowledge regarding the function of neurons in the brain is
based on neural recordings from animals or humans who are isolated from their
social counterparts. Thus, there exists a knowledge gap that is largely due to
the lack of recording and behavioral tools for doing experiments in the social
realm that still allow proper experimental control. Dr. Andrea Chiba and
colleagues aim to fill this gap by developing the following: 1) light, wireless,
flexible recording sensors that can provide brain and body signals in a non-
intrusive manner; 2) a robot with a synthetic, biologically inspired brain that
can act as a socially relevant entity; and 3) a set of novel experiments to
interrogate the function of brain circuits and their relationship to other
biological signals during social interactions and decisions. The ability to
record and integrate signals from the brain and body during complex social
decisions will provide a research platform for studying and reconstructing brain
signals to understand how the brain represents the social world. The new
technology can eventually be scaled for use with humans, providing a means to
better understand the neural basis of goal-directed social actions beyond what
is currently feasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its potential for
advancing the understudied field of social neuroscience, the development of the
tools will provide a cutting-edge platform to train the next generation of
diverse interdisciplinary scientists. The research team is committed to public
outreach and plans are in place for: 1) public talks, including to K-12 and
undergraduate audiences; 2) dissemination of information through appropriate
media outlets; and 3) launching a virtual robot competition to engage promising
young scholars of diverse backgrounds in scientific careers, by highlighting
exciting interdisciplinary research that links the study of brain and behavior
with engineering approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, 3 major
technologies will be developed and conjoined to comprise a suite of
neuroscientific tools that include: 1) Flexible, stretchable, wireless sensors
for detecting autonomic responses such as respiration rate and heart rate, both
of which are modulated by social encounters; 2) integration of the autonomic
signals with high-density neurophysiological wireless recording systems, as no
such system exists currently. Approximations of these systems result in heavy
instrumentation that disrupts ordinary movement and social behavior, so the
second generation of this technology would include integration with injectable
cellular scale opto-electronic devices; and 3) A synthetic life form (robot) to
be further developed as a neuroscience research tool and a test bed for
integration of theoretical principles gained from experimental data of the
complex dynamics of neural systems. Ultimately, the neurally inspired
architecture of the robot will, in turn, be expanded to include and synthesize
the formal theoretical properties of neural systems essential to social
function. The basic neuroscientific questions that can be addressed with these
tools are boundless.