* 1451522
* Workshop on Approaches to Slavic Morphology
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Maria Gouskova, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2016
* USD 14,522.00

One of the main goals of linguistics is to understand the human mind by studying
what languages have in common and how they differ. These commonalities and
differences identify features of human cognition that might be innate, and
features that arise through learning. This nature-nurture divide is striking in
the area of morphology, the study of word structure. The word structure of
languages such as English is relatively simple--a noun can have three different
forms ('book', 'books', 'book's'), and verbs can have up to four ('write',
'writes', 'wrote', 'written'). On the other hand, languages in the Slavic
family, which includes Czech, Russian, Serbian, are notorious for their
morphological complexity--a noun can have up to fourteen forms, and verbs can
have as many as sixty. Yet linguists have shown that there are parallels between
the structure of sentences in languages such as English and the structure of
complex words in morphologically rich languages such as Slavic. Some linguists
believe that these parallels are due to the structure of the innate language
faculty of the human mind, but others argue that the similarities can arise
because of the way humans learn complex patterns, and these learning mechanisms
are not necessarily specific to language. The science of linguistics resolves
such debates by investigating the structure of languages and language families
in detail, and by supporting different theories with experiments and
computational simulations of human language learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is for a Special Workshop on Approaches to Slavic Morphology, which
will be held as part of the annual conference Formal Approaches to Slavic
Linguistics--the premier venue for research on Slavic languages in North
America. While the conference is in its twenty-fourth year, it has never
included a morphology workshop. The workshop will feature three invited speakers
who have made major contributions to research on morphology in general and
Slavic in particular. There will be eight additional talks accepted based on
anonymous, competitive review. The workshop will bring together a variety of
perspectives on morphology, bringing together researchers who specialize in
Slavic on the one hand and morphology on the other. Participants will be
encouraged to present research that addresses fundamental questions about the
relationship between meaning, sound, and word structure. The workshop will
highlight the research of three junior women scholars. It will furthermore offer
students training in conference organization, as well as subsidize their
participation in the workshop.