* 1451047
* EAGER: Conditional Risk Measures for Reducing Cascading Failures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Ruiwei Jiang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 10/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

In an interdependent system (e.g., power grids and financial markets), an
undesirable event could spread and cause even more severe economic and/or social
consequences, also known as cascading failures. Typical examples include the
blackout in Northeastern America triggered by a tripped transmission line in
2003, and the recent global recession stemming from the U.S. subprime mortgage
market. To protect an interdependent system, a system operator need to better
understand the threats of cascading failures when undesirable conditions are
realized, and accordingly make better operational and recourse plans. This award
supports exploratory research to study conditional risk measures on quantifying
the threats of cascading failures, and show how they can help improve
operational decision makings in many practical applications. The successful
implementation of this project will provide effective decision support tools for
system operators to identify cascading failures and reduce potential impacts. At
meanwhile, this project will provide new teaching materials for undergraduate-
and graduate-level courses on related research topics. Underrepresented Ph.D.
students will be motivated to participate in the research and educational
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore a class of
conditional risk measures which generalize many classical risk measures
including the Conditional Value-at-Risk. Because of the quotient expressions and
the distributional ambiguity, it is technically challenging to incorporate these
conditional risk measures in stochastic optimization models. This project will
explore reformulation and approximation approaches in a data-driven context.
More specifically, distributional robust versions of the conditional risk
measures and their reformulations under various distributional ambiguity
settings will be explored, sample approximations of the conditional risk
measures based on available historical data will be investigated, and effective
solution algorithms to handle the conditional risk measures will be formulated.
The successful completion of this project will lead to new knowledge in the
stochastic optimization literature, including functional optimization analyses,
the value of historical data, and cutting planes for stochastic integer
programs.