* 1451527
* Land Cover and hydrology - assessing controls on Si cycling in a changing Arctic
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Joanna Carey, Carey                   Joanna         C
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 130,500.00

Dr. Joanna C. Carey has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral fellowship to carry
out a research and education plan at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods
Hole, MA. Her research will examine how shifting land cover and permafrost thaw
is altering silicon (Si) biogeochemistry in the Arctic. By examining ten large
river systems in Alaska, this project will quantify how warming of the
terrestrial landscape is altering Si availability in downstream receiving
waters. Because Si availability in marine systems is critical for the survival
of diatoms, the most abundant type of phytoplankton in marine waters, the
results of this research will have direct implications for marine carbon
dynamics. Land cover and hydrology are two important controls over Si export to
marine systems, but to date these factors have yet to be examined in conjunction
in Arctic ecosystems. In addition to a lack of baseline information on Arctic Si
cycling, the rapid pace of warming in polar latitudes makes this work timely.
The education arm of this fellowship will consist of engagement with local
Alaskan communities through working with the Yukon River Inter-tribal Watershed
Council and outreach with public high school Earth Science courses in
Providence, RI to teach students about climate change and Arctic ecosystems. In
addition, Dr. Carey will share the results of her research results with policy
makers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although geochemical factors exert large controls
over riverine Si fluxes, watershed land cover (i.e. terrestrial vegetation) has
also recently been identified as another important control over riverine Si
fluxes in temperate and tropical systems. However, the role of terrestrial
biological processes has yet to be examined in the Arctic. Hydrologic flowpaths,
including water residence time, is another critical driver of riverine Si
fluxes. Both of these factors are rapidly changing in Arctic ecosystems due to
recent warming, potentially impacting the magnitudes and timing of Si exports to
coastal receiving waters and shifting phytoplankton species compositions. The
novel use of germanium (Ge)/Si tracers will allow Dr. Carey to decipher between
geochemical vs. biological drivers of Si fluxes across a gradient of vegetation
and permafrost cover. Using a space-for-time substitution, this work will create
the first predictive framework of how future warming will alter Si availability
in marine waters.