* 1451663
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Interaction of Pitch and Timing in the Perception of Prosodic Grouping
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Jonathan Barnes, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 04/30/2020
* USD 7,884.00

Speakers break the otherwise continuous stream of their speech into smaller,
meaningful segments, the edges of which are marked by audible cues such as
pauses, rate changes and pitch movement. Prosodic boundaries, as these segment
edges and the cues that mark them, are known to play a role critical to language
processing and spoken language acquisition. While great progress has been made
documenting the range of cues that mark boundaries, much is not understood about
the cognitive processes listeners use to make sense of these cues in
interpreting the speech stream. The signaling of a boundary includes multiple
cues from timing and pitch. Current models of prosodic boundaries, such as are
used in spoken language processing and text-to-speech (TTS) systems, rely
heavily on timing cues. Pitch cues are typically considered to merely support
timing cues, and are even considered redundant. However, growing evidence
suggests that pitch and timing interact in perception, including speech and non-
speech research demonstrating pitch-based distortions of perceived
duration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project seeks to enhance our
knowledge of the psychological processes involved in boundary perception through
empirical work on the perceptual interaction, integration and weighting of
acoustic cues that have typically been measured independently. Quantifications
of these interrelations will inform models of boundary detection in spoken
language processing, and boundary generation in synthetic speech, by reflecting
a richness of prosodic structure lacking in models using primarily objective
duration measures. Synthetic speech has been shown to have a higher cognitive
load (lower intelligibility, lower recall) than natural speech, and is
especially challenging for populations such as non-native speakers, aging and/or
hearing-impaired speakers, or those with language disorders. Redundant acoustic
cues are known to increase speech comprehensibility in noisy conditions, and to
potentially lighten the listeners' cognitive load. Increasing the strength of
pitch-based cues that facilitate boundary processing may increase both the
intelligibility and naturalness of synthetic speech and TTS-based assistive
technologies.