* 1451283
* PEEC Workshop 2014: Building a Bridge to the Future
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Scott Morgan, Sisseton Wahpeton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2016
* USD 48,915.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
STEM instructional and research capacities of specific institutions of higher
education that serve the Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM
curricular offerings at these institutions expands the opportunities of their
students to pursue challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for
research studies in areas that may be culturally significant, and encourages a
community and generational appreciation for science and mathematics education.
The Pre-Engineering Education Collaboratives (PEEC) strand of TCUP is designed
to increase the number of American Indians in engineering by helping tribal
colleges establish two-year pre-engineering courses and degrees that seamlessly
articulate to four-year engineering programs, and to provide research and
service learning projects that are regionally and culturally
relevant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sisseton Wahpeton College, a tribal college
located in South Dakota, will convene a workshop for the sixteen partner
institutions that are involved in the four PEEC projects. The workshop will
provide a forum for PEEC administrators, faculty, and researchers to share and
learn new strategies for pre-engineering study geared toward American Indian
tribal college students. New models for effective engineering degree tracks,
appropriate curricula, methods of instructional delivery, along with the
necessary support mechanisms will be discussed helping to assure tribal college
students successfully earn engineering degrees. At the workshop, projects will
present what qualitative and quantitative outcomes have been achieved and what
could have been done differently. Projects will be asked to identify issues they
encountered that hindered the PEEC process along with any implemented or planned
solutions. Identifying strategies for continued funding will be a critical
workshop outcome. A formal report will be written that captures the workshop
findings and recommendations.