* 1451035
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Provenance and Paleomagnetic Analysis of the Ochoco Basin: A Window into Late Cretaceous Paleogeography
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Bernard Housen, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2018
* USD 116,518.00

The western margin of the North American continent developed through the process
of accretion of distinct tectonic terranes of diverse origin due to the oblique
subduction of the Farallon plate beneath the North American plate during the
Mesozoic. A consequence of this process has been the proposed translation of
accreted terranes northward through time to their present-day locations. The
extent to which this process has occurred and the proposed timing and magnitude
of translation has been an ongoing controversy that has been debated with the
geologic community for many years. The goal of this research is address this
long-standing scientific controversy using a combination of independent
techniques that involve determining the provenance of Late Cretaceous
sedimentary rocks from the Blue Mountains and related areas in east-central
Oregon using isotopic dating methods, combined with analysis of the
paleomagnetic signature contained within those rocks. The provenance analysis
will contribute information regarding the potential origin of those rocks with
those of similar age elsewhere in North America and the paleomagnetic signature
will contribute information regarding the paleolatitude at which these rocks
formed. These data will contribute to a better understanding of the geologic
evolution of the western North American plate margin. In addition to the
research objectives of the proposed study, the project is contributing to the
training of ten undergraduate students from two universities and a graduate
student in an important STEM discipline and the broadening of participation of
underrepresented groups in the earth sciences. The students will be involved in
a collaborative team environment that will help them develop analytical and
problem solving skills that will make them more competitive for and better
prepared to succeed in graduate programs and careers; such training will
contribute to important national priorities in terms of STEM research and
education. Results of the research will be used in classroom curricula, and the
principal investigators and their students will contribute information that will
be shared with the National Park Service John Day Fossil Beds National Monument.
Results of the research will be disseminated through presentations at
professional society meetings and through the peer-reviewed scientific
literature; the data will be archived and made available through web-based
community databases.

The North American Cordilleran margin developed through terrane accretion
throughout Mesozoic time, with oblique deformation resulting in dextral
translation of many terranes. Significant questions regarding the timing and
magnitude of proposed translation remain unresolved, and these uncertainties
hinder further understanding of the Cretaceous paleogeography and tectonic
history of this margin. The proposed project will utilize complimentary
approaches to address some of these questions through study of Late Cretaceous
sedimentary rocks of the Blue Mountains in east-central Oregon. The principal
investigators propose to integrate detailed provenance analysis with extensive
paleomagnetic analysis of Late Cretaceous clastic sedimentary rocks of the
Mitchell Inlier and related sedimentary rocks elsewhere in the Blue Mountains to
test if these sedimentary rocks were part of a single Ochoco basin system
deposited on the Blue Mountains, or if the Mitchell Inlier was a separate
forearc sliver, with a tectonic history distinct from the rest of the Blue
Mountains and other Late Cretaceous sediments. If there was one large Ochoco
basin that was linked to the Blue Mountains during deposition, then our robust
paleomagnetic analysis of sedimentary rocks, combined with detailed provenance
analysis, will better constrain the paleolatitude of the combined Ochoco basin
and Blue Mountains using independent and complimentary data sets. Alternatively,
our results may suggest that the Mitchell Inlier and possibly a subset of
smaller sedimentary inliers were separate from the Blue Mountains during
Cretaceous time, requiring the presence of now-covered large-scale fault
system(s) between Mitchell and the Blue Mountains and limiting the amount of
dextral translation accommodated on shear zones east of the Blue Mountains. The
study will provide robust constraints on the paleolatitude of these Cretaceous
rocks, and also provide a test of existing tectonic models and the predictions
of these models with respect to potential correlations between Ochoco rocks, the
Hornbrook Formation, and other Cretaceous basins. The project will directly
address a long-standing debate in Cordilleran tectonics regarding the magnitude
and timing of terrane translation by combining provenance and paleomagnetic
analysis of well-bedded sedimentary rocks to reconstruct Late Cretaceous
paleogeography. The Late Cretaceous sedimentary rocks in the Blue Mountains
region provide an ideal opportunity to test several ideas proposed for the
paleogeography and tectonic affinity of the Blue Mountains and related terranes
using independent and complimentary methods. Furthermore, the large
paleomagnetic dataset obtained will allow the application of three independent
methods for evaluation and correction for paleomagnetic inclination error in
magnetite-bearing clastic sediments. Finally, determining the well-constrained
paleogeography of marginal basins such as we propose here will better enable the
evidence of uplift and denudation obtained from thermochronology of detrital
minerals of a given basin to be tied to a specific location within the North
American Cordillera, potentially fostering critical advances in our
understanding of the North American Cordillera.