* 1451812
* A National Longitudinal Study of Community Trauma Exposure
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Roxane Silver, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2020
* USD 486,612.00

Community-based traumas are pandemic and recurring, profoundly taxing individual
well-being and societal resources. Yet surprisingly few studies have considered
how cumulative exposure to collective and individual stressors may contribute to
patterns of adjustment over time. Effects of community traumas can span physical
boundaries as well as temporal boundaries, with widespread media coverage
transmitting a trauma's impact far beyond the directly exposed population, and
challenging the traditional view of trauma exposure. Designing and implementing
research on collective traumas requires overcoming formidable scientific and
logistical challenges resulting from the fundamental unpredictability of these
events. Previous studies that have examined adjustment to community traumas
usually involve recalling events long after it occurred, making it difficult to
disambiguate the effects of trauma on subsequent adjustment. To be able to draw
more solid conclusions about long-term trauma reactions requires having a large
sample in which information about pre-event mental and physical health, and
baseline assessments of psychological responses have been collected during the
acute period of trauma response. The proposed work provides such an opportunity
by leveraging the investigators' previous research following a large
representative sample for which health and trauma exposure was collected. As a
result, the proposed work provides a remarkable opportunity to examine how
individuals respond over an extended period of time to repeated direct and
indirect exposure to terrorism and other individual and collective
traumas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work by the investigators involved
conducting a large, nationally representative longitudinal study (including
oversampling of Boston and New York areas) in which individuals were surveyed
immediately after a traumatic collective trauma, the Boston Marathon Bombings
(BMB), and at two additional times, on the 6- and 12-month anniversaries of the
BMB. The proposed work provides a unique opportunity to collect two additional
waves of data on this sample in order to track ongoing direct and indirect
exposure to individual and collective stressors, and their role in adjustment,
over time. The research has three primary aims: 1) To investigate prospectively
how different types of trauma exposure (i.e., direct vs. indirect media-based)
are associated with patterns of long-term adjustment after collective stress
(e.g., the BMB); 2) To investigate whether cumulative exposure to prior
individual or collective traumas sensitizes individuals to or inoculates them
against the negative consequences of subsequent events; and 3) To investigate
prospectively the extent to which post-BMB trauma exposure (e.g., direct,
indirect, individual, collective) explains predicted associations between acute
BMB-related stress response and adjustment over time. This research will advance
knowledge of how individuals cope with collective traumas and highly stressful
events, furthering understanding of the unique needs of individuals traumatized
by terrorism, both directly, and indirectly, via exposure to media coverage.
Such work will provide information to help identify those at risk for subsequent
difficulties following major traumatic events. Moreover, the work has important
implications for informing the theory and practice of preparing people for
collective traumas and helping them cope with the aftermath. These findings will
also add to the foundation of knowledge for helping policymakers, service
providers, and community leaders design educational and intervention efforts
that are cost-effective and sensitive to the needs of the populace.