* 1451473
* JST-NSF-DFG Workshop on Future Power System Architectures and Control Paradigms, Arlington VA, April 22-24, 2015
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Kevin Tomsovic, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 65,000.00

This workshop will bring together leading international researchers from
Germany, Japan and the United States to discuss how to address the rapidly
changing demands being placed on the power grid. The recent deployment and
integration of more renewable energy sources to the electric power grid coupled
with the shutting down of nuclear units in some countries or switching over from
coal to natural gas is placing unprecedented stresses on the power grids around
the world. This workshop will investigate new system architectures and control
paradigms to address these challenges.

An electricity supply less reliant on fossil fuels is central to any meaningful
approach to a sustainable energy future. Encouragingly, renewable generation has
grown rapidly in recent years. The US will have 65 GW of installed wind capacity
by the end of 2014 with anticipated continued rapid growth for several years.
Solar PV costs have dropped dramatically. Internationally for reasons of safety,
national security and environmental concern, we see similar trends as well as
the shutting down of nuclear generation. These changes all place new demands on
the existing power transmission infrastructure. Germany and Japan have some of
the most aggressive plans for moving to a low carbon future. This workshop with
the support of the Japan Science and Technology (JST) Agency and the German
Research Foundation (DFG) will bring together researchers and educators in
electric energy and sustainability from across the globe to discuss relevant
issues to these changes.

A primary goal of the workshop is to learn about research activities in power
and energy from the different countries and to discuss ways to leverage the on-
going efforts and develop collaborations. Specifically, we wish to take
advantage of the progressive changes in electricity sources occurring in
Germany, Japan and the US and learn from these developments. Topics for
discussion include renewable energy generation, the smart grid, demand response,
energy storage, HVDC and supergrids, distributed controls, microgrids and
various new control paradigms. The workshop will examine control, communication,
computational science, environmental, energy, power systems and social aspects
of electric energy and sustainability. A report will be generated discussing
accomplishments of workshop along with action items.