* 1451931
* OPUS: Ectotherms In Changing Climates
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Marc Mangel, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 220,975.00

Organisms whose body temperature is set by the environment (such as fish,
insects, and reptiles) are particularly sensitive to environmental change (which
includes temperature, rainfall, food, and predators). The principal researcher
of this project has spent more than thirty years working on such organisms
(especially salmon, krill, and wasps and economically important fruit flies,
such as the Mediterranean fruit fly), always motivated by an important applied
problem but at the same time seeking fundamental understanding of species
population dynamics. In doing this work, the researcher has developed novel
computer modeling methods, ways of connecting models and field and laboratory
studies, and has both solved environmental problems as well as generated new
understanding and research directions. This project will provide the opportunity
for a synthesis of the ideas developed over the researcher's career. The result
of the project will be a framework that can be used by other scientists,
resource managers, and stakeholders for a better understanding species responses
to climate change.

During his long career, the principal researcher of this project has developed
modeling approaches that link a) behavioral ecology and population biology, b)
proximate and ultimate factors that shape behavior and life history of
organisms, c) variation in individual behavior to population dynamics, d)
evolution and ecology, and e) simultaneously address basic and applied
questions. This work has made state dependent life history theory, as
implemented by stochastic dynamic programming, one of the most powerful tools
for understanding the effects of environmental change on ectotherms and for
synthesizing the science needed for understanding and predicting the responses
of ectotherms to environmental change. The project will support the development
of a major synthetic publication that will situate this theory with other
approaches to understanding ectotherms in changing environments, using case
studies to simultaneously highlight species in specific locations and to develop
general principles. Scientists often realize too late in their careers that they
should have studied more quantitative methods and learned how to solve problems
in biology using mathematical methods. The result of this project will be a
source for people to learn how to hypothesize at the mechanisms behind observed
patterns, and how to translate them into a living, breathing mathematical model
that makes intuitive sense and yet reveals processes or trends that may not be
intuitive.