* 1451203
* RAPID: Geospatial Resources, Materials, and Tools for STEM Teacher Preparation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Michael Solem, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 12/31/2015
* USD 199,816.00

This project will conduct research that will inform future development and
national dissemination of geospatial resources, materials, and tools for
science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (STEM) teacher preparation.
The project will respond to opportunities created by the recent announcement of
Esri, the world's largest supplier of geographic information system (GIS)
software and geodatabase management applications, to donate free ArcGIS Online
software licenses to schools in support of the ConnectED initiative. This
project will draw on key recommendations for improving research, professional
development, and assessment in geography education developed through the Road
Map Project coordinated by the National Geographic Society. The researchers will
develop a model set of resources, materials, and tools that teaches a variety of
spatial thinking and problem-solving skills and that reinforces cross-curricular
applications of GIS. The research will set the stage for future longitudinal
research with trained teachers as they enter the workforce and implement their
training in schools. The project will address immediate needs to provide
teachers with geospatial resources, materials, and tools while pursuing
important research measures for long-term reform and improvement of STEM teacher
education. This project therefore will contribute to the development of the
capabilities of teachers nationwide to use geospatial data and technology for
STEM instruction, thereby assisting their students in gaining essential
geographical knowledge and geospatial skills for the 21st century workforce. The
project will be a collaborative effort between the Association of American
Geographers and the Texas State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the
course of this project, the researchers will create and evaluate the
effectiveness of a prototype web-based set of geospatial resources, materials,
and tools that introduces STEM pre-service and in-service teachers to
fundamental geographic and spatial concepts for effective teaching with ArcGIS
Online. The prototype resources, materials, and tools will be built using ArcGIS
Online data, student-collected datasets, and other geospatial technologies to
present compelling examples of teaching STEM content in the context of
geographical problems. This prototype will illustrate for teachers how to
develop inquiry-based lessons that support STEM education standards. Emphasis
will be placed on the interdisciplinary characteristics of the resources,
materials, and tools for fostering teachers' abilities to support spatial
thinking skills and geographic inquiry across the curriculum. During the second
part of this project, the researchers will use the prototype geospatial
resources, materials, and tools to conduct pre- and post-tests, surveys, and
interviews with the participating teachers. Data collection will focus on
measuring change in teachers' perceptions of using geospatial resources,
materials, and tools for improving STEM teacher professional development in
three domains of practice: (1) technological knowledge, (2) pedagogical
knowledge, and (3) disciplinary content knowledge. The researchers also will
gather data about changes in spatial thinking and analytical skills of the
teachers themselves.