* 1451478
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated Approach to Understanding the Function of the Potent Hepatotoxin Microcystin in the Growth &amp; Ecology of Microcystis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Gregory Boyer, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2020
* USD 190,000.00

Blooms of toxic photosynthetic bacteria (cyanobacteria) are occurring globally
with expanding frequency, duration and intensity in lakes, reservoirs and river
systems. Most recently blooms of the toxic cyanobacterium Microcystis shut down
the water supply of the city of Toledo, OH for a weekend in August of 2014.
While the scientific community has developed a solid understanding of the
factors that contribute to the blooms of Microcystis, previous research has not
explained why cells make the hepato- (liver) toxin microcystin. As a potent
inhibitor of a key class of enzymes - protein phosphatases - microcystin might
play important roles inside Microcystis cells, and once released, inside the
cells of other (target) organisms. This project will use advanced tools in
molecular biology (RNA sequencing), microbial genetics, the quantification of
small metabolites (metabolomics) and enzyme analyses to understand how the
presence of microcystin shapes the activity of both the cells that make the
compound and the community of microorganisms around them. Experiments in the
laboratory will be complemented by field surveys of bloom events across
naturally occurring toxin gradients - areas of historically high and low
concentrations of toxin during the summer bloom season. State-of-the-art
statistical analyses combined with these advanced scientific approaches will
transform the understanding of why these cyanobacteria make this toxic compound.
Understanding of the biological functions of the microcystin, will lead to
better stewardship of a valuable natural resource: potable water. The total
research effort will train students, including those from underrepresented
groups, and broadly disseminate information to the public, systems managers and
the scientific community. A significant component will feed into state-
associated, in-class 4H training that will expose as many as 200,000 students to
cyanobacteria as a model system to examine complex biochemical
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a deeper
understanding of the biochemical role of microcystins, a potent protein
phosphatase inhibitor, within cells and communities, and address both ecological
and evolutionary questions concerning the maintenance of this and other
expensive biosynthetic pathways for non-ribosomally encoded secondary
metabolites within a (sub)population of cells. To determine how microcystin
shapes cellular biochemistry and physiology, controlled lab experiments with
Microcystis isolates that make microcystin, engineered strains where the
biosynthetic gene has been knocked out, and wild-type Microcystis cells that
lack the biosynthetic pathway will be conducted. Other cyanobacterial pairs
(Planktothrix and Anabaena spp.) that make or do not make the toxin, engineered
bacteria that produce this compound and a set of microorganisms isolated from
Lake Erie that co-occur with Microcystis and may be influenced by toxin will
also be tested. Experiments in the presence and absence of exogenous toxin will
be conducted with both producers and non-toxin producers. State-of-the-art
techniques in metabolic (LC-MS and LC-MS/MS metabolomics and lipidomics),
transcriptional (Illumina mRNA-sequencing), enzymatic (4:3:3-regulated
processes) and physiological analyses (e.g., cellular growth rates, primary
production, and photosynthetic efficiency) for these defined lab strains will be
employed to develop "fingerprints" of cellular function and elucidate how
microcystin shapes these biochemical pathways and the physiological ecology of
these cells. Lab experiments will be complemented by field surveys of bloom
events across naturally occurring and well documented toxin gradients.
Relationships will be identified using univariate and multivariate techniques.
This novel integration of sequencing, small molecule chemistry, physiological
and enzymatic approaches will permit the mapping of the physiological
biochemistry of cells and identify both isolated as well as synergistic effects:
indeed this work may transform the study of secondary metabolites in complex
microbial systems and provide insights into microbial evolutionary ecology.