* 1451319
* EAGER: Building a Framework to Advance Research through Undergraduate Participation: Investigating pH in 3D Tissue Test Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Karen Burg, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2019
* USD 69,885.00

Proposal: 1451319&lt;br/&gt;PI: Burg, Karen&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER: Building a
Framework to Advance Research through Undergraduate Participation: Investigating
pH in 3D Tissue Test Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award will lead to
the development of methods for both constructing complex three dimensional
tissues, but also deconstructing the tissues after use such that each layer of
the tissue can be analyzed. Developing new techniques for tissue construction
that allow facile layer by layer deconstruction or dis-assembly of tissues will
allow investigators to ask for the first time how the role of spatial gradients
of chemicals, along with cell to cell contacts, impacts the survival and
function of individual cells within the tissue and eventually overall tissue
function. Along with this innovative research program, the PI will also develop
novel mentoring strategies for undergraduates engaged in research. She poses
some unconventional hypotheses about a fused research and mentoring methodology
which she believes will lead to greater retention of diverse students in STEM
fields. With funds from this award, the PI aims to develop a scalable model of
fused research and mentoring that will potentially have a high impact on
undergraduate research and training, and retention of students engaged in such
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching theme of the proposed work is
to quantify and evaluate the role of pH in tissue system applications. To this
end, a novel, heterogeneous 3D bench-top system will be developed to model
tissue engineered breast and bone. Unlike conventional 3D tissue systems, the
breast model will incorporate stacked layers with "peel-able" design, in which
each layer has specific characteristics. This design is also unique in that the
model may be easily taken apart and analyzed. The orthopedic model will
incorporate gel and a ceramic bone graft filler and will explore acidic to basic
ranges of pH shift. The breast model will incorporate gel and polymeric beads
and will explore neutral to acidic ranges of pH shift. Following culture of
either model, the system will be deconstructed, layer by layer, and pH test
liquid applied to spots across each paper. In this manner a pH map will be
constructed. If successful, the stacking approach will allow, for the first
time, mapping of the interior of tissue engineered systems. At the same time the
PI will build on a previous Research Experience for Minorities (REM) program to
test new methods to provide critical thinking skills to undergraduates engaged
in research. She will use a scientific approach to gathering and analyzing data
related to the efficacy of current undergraduate research courses and a team-
based undergraduate research opportunity as the means to teach critical thinking
through research. The results of this study will help provide guidance as to
where limited university resources should be applied to provide wide-scale
research participation by undergraduates and maximize research results while
addressing the need to improve the critical thinking skills of the participants.