* 1451194
* Workshop on the Development of a Next-generation, Interoperable, Federated  Networking Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Victor Hazlewood, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2015
* USD 49,965.00

The national and global research Cyber Infrastructure (CI) of the future is
likely to exhibit a dichotomy in the physical distribution of cyber resources.
At one extreme are traditional, large-scale data centers, such as the NSF
supported supercomputing centers (e.g., NCSA, PSC, SDSC, NICS). The other
extreme includes highly distributed federations of collaborating resources
represented by tightly and loosely coupled federations for NSF projects
including, but not limited to, GENI, XSEDE, FutureGrid and NSFCloud, which
include university campus IT and campus research networks. In this second model,
small collections of resources are owned and operated by a large number of
participating sites. The most important contribution of the CI platform is not
the sheer bulk of resources at any one facility, but rather the wide reach of
the overall federation. These diffuse federations have a number of desirable
characteristics: they benefit from natural geographies of researchers and data,
and they require relatively modest resource contributions from each site, thus
encouraging broad participation.

Building and maintaining highly diffuse federations of cyberinfrastructure
involves distinct technical challenges that need to be discussed, analyzed and
overcome. This proposal funds a workshop that will bring together participants
from the GENI, NSFCloud, FutureGrid and XSEDE communities to discuss,
compare/contrast and understand the various communities' needs and approaches to
control frameworks for CI. The workshop will be held in the Washington, DC area
on October 14th and 15th, 2014. To help identify opportunities for
collaboration, participants will be specifically encouraged to make statements
of the form "My project needs" or "My project can offer" regarding the following
topics: 1. Tools for cyberinfrastructure-supported researchers; 2. Tools for
cyberinfrastructure owners / providers; 3. Data structures and protocols for
control of resources; and 4. Data structures and protocols for control of
federations.