* 1451265
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Expressing attitudes of belief and other mental states in Navajo
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Rajesh Bhatt, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2017
* USD 10,318.00

Although understudied languages native to the Americas have long shaped
linguistic theories of sounds, word formation, and sentence structure, formal
semantic theory - the theory of meaning - has only recently started to be driven
by these languages. Understudied languages demonstrate what words, and which
strategies for constructing meaningful sentences out of individual words, are
universal and innate to all human languages, and which are not. This research
project examines the expression of mental states such as beliefs and desires in
Navajo, an understudied language spoken in the southwest of the United States.
Examining the semantics of an understudied language is valuable in two ways.
First, the products of semantic research readily lend themselves to use in
documentary and pedagogical materials which will aid in language revitalization.
It is crucial that linguistic research coordinate with language revitalization
efforts since many languages of the Americas, including Navajo, are
underdocumented and no longer acquired as a first language by a significant
number of children. Second, such work enriches linguists' understanding of the
ways in which certain languages can vary in their construction and expression of
complex meaning. All previous formal semantic research on beliefs and desires
focused on languages related to English, where special verbs like think or want
are used to express either belief or desire, respectively: if research only
considers English and its relatives, however, linguists might - perhaps
incorrectly - conclude that this is the only way that human languages can
grammatically express the mental states corresponding to beliefs and
desires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Navajo is an ideal language of study since its
method of expressing beliefs and desires appears to be very different from what
is found in English. Navajo lacks specialized attitude verbs corresponding to
English verbs like think and want: the same verb appears both in sentences
expressing beliefs and in sentences expressing desires. The project's first
theoretical goal is to determine what other grammatical resources are used in
such sentences to disambiguate between beliefs and desires. Pilot work shows
that speakers use different temporal (tense, aspect) and modal morphology
depending on the kind of attitude they intend to express. The project's second
theoretical goal is to study the truth and felicity conditions of Navajo
attitude sentences - under what conditions is a sentence true and 'natural-
sounding'? - and contrast them with their English translations. Existing
documentation of Navajo expressions of belief and desire provide English
translations of Navajo sentences but give no further clues to their truth and
felicity conditions: translations are only partial clues to meaning and may
obscure deeper between attitudes in English and Navajo. Interviews will be
conducted with Navajo speakers at the Navajo Language Academy (NLA), an annual
workshop attended by Navajo speakers and language teachers and held in, or near,
the Navajo Nation. The co-PI will incorporate findings into an NLA course in
linguistic theory and research methodology designed to enable Navajo speakers to
conduct research on their own language. In addition, research findings will be
summarized in an accessible, theory-neutral way and will be made available to
Navajo speakers engaged in projects of language revitalization and education.