* 1451356
* Application of thermodynamic theory for predicting microbial biogeochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2016
* Joseph Vallino, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* diane mcknight
* 03/31/2016
* USD 203,658.00

Most of the elements critical for life on Earth, such as nitrogen, carbon,
phosphorous, sulfur and many trace metals, are cycled between land, water and
the atmosphere by the actions of microscopic bacteria and archaea that both
extract and recycle these elements on a continuous basis. Understanding how
microbes control these so called biogeochemical cycles is critical for
understanding how the environment will change in the face of natural and
anthropogenic alterations. To predict how ecosystems will respond to increases
in nutrient inputs, changes in temperatures, increases in atmospheric carbon
dioxide and similar drivers, computer models are constructed based on how
bacteria grow and interact. However, because a single gram of soil or liter of
water contains billions of bacteria consisting of thousands of difference
species, it can be challenging to accurately predict their collective
geochemistry by modeling all of their growth characteristics and interactions.
An alternative approach assumes that complex systems, whether composed of living
organisms or not, naturally organize to maximize the extraction and use of
available energy. Known as the maximum entropy production (MEP) principle, this
theory can be used to describe the collective actions of a community of
microorganisms without needing to know exactly which microbes are present and
exactly how they interact. If true, the MEP-based approach should produce models
with better predictive capabilities than models based on conventional
approaches. This project seeks to demonstrate the usefulness of MEP by comparing
model predictions to biogeochemical observations collected in an aquatic
environment. The investigators will disseminate the modeling approach and
research results via journal publications and presentations. The research
project will support one postdoctoral scholar in a multidisciplinary research
area, independent undergraduate research projects via Marine Biological
Laboratory's Semester in Environmental Science Program, and summer internships
as part of the Woods Hole Partnership Education Program, which is a consortium
of institutions committed to increasing diversity in Woods
Hole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mathematical framework to predict microbial
biogeochemistry based on the maximum entropy production (MEP) principle applied
to a distributed metabolic network has been developed. The model accurately
predicts microbial dynamics and associated chemistry in experimental
methanotrophic microcosms and is also adept in predicting metabolic switching
between the known nitrate reduction pathways (denitrification, dissimilatory
nitrate reduction to ammonium, and anammox) in well-mixed systems as a function
of environmental conditions. The MEP approach describes both geochemistry and
biogeochemistry, where the latter differs from the former in that living
organisms maximizing energy dispersal over time and space as opposed to
instantaneously. The objectives of this project are to: 1) advance the MEP
biogeochemistry modeling approach by incorporating metabolic reactions for
aerobic and anaerobic-based phototrophy; 2) extend the approach from 0D to 1D to
examine hypotheses for integrating MEP over space; 3) collect diel
biogeochemical measurements over vertical profiles in a meromictic pond (Siders
Pond on Cape Cod, MA) for model development and testing; 4) measure allocation
of molecular machinery associated with key biogeochemical pathways over depth in
Siders Pond using metagenomics and metatranscriptomics and compare these
observations to model predictions.