* 1451173
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating cognitive and communicative pressures on natural language lexicons
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Edward Gibson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2016
* USD 11,984.00

Understanding how humans produce and comprehend language is a critical step in
understanding high-level human cognition and the human brain more generally.
Moreover, basic research into human language has been, and will continue to be,
useful for building computational natural language processing systems that
enable humans to interact naturally with computers. The lexicons of the world's
thousands of languages--that is, the sets of words that exist in any given
language--offer a particularly rich source of insight into the language
production and comprehension mechanism. The words of any given language have
undergone thousands of years of evolution, sometimes changing dramatically over
one or two generations as sounds change, new words are invented or borrowed from
other languages, and old words die. What all languages have in common, however,
is that they enable their speakers to successfully communicate with one another.
Therefore, a language's lexicon is necessarily constrained by the cognitive and
communicative demands of speakers. Consequently, studying the statistical
properties of lexicons, the ways that lexicons evolve, and the process by which
words are formed is a promising avenue for answering fundamental questions about
human cognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on previous work by this research
group showing that lexicons tend to be structured for efficient communication,
this research will harness the power of large cross-linguistic data sets
available through the Internet, including Wikipedia and Google Books, in order
to study the lexicons of a large number of world languages (~100). Specifically,
this analysis will focus on how words cluster or spread out in phonetic space,
exploring competing demands for words to consist of easy-to-pronounce and easy-
to-comprehend sequences but also to be phonetically distinct from one another. A
second major component of this work is a series of human-participant behavioral
experiments that, in a controlled laboratory setting and in a smaller number of
languages, explore the mechanisms that underlie how words change over time.
Finally, a computational model will be used to integrate the insights of the
statistical analyses and behavioral experiments in order to explore and predict
how words enter and exit the lexicon over time. This research program has
implications not just for higher-level human cognition but for any engineering
applications that require human-computer interaction involving natural language
and also for any applications that require building a cognitively tractable
communication system that allows people to communicate efficiently.