* 1451993
* EAGER: Processes for Manufacturing High-Performance Magnetic Materials in Electronic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2016
* David Arnold, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2016
* USD 120,000.00

The objective of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award
is to develop new manufacturing processes for the magnetic components used in
modern electronic systems. The goal is improve the manufacturability,
performance, and energy efficiency of power supplies and wireless communication
devices, while simultaneously reducing their size and weight. A novel process
developed through the work will be used to combine the properties of two
different magnetic materials incorporating magnetic particles of one type of
material inside of a second material. The result is a new hybrid magnetic
material (i.e. a composite of two materials) that exhibits improved material
properties compared to existing magnetic materials. In the long run, these new
magnetic materials are aimed at enabling next-generation mobile electronics,
communication systems, robotics, and medical devices. The project will
strengthen an industry/university research partnership between the University of
Florida (UF) and Electron Energy Corporation (EEC) and provide a pathway for
commercial testing of the methods and materials developed in the work through
exchange of technical information and personnel exchanges. In additon, education
of UF graduate students on the project will be enriched through their
participation in a summer internship at EEC. The project also aims to broaden
participation and retention of female and minority students in STEM career
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic components used in modern electronic
systems require compromising tradeoffs in size, power, and efficiency due to the
lack of magnetic materials that simultaneously exhibit high saturation and low
loss at MHz to GHz frequencies. To overcome this bottleneck a novel electro-
infiltration process is planned, wherein magnetic nanoparticles are consolidated
onto a surface, and the inter-particle gaps are filled by an electroplated
magnetic material. The result is a two-phase nanocomposite with potentially
transformative magnetic properties, along with a disruptive manufacturing
technology integrate these materials within a variety of electronic systems.
From a scientific standpoint, the electro-infiltration process provides a unique
platform to fabricate new nanocomposite architectures. This enables fundamental
exploration of exchange-coupled or nanogranular soft magnetic cores, as well as
hard (permanent) magnetic materials. The long-term impact of this work would be
a scalable, end-to-end manufacturing process for compact magnetic device
components with exceptional performance, low manufacturing cost, and integration
with other electronic devices. The specific aims of this one-year EAGER project
are to validate the feasibility of the process, while beginning to optimize
micro/nanofabrication methods and elucidate structure/property/performance
relationships for these new electro-infiltrated nanocomposite magnetic
materials.