* 1451015
* BRAIN EAGER: Three Dimensional Optical Control of Neuronal Circuits during Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Dinu Albeanu, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

A central goal of systems neuroscience is to describe behaviors in terms of the
neuronal circuits that control them. This constitutes a monumental challenge in
the mammalian brain because behaviors are thought to rely on widely distributed
neural representations, which are technically difficult to monitor at large
scales or to manipulate at cellular resolution. This research will implement,
optimize, and ultimately broadly distribute via online repositories and
workshops, a three-dimensional, two-photon microscope, exploiting patterned
illumination strategies for fast manipulation and monitoring of large neuronal
populations in behaving animals. First, the PI will implement and optimize a
dual photo-stimulation system to enable both precise two-dimensional
illumination across wide fields of view using a digital micro-mirror device, as
well as high-resolution three-dimensional stimulation using digital holography.
Photo-stimulation will be combined with two photon resonant scanning imaging to
achieve fast sampling rate of hundreds of neurons across large brain volumes.
Second, these technologies will be demonstrated for in vivo use, in head-fixed
behaving rodents, optimizing their applicability for experimental use. This
approach will enable dynamic testing of the functional roles of arbitrary
neurons and combinations of choice in behaving rodents.

This project will develop and implement innovative optical methods for fine
patterned stimulation of nervous systems and other excitable biological tissues.
The approach will exploit current light-sensitive ion channels that can be
inserted into neurons using the techniques of optogenetics. The planed optical
illumination methods will, for the first time, allow fine spatial control and
monitoring of brain activity. Further, these developments will provide new
applications for high-resolution three-dimensional optical control of intra- and
inter-cellullar signaling processes in any optically accessible tissue, greatly
broaden their applicability in biological research and bioengineering. The
project will result in broad distribution among interested scientists of all the
methods developed. In addition, the results will be used to increase the
awareness among the general public of the relevance of applied optics to daily
life. These goals will be achieved through a concerted outreach program
including optical imaging courses in Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, volunteering
internships, and lectures to local schools in Long Island and New York City.