* 1451801
* Partnership for Undergraduate Research: Enhancing the Mathematics Curriculum (PUR)
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Michael Penkava, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Partnership for Undergraduate Research: Enhancing the Mathematics Curriculum
(PUR) will enhance and expand the undergraduate mathematics curriculum at the
University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire (UWEC) by creating a new comprehensive
mathematics major focused on undergraduate research and graduate school
preparatory courses. UWEC, a primarily undergraduate institution, will partner
with the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM), a research institution and the
most diverse institution in the University of Wisconsin System, to engage
underrepresented students in mathematics research. The newly developed
comprehensive major with research emphasis will incorporate formal instruction
in research skills and ethics, training in writing and presentation skills, and
a sustained undergraduate research experience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
curriculum redesign allows students to integrate research in progress toward
their degrees. Simultaneously, it creates opportunities to recognize faculty
mentorship of undergraduate research as a teaching activity. The investigators
will encourage UW System universities and other institutions to adopt the UWEC
and UWM partnership model in order to increase access of underrepresented groups
to STEM careers and actively develop a more inclusive environment. In addition,
this project serves as a model of a sustainable way to increase the number of
undergraduates participating in collaborative research by incorporating research
into the undergraduate curriculum. Undergraduate participants will learn how to
successfully do research, building skills necessary for conducting original
research and disseminating their results. These skills include presentation and
writing, surveying papers to find background information, collaborating with
others through peer mentoring, and initiating and maintaining a research
program. Thus, the program will increase the mathematical knowledge and research
skills of undergraduates, better preparing them for graduate school and a
globally competitive STEM workforce.