* 1452712
* CAREER: Understanding the Performance of Distributed Systems through Causal Tracing
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Rodrigo Fonseca, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/29/2020
* USD 576,344.00

CAREER: Understanding the Performance of Distributed Systems through Causal
Tracing Society increasingly depends on shared software systems that are large,
decentralized, with many components that interact in complex and subtle ways.
These systems include financial and banking services, Web and cloud resources,
airline reservations, and big data and scientific computing, to name a few.
Despite their unquestionable reach and success, in these systems it is very hard
to answer questions about the causes of failures, to uncover dependency issues
among their components, to determine the impact of one operation on the rest of
the system, or to provide guarantees about their performance to users. By
developing and applying techniques to enable deep and real-time understanding of
the performance characteristics of large-scale distributed systems, this
project?s goal is to develop techniques that will enable users and providers of
these systems to better express their needs and their guarantees in terms of
performance, and better plan for and mitigate the effects of failures.

The main insight in this project is that because of the many components in
distributed systems, the context of an operation initiated in one component gets
lost as the operation involves other components. This makes it hard for a
component deep in the system to discern with which client it is working, making
it also hard to apply consistent policies or account for the cost of operations
across component boundaries. This research will create the abstraction of a
Tracing Plane that preserves this context throughout the entire execution of the
system, allowing for debugging and diagnosis of performance problems, and for
real-time provisioning of performance guarantees. This Tracing Plane will be a
pervasive infrastructure to collect causal information from the execution of a
distributed system and facilitate the efficient deployment of analytics and
diagnostic tasks. Further, by aggregating information about tasks in the system
across all components in a coherent way, the Tracing Plane enables the
implementation of resource management policies that can act locally, in real-
time, and with global knowledge - which is presently not possible.

We are better today at building large-scale distributed systems than we are at
understanding precisely how they work, and how they fail and this will provide a
core educational aspect, as the Tracing Plane is a strong pedagogical tool for
the understanding of distributed systems structure and execution. This work will
engage undergraduate and graduate students, as well as industry partners that
operate such large-scale distributed systems. By starting from increased
visibility into these systems, the ultimate goal of this project is to provide
tools and methods to allow building, operation, and management of large-scale,
shared distributed systems that are efficient, reliable, and predictable. As
society increasingly depends on systems of this kind, this research has a large
and long lasting potential impact.