* 1452180
* CAREER: Liquid-drop impacts on granular surfaces and the universality in granular impact cratering
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Xiang Cheng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 01/31/2021
* USD 468,658.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Granular impact cratering by liquid drops is
likely familiar to all of us who have watched raindrops splashing in a backyard
or on a beach. Such a ubiquitous phenomenon is directly relevant to many
important natural, agricultural and industrial processes such as soil erosion,
drip irrigation, dispersion of micro-organisms in soil, and spray-coating of
particles and powders. It is even more surprising that granular impact cratering
by liquid drops and asteroid impact cratering on planetary bodies show
quantitatively similar features in terms of the energy scaling and the shape of
impact craters. The present project investigates the fast dynamics of impinging
liquid drops and impacted granular particles during impact events, which are
then used to develop a quantitative model for describing the morphology of
raindrop imprints in granular media. The project also aims to reveal universal
features of granular impact cratering and search the link between different
granular cratering processes including solid-sphere impact cratering, liquid-
drop impact cratering, asteroid impact cratering and explosion cratering. To
probe the fast impact dynamics, students working on the project are trained in
the state-of-the-art high-speed and radiological imaging techniques. The project
can provide practical guides to various activities in environmental protection
and industry involving liquid-drop impacts on granular
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Directly related to
two long-standing problems in soft matter research, i.e., drop impact on
solid/liquid surfaces and granular impact cratering by solid spheres, liquid
drop impact on granular surfaces is notoriously complicated. The objective of
the project is to investigate the dynamics of liquid-drop impact on granular
surfaces and explore universal features of granular impact cratering across
widely different energy scales. Combining high-speed photography with advanced
radiological imaging techniques, the study aims to uncover the detailed dynamics
of liquid-drop impact in granular media and provide a quantitative model for
predicting of the outcome of liquid-drop impact events. The experimental
techniques and physical insights developed in the research are considerably
useful for solving difficult problems faced in the study of drop impact dynamics
and granular impact cratering in much broader contexts. Moreover, the study
helps to illustrate universal features in granular impact cratering and may open
up a new way to probe high-energy granular impact cratering associated with
asteroid strikes. The study can also potentially benefit soil science research
on soil erosion, astrophysical research on asteroid strikes and geological
research on primordial rain activities.