* 1452333
* CEDAR: High-resolution Multistatic Mapping of Small-Scale Flow Structures in Earth's Auroral Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Donald Hampton, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 312,892.00

This project will measure winds at ~250 km altitude in Earth?s auroral
thermosphere. These winds remain poorly understood, especially at spatial scales
spanning ~100 km or less. The project is based on the hypothesis that eddies and
waves at horizontal length scales of ~100 km or less are important contributors
to the dynamics of Earth?s auroral thermosphere and that their cumulative impact
is important both for the basic physics of the thermosphere and for operational
prediction of space weather. To determine small-scale flow structures, all seven
of the Fabry-Perot spectrometers now in Alaska will be configured to focus their
attention simultaneously onto one small geographic region roughly coinciding
with the field of view of the PFISR radar. These instruments will simultaneously
monitor thermospheric temperatures and wind vectors, producing two-dimensional
maps of temperatures and 3-component vector winds, with a spatial resolution of
around 80 km. The array will operate in this mode for three campaigns each
lasting around two-months.&lt;br/&gt; To quantify the importance of small-scale
eddies and waves in the thermosphere, the project will address three focused
science questions: (1) What is the occurrence frequency, intensity, spectral
distribution, and overall morphology of the small-scale eddies and waves in
Alaska?s auroral thermosphere, for both quiet and active conditions? (2) Is it
possible to identify the driver mechanisms and source regions for these small-
scale features, based on timing of their occurrence relative to other
measurements, the spatial alignment of their phase fronts, and the directions in
which they?re propagating? (3) Is it possible to estimate the momentum flux and
dissipation rates of these waves, based on the amplitudes, periods, and
horizontal &amp; vertical wavelengths of the temperature and 3-component wind
perturbations, and on the time evolution of these quantities? This project will
include training one graduate student, enhancing the research facility at Toolik
Lake in Alaska, supporting rocket missions from Poker Flat, and bringing
cutting-edge scientific research to remote Alaskan villages.