* 1452795
* CAREER: Novel Algorithms for Dynamic Network Analysis in Computational Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2022
* Tijana Milenkovic, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2022
* USD 540,000.00

Broader significance and importance. Proteins are major macromolecules of life.
Thus, understanding how proteins function in the cell is critical. Genomic
sequence research has revolutionized understanding of cellular functioning.
However, as recognized in the post-genomic era, genes (proteins) do not function
in isolation. Instead, they carry out cellular processes by interacting with
each other. This is exactly what biological networks model. Unlike genomic
sequence data, biological network data enable the study of complex cellular
processes that emerge from the collective behavior of the proteins. Thus,
biological network research is promising to give new insights into principles of
life, evolution, disease, and therapeutics. However, current network research
deals with static representations of biological data, even though cellular
functioning is dynamic. This is in part due to unavailability of experimentally-
derived dynamic biological network data, owing to limitations of biotechnologies
for data collection. Efficient computational strategies for both inference and
analysis of dynamic biological networks are needed to advance understanding of
cellular functioning compared to static biological network research. This is
exactly the focus of this project. Dynamic biological network research has
biological applications of societal importance, such as studying cellular
changes with disease progression, drug treatment, or age, which will be explored
as a part of this project. Thus, the project could contribute to global health.
It may impact other domains as well, e.g., social networks. Also, this project
will result in educational activities that are intertwined with its research,
such as forming interdisciplinary scientists via novel curriculum development
activities, or strengthening the computer science population via research
supervision, career mentoring, and community outreach to K-12 and
(under)graduate students, focusing on women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description. This proposal will result in new computational directions for
dynamic biological network research. New algorithms will be developed for
inference of systems-level biological networks underlying a dynamic biological
process, by combining the static network topology with other data types, such as
measurements of gene expression or protein abundance at different times. Then,
novel methods for analyzing the dynamic network data will be developed to gain
insights into the underlying cellular changes. For example, the idea of
graphlets (small subgraphs), which has been well established in static
biological network research, will be taken to the next level to allow for
graphlet-based analyses of dynamic biological networks. Also, novel
computational strategies will be designed to allow for dynamic network
clustering. The proposed methods will be used in collaborative applications that
encompass representative dynamic biological processes: early cancer detection
and chemotherapy resistance, both in the context of pancreatic cancer, as well
as studying human aging. These interdisciplinary applications will be used as
concrete model systems to innovate fundamental computational research. Because
network research spans many domains, open-source software implementing the new
methods will be offered to researchers from diverse disciplines. The software
will also serve as an educational tool. Integration of research and education
will be promoted even further. Interdisciplinary student training will be
offered via novel courses on network research. A literate approach to education
will aim to advance students' communication skills. Proven pedagogical
strategies will be used to improve student learning. Research supervision and
career mentoring will be offered to K-12 and (under)graduate students, with
focus on minorities and women, thus integrating diversity into the project.
Interdisciplinary research and educational collaborations will allow for wide
distribution of the proposed ideas and results. The results will also be
disseminated through tutorial and workshop organization at renowned
international conferences.