* 1452386
* The role of post-pollination interactions in structuring co-flowering plant communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Tia-Lynn Ashman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2021
* USD 654,641.00

Greater than 85% of all flowering plants and at least 30% of agricultural crops
are pollinated by animals. In the wild plants exist in multispecies groups and
often share pollinators which can lead to exchange of pollen between different
species. This research will determine the mechanisms that allow different
species of flowering plants to coexist when utilizing the same pollinators, that
is, how they avoid or tolerate exchanging pollen. Thus, the work will advance
understanding of the consequences of plant interactions via their shared
pollinators and will provide data for predicting the composition and
sustainability of natural flowering plant communities, as well as the
consequences of disruption of these from global change, such as climate warming,
invasive species, or pollinator decline. Identifying the traits that allow
combinations of flowering plants to coexist will benefit society by informing
agricultural practices for enhanced sustainability, and policies for
conservation of biodiversity hotspots. The work will also provide training in
pollination biology for elementary school students and high school teachers via
workshops and hands-on activities that are designed and implemented by graduate
students and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question of how plant-pollinator
interactions contribute to flowering plant communities has largely focused on
plant traits that mediate pre-pollination interactions, and ignored the
potential for traits that mediate post-pollination processes. This work will
test the novel assertion that plant traits (e.g., style and stigma features)
which influence the female fitness costs of pollinator sharing (detrimental
effects of heterospecific pollen receipt) play an important, yet
underappreciated, role in mediating coexistence of flowering plants within
communities. Using replicated California wildflower communities as a model, the
work will link plant traits with the pattern and costs of heterospecific pollen
receipt, and modifiers of pre-pollination interactions at a community-wide
scale. In doing so, the work will test the idea that within a co-flowering
community tolerance and avoidance of heterospecific pollen receipt are alternate
strategies for coexistence, and that tolerance is a stabilizing force that
depresses the risks of reproductive failure of species that receive high
heterospecifc pollen. Thus, the work will accelerate our understanding of the
primary ways pollinators contribute to the coexistence flowering plants, an area
urgently in need of greater study, especially in the face of global changes
affecting both plants and pollinators.