* 1452137
* CEDAR: Vertical Coupling in the Atmosphere-Ionosphere System by Gravity Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Erdal Yigit, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2019
* USD 271,041.00

Lower atmospheric small-scale gravity waves (GWs) play a crucial role in
determining the dynamical and thermal structure of the mesosphere and lower
thermosphere. This project will address how GWs influence the vertical coupling
in the atmosphere-ionosphere in terms of energy and momentum budget,
variability, thermospheric composition, and ionospheric electron density
distribution. Two comprehensive GCMs will be coupled and used to simulate the
atmosphere-ionosphere from the tropopause to the topside ionosphere. A suite of
available upper atmosphere measurements, such as, from the TIMED satellite,
SuperDARN, and Fabry-Perot Interferometers, will be used to validate the model
fields. Specific topics to be addressed are: (1) GW effects on the circulation
and composition of the thermosphere and on the distribution of ionospheric
electron density; (2) The influence of gravity waves in shaping the variability
of the high-latitude ionosphere, in both geomagnetically quiet periods and those
of higher magnetospheric variability, (3) The impact of sudden stratospheric
warming on the upward propagation of GWs and the resulting changes in GW
dynamical, thermal, and compositional effects in various geomagnetic and solar
conditions; (4) The direct GW propagation from the lower atmosphere during
atmospheric and geomagnetic transient processes as a possible link between
meteorological and space weather processes.