* 1452010
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Curation and Re-housing of the Entomology Collection of the Sam Noble Museum.
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Katrina Menard, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2017
* USD 368,695.00

An award is made to the University of Oklahoma to support the Sam Noble Museum
Recent Invertebrates Collection. This scientific resource documents biodiversity
in the state of Oklahoma and beyond, and is one of the largest collections of
invertebrates from Oklahoma. This award will support the installation of a
mobile storage (compactor) system and provide new entomology cabinets. The
project improves infrastructure to adequately and efficiently utilize existing
space and increase the potential collection capacity. Collection security and
physical access to the specimens is enhanced for researchers and students. The
project will integrate with the existing ExplorOlogy Program at the Museum to
engage K-12 students in research and encourage the participation of Native
Americans, the largest underrepresented group in
Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the next phase in a long-term
collection revitalization plan for rehousing and re-curating the ca. 400,000
pinned insect specimens at the Sam Noble Museum, the only active entomological
collection in Oklahoma. The collection includes one of the largest and most
comprehensive collections of Byrrhoidea, an aquatic beetle superfamily. The
collection also contains ca. 160,000 Diptera from early and recent surveys,
inventories, epidemiology studies, and vector ecology. The collection contains
2,796 primary and secondary insect types that have been cataloged and digitized,
as well as historically important collections of dragonflies, butterflies and
other beetle groups. Along with the installation of a new compactor system and
new cabinets, a reorganization of the collection will be completed, and will
incorporate recent knowledge on phylogenetic relationships of insects. In a
state where natural habitats have been and continue to be replaced by
agriculture, deforestation, grazing, and other land use change, these specimens
provide an invaluable record of entomological diversity in the decades before
and after statehood (in 1907; Oklahoma was designated as Indian Territory until
the major land runs began in 1889). Currently this is the only digitized and
readily accessible entomology collection in Oklahoma. All data resulting from
this project will be shared with iDigBio (https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring
accessibility to researchers and the public.