* 1452290
* EAGER: Engineering bacterial lectins for glycomics analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Ruizhen Chen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2015
* USD 40,362.00

1452290 Chen Georgia Tech

Glycosylation is the process that attaches glycans to proteins, lipids, or other
organic molecules. Glycans on proteins and lipids may serve as markers or
identifiers in many vital biological processes such as cell growth, cell-cell
interactions,and cell mig. Unusual glycosylation has been implicated in many
different types of diseases including cancer. The lack of simple and effective
tools to detect glycolsylation creates a significant obstacle to the advances in
this area. The PI proposes a study to develop new tools and methods useful to
assist in the detection of glycolsylation that are low cost and simple to use.

Two specific aims are proposed:

Aim 1: the PI proposes to develop and validate a novel glycoprotein
quantification method, which can be incorporated into commonly used protein
separation techniques. If successful the work proposed in could extend the use
of 1-D and 2-D electrophoresis separation techniques. It could also make these
tools more reliably employed and useful tool for glycoscience.

Aim 2: As an example the PI proposes to demonstrate that the developed methods
could be used for a real-time label-free bacterial surface glycome profiling and
for study of dynamics of bacterial glycosylation in response to environmental
conditions.

The proposal also plans to incorporate engineered lectin molecules into the
common protein separation and analysis format, such as SDS gel electrophoresis.
If successful, this will change how glycans are detected by eliminating the need
for antibody and other expensive reagents commonly in the processes.

The proposed research may advance the development of much needed tools to
simplify methods commonly used in glycoscience research. The success of the
research has the potential to make glycomic analysis less arduous and less time
consuming, less labor and material intensive. As a result, glycomic analysis may
no longer be conducted by only a small number of specialized laboratories and
may become much more accessible to a common laboratory. Thus the research will
have significant impact on the field by bringing low cost tools to glycoscience
researchers.