* 1452520
* CAREER: Developing Novel Social Systems-level Approaches with a New Ant Model to Study the Genetic, Behavioral, and Evolutionary Basis of Social Traits
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2021
* Timothy Linksvayer, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2021
* USD 849,998.00

Research in diverse organisms increasingly demonstrates that the behavior,
physiology, development, and lifespan of individuals strongly depend on the
social environment. However, conventional genetic analyses do not adequately
consider how social interactions affect the genetic basis of traits.
Furthermore, all well-developed model systems are solitary and no highly social
system amenable to genetic analysis has been developed. This project will
develop novel genomic approaches and a new highly social ant system to study the
genetic and behavioral basis, and evolution of social traits. Because social
interactions are ubiquitous, and humans are highly social, with behavior,
health, and lifespan strongly dependent on the social environment, the project
is expected to have widespread implications. The research components of the
project are tightly integrated with several educational components targeted at
the high school, undergraduate, PhD, and postdoctoral levels to increase
education and training in the areas of genetics, genomics, behavior, and
evolution.

Social interactions mean that socially-influenced traits are properties of the
genomes of multiple interacting individuals. The project develops a novel social
systems-level approach, building on the interacting phenotypes framework, to
elucidate the genetic and behavioral mechanisms underlying the expression and
evolution of socially-influenced traits. The project combines: 1). genome-wide
studies of transcriptional and evolutionary patterns associated with social
trait expression; 2). gene mapping studies to identify the subset of loci
underlying social trait expression that are polymorphic and contribute to social
trait variation and evolution; and 3). gene-level studies to verify the
phenotypic effects of identified candidate genes in the ant Monomorium pharaonis
and in the genetic model Drosophila melanogaster. The project develops M.
pharaonis as a new ant model system for studying the genetic basis and evolution
of social traits. The study trait, reproductive caste is a well-studied
socially-influenced trait that is also the archetypal example of reproductive
altruism. Because workers in the study species are obligately sterile, their
genes with social effects on caste must evolve via kin selection. Thus, this
research will provide genome-wide identification of sets of socially-acting
genes shaped by kin selection and will identify evolutionary genetic signatures
of kin selection. All data generated by the project will be made publicly
available through online databases.