* 1452327
* EAGER: Locality-Aware Data Access Control for Future 1000-core Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Omer Khan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 127,999.00

Computer architectures will soon approach an era of single-chip multicore
processors with hundreds or even thousands of heterogeneous cores connected via
complex interconnection networks and cache hierarchies. These many-core
processors will concurrently execute next generation applications, such as big
data analytics, to exploit parallelism and specialization for power-performance
efficiency. Furthermore, new memory technologies will be integrated to minimize
energy-inefficient off-chip accesses. However, the technology trends indicate
that wire scaling will slow down dramatically as compared to computation. The
cost of moving data efficiently through the future many-core processors will
become a major challenge. The increasing core counts with heterogeneous
computation and communication capabilities, as well as applications that process
massive data with varying degrees of locality and reuse, will introduce data
access variations at different layers of the processor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to dynamically exploit and co-
optimize this variability in locality and reuse of data as it flows through the
processor resources. The strategy is to adopt a hardware-software co-design
approach, and develop fine-through-coarse-grain cross-layer mechanisms for
locality-optimal data access in future many-core processors. This will be
achieved using a novel locality-aware data access control utility (LDAC) that
intelligently and cooperatively orchestrates data movement in the shared
heterogeneous processor resources to deliver the efficiency promise. If
successful, this project will be a major step forward towards a new
computational model where runtime management of processor efficiency can be
utilized to make tradeoffs with security, privacy, resilience, or accuracy of
computation. The PI will build a holistic prototype simulation environment to
demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed locality-optimal data access utility.
The development of simulator infrastructure and a many-core prototype will allow
the products of this research to be disseminated widely. This project will
introduce practical multicore computing to graduate and undergraduate students
with a focus on writing parallel software for performance and energy efficiency.
The research outcomes will enable the design of future many-core processors that
use low energy to execute parallel applications efficiently.