* 1452119
* Footprint formation and interpreting fossil dinosaur tracks
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Peter Falkingham, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 02/29/2020
* USD 284,118.00

New Title:&lt;br/&gt;Footprint formation and interpreting fossil dinosaur
tracks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Dinosaur tracks
offer unique evidence of the anatomy, behavior, and environment of long-extinct
animals when they were alive. These tracks and trackways are recognized as
unrivaled glimpses into dinosaur locomotion, recording aspects of gait, speed,
limb posture, foot motion, and even social behavior. A single animal's tracks
can vary dramatically depending on the firmness of the substrate and how deeply
it sank with each step. This project aims to understand both the effects of
substrate on locomotion and the origin of track diversity in the fossil record.
3-D movement of birds walking on different substrates will be measured using
skeletal models animated using X-ray video. Computer simulations of track
formation will reveal how tracks develop both at the surface and at different
depths. These exciting new methods developed by the researchers for imaging,
quantifying, and simulating locomotion through deformable substrates will
provide an entirely new, volumetric perspective on the "birth" of a dinosaur
track. Simulated bird tracks will then be compared to 200 million year old
dinosaur tracks to help explain variation in shape and correct errors in
previous interpretations. Results from this research will fundamentally change
our perception and interpretation of dinosaur tracks by unlocking previously
invisible motions and
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Why are footprints shaped the way they are? How and why does
a single animal produce a disparate array of tracks? The proposed project aims
to continue a fruitful collaboration between Gatesy (paleontology, biomechanics,
and functional anatomy) and Falkingham (computer science, geology, and
paleontology). The PIs will explore the emergence of footprint morphology from
the dynamic interplay between bipedal dinosaurs and deformable substrates. They
seek to understand the origin and functional significance of Mesozoic track
diversity by exploring disparate specimens in the historic Hitchcock Ichnology
Collection at the Beneski Museum of Natural History at Amherst College. PIs will
integrate living bird experiments (XROMM: X-ray Reconstruction of Moving
Morphology) and substrate simulations (DEM: Discrete Element Method) to reveal
important interactions among anatomy, motion, and sediment properties governing
footprint formation. Volumetric DEM models of guineafowl tracks in varying
substrates will serve as reference for interpreting and iteratively simulating
specific specimens from the Connecticut Valley and Greenland. Results from this
research will fundamentally change our perception and interpretation of dinosaur
tracks by unlocking previously inaccessible foot/sediment dynamics.