* 1452485
* CAREER: Modeling Personalized Brain Development with Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Bennett Landman, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 465,951.00

Big data offer an opportunity to study specific control populations (age / sex /
environmental factors / demographics / genetics) and identify substantive
homogeneous sub-cohorts so that one may understand the roles that potential
factors play in brain development, differentiating abnormal trajectories from
normal development. The image processing, statistical, and informatics tools to
effectively and efficiently use big data imaging archives for quantitative
population-level research and personalized medicine do not yet exist. This
research will enable discovery science on a scale considerably larger than
routinely possible with traditional study designs by creating novel informatics
resources that tie archives of 3-D images into accessible research databases.
This research will discover genetic and environmental factors that influence an
individual's brain development and characterize the developing human brain
through personal developmental trajectories. To accomplish this goal, new
informatics technologies will be created to enable (1) image processing and
segmentation based on image content in the context of heterogeneous, low
quality, and error prone data with minimal human oversight and (2) routine
archival, query, and image processing of large medical imaging datasets. This
research will impact the areas of (1) informatics via novel computation models,
(2) neuroscience via a new structural model of brain development, and (3) public
health via newly accessible data sets for research. The science and technology
innovations enabled by using big data to understand personalized brain
development will be communicated in a tiered method. Outreach to the K-12
audience will target conceptualizing design criteria, inspiring students with
interactive demonstrations, and providing capabilities for students to apply key
concepts in hands-on engineering projects. For advanced students and
researchers, new accessible course materials and online modules will be
developed so that others may build upon the foundations established by this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel software, data wrangling tools, and
resources will be created through two research thrusts organized around a novel
test bed infrastructure and synthesized in a third education/outreach thrust.
Thrust 1 (Personal Brain Trajectories) will focus on extracting meaningful
information from medical images when performed at scale through (1) creating
automated methods robust to variations in image quality, acquisition, and
transfer errors, and (2) enabling efficient human-in-loop control at scale. The
research will extend novel statistical models for image content labeling while
adapting quality control techniques from industrial engineering. Thrust 2 (Novel
Storage &amp; Processing) will create novel medical imaging data models to
describe data acquisition / retrieval, storage, cleaning, access / security,
query and processing by integrating of medical imaging standards with big data
architecture derived from social network and e-commerce communities. This
infrastructure will provide practical access to petabyte imaging archives,
integrate with existing data workflows, and effectively function with commodity
hardware. The PI will develop and release a reference test bed to evaluate new
technologies in the context of computer-aided detection (CADe) of brain
abnormalities while considering age, sex, and demographics. Using the test bed,
researchers and students will be able to efficiently evaluate existing and
emerging image processing software to screen for potential prognostic markers.
In Thrust 3 (Education and Outreach), the research results will be integrated
into two classes targeting undergraduate students and interactive online modules
created and released through an established graduate student/faculty training
program. Each summer, an undergraduate and high school student will participate
in research by implementing and extending research contributions within an
interactive demonstration platform. In the second through fifth summers, a high
school teacher will assist in the development of curricula targeting high school
students using the demonstration platform. High school students and teachers
will be recruited from Nashville Metro schools with a high underrepresented
minority / reduced cost lunch populations. These efforts will create an open-
source, open-hardware system for public demonstration and K-12 classroom
exercises.