* 1452045
* EFRI-SEED: Creating Opportunities for Adaptation Based on Population in Urban Landscape for Sustainable Built Environment (PULSE)
* ENG,EFMA
* 02/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Jelena Srebric, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2015
* USD 998,303.00

The objective of this EFRI-SEED award is to develop an urban simulation platform
to identify and test opportunities for urban dwellers to better adapt to indoor
and outdoor environmental conditions and for the aging building infrastructure
to better adapt to changing environmental conditions and new building energy
performance requirements. This research will make contributions that could
potentially help address one of the Grand Challenges for Engineering defined by
the National Academy of Engineering as "Restore and Improve Urban
Infrastructure." Also, the urban infrastructure is the main focus of the
recently approved Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) for
Neighborhood Development Rating System (LEED-ND), which will be represented in
the project from a quantitative analysis perspective. Developed simulation tools
and techniques will provide a framework to integrate architects and engineers
for solving complex coupled problems in a novel way to decrease building energy
consumption and environmental impacts. Policy makers will have access to
quantitative data to improve assessment of energy demands in urban environments.
Such capacity can provide a fundamental framework for responsible energy policy
and growth of urban settlements. The work will provide better understanding of
environmental stressors that can lead to systemic population health problems.
The project results will provide policy makers with baseline information
necessary to upgrade urban infrastructure for improved population health. Direct
dissemination of the Virtual PULSE simulation tool will be aimed for the
industry and research community, while special materials will be developed for
undergraduate/graduate students and campus communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will include multi-scale modeling with overall
system boundaries spanning across a whole urban neighborhood to capture the
combined effect of multiple buildings on energy flows for
cooling/heating/lighting, while maintaining a model resolution small enough to
simulate these effects based on first principles (conservation laws directly
applied to multiple scales). The energy flow modeling efforts will be coupled
with research outcomes on occupant comfort and health ranging from mucosal
irritation and lower respiratory symptoms to occupant alertness. The main
campuses at the University of Maryland, Pennsylvania State University,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Harvard University will serve as case
studies for this project to develop urban design performance metrics related to
building energy use and occupant satisfaction with the urban environment. These
metrics will support the development of improved building energy control
strategies by taking full benefits of sun, wind and rain at the neighborhood
scale, as well as accounting for inputs from occupants. The developed software,
including interfaces, will be available in open software architecture. The
research team plans to enable a community infrastructure, where researchers can
provide vital input into the Virtual PULSE model for improved neighborhood
simulations and data collection.