* 1452911
* CAREER: Loading on Coastal Bridges in Windstorms Using Rapidly Deployable Sensor Network
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Jennifer Bridge, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant seeks to transform
coastal bridge resilience through cyberinfrastructure supported extreme event
observations. The damaging effects of severe windstorms including hurricanes on
infrastructure of coastal bridges highlight the need for new tools to provide
fundamental knowledge of windstorm impacts on infrastructure. This award
supports fundamental research to establish a rapidly deployable, bridge-located
observation network to lay the groundwork for capturing measurements of wind,
surge, wave, and scour and analysis of bridge responses during a severe storm
such as a hurricane. These efforts will enhance coastal bridge health management
decisions as well as design and reliability models through the analysis of
hurricane load and response data. A full-scale prototype of this system deployed
on a bridge with interactive system will provide students at all academic levels
the opportunity to interact with an in-service bridge and visualize the impacts
of bridge management decisions. The rapidly deployable bridge-hurricane
observation network will advance fundamental knowledge of the loadings and
responses of bridges in coastal storms. The introduction of wireless smart
sensor networks has promise of transforming bridge management; however, their
potential has been restricted by static application software that is unable to
respond to changing monitoring conditions. Under this CAREER program, a
cyberinfrastructure enabled dynamically reconfigurable smart sensor framework
will be created based on mobile agents. These are the software programs that
traverse the wireless sensor network and act intelligently to facilitate network
and sensor functionality in response to changes in the bridge loading and
response. To realize the full benefits of the bridge monitoring framework, there
should be a link between the data it produces and effective bridge management
decisions. This link will be pursued by coupling extreme event data with
advanced bridge response and windstorm phenomena simulation tools to enable the
development of accurate coastal bridge reliability models.