* 1452857
* CAREER: Ligand-Mediated Photothermal Energy Dissipation in Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* William Tisdale, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 650,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the NSF Division of Chemistry and the Condensed Matter Physics Program of the
Division of Materials Research are supporting Prof. Tisdale at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology to conduct research directed toward better understanding
of the properties of semiconductor nanocrystals. Semiconductor nanocrystals,
also known as colloidal quantum dots, are promising components of next-
generation renewable energy technologies (including solar cells, high-efficiency
lighting, and thermoelectric devices). To improve the performance of these
important technologies, more must be learned about how useful forms of energy
are degraded into less useful forms (e.g., heat) in these exciting materials.
Prof. Tisdale and his team are using advanced optical spectroscopy techniques to
study the ways in which thermal energy is generated in quantum dots and
developing chemical strategies for preventing these unwanted processes from
occurring. In conjunction with these research activities, Prof. Tisdale is
integrating new nanotechnology and energy engineering concepts into the MIT
Chemical Engineering undergraduate curriculum, and promoting the participation
of underrepresented minorities in STEM through a partnership with a Boston
public middle school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Tisdale and his team
investigate the dynamic pathways of vibrational-electronic energy dissipation in
quantum dots and in quantum dot arrays, aiming to provide insight into the role
of surface ligands in mediating these processes and pointing the way toward more
effective quantum dot technologies and more sophisticated models of interfacial
heat transport. These efforts include 1) ultralow-frequency vibrational
spectroscopy of quantum dots and in quantum dot arrays, including the use of
time-domain and frequency-domain techniques for observing surface vibrational
modes and coherent lattice dynamics in ordered quantum dot arrays; 2) frequency-
resolved visualization of thermal transport in quantum dot arrays, including the
development of a novel time-resolved optical microscopy technique; and 3)
ultrafast dynamics of vibrational relaxation in QDs, with a particular emphasis
on the interaction between hot electrons and surface ligands.