* 1452694
* EAR-PF Cracking the Critical Zone: Tree roots in fractures and a proposed mechanistic soil production function
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Jill Marshall, Marshall                Jill           A
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Jill Marshall has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out a research and education plan at the University of California, Berkeley, in
collaboration with the University of Colorado, Boulder. She will develop
numerical models to describe the effect tree roots have on soil production. The
investigation is important across a broad range of problems in critical zone
science, from understanding landscape evolution to quantifying soils
sustainability. The investigation will use data collected at three Critical Zone
Observatories (Eel River, Boulder Creek, and Southern Sierra CZOs) that have
patches of terrain with thin to no soils and bedrock exposures. This enables
quantitative observations of tree roots growing in fractures across sites
underlain by different lithologies and fracture patterns. The development of a
biomechanical soil production model will allow for improved insight into the
role of vegetation in soil sustainability and resilience. The education plan,
based in Round Valley, CA (a rural region in the Eel watershed encompassing the
Round Valley Indian Tribal Lands) has two components: multi-age field-based
science activities directed at the school district's students and a LiDAR
workshop for the Tribes' Natural Resource Department. The educational plans were
developed with extensive community input and these synergistic activities meet
the community's needs of expanding access to science activities and providing
tools for future endeavors.

Research in this project will test the hypothesis that depth-dependent soil
production is a function of root pressures, variations in root density with
depth, and tree sway modulated by rock properties. To develop a geomorphic
transport law that describes how and why soil production rates vary with depth,
this project will combine Discrete Element Method simulations incorporating
bonded grains, rock properties, and field-derived values for root pressures at
the bedrock interface from data collected at the three Critical Zone
Observatories. A suite of bedrock-impeded tree roots will be monitored with
force sensors to measure external root pressures generated from growth, diurnal
fluctuations due to tree water fluxes, and torque about the tree base from wind
and snow events. Hydrologic routing, net primary productivity, carbon storage in
soils, and mineral supplies for the geochemical reactor are all linked to rates
of soil production. By including tree-driven processes in a geomorphic process
law for soil production, this project will enable numerical experiments that
explore how the presence and absence of vegetation control surface and near-
surface processes and landscape form.