* 1452977
* CAREER: Analyzing Interactions in Visual Analytics for User and Data Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2024
* Remco Chang, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2024
* USD 553,876.00

Visual analytics systems combine human analysis with computational techniques.
When the two are fully integrated these next generation human-in-the-loop
systems can be tremendously powerful, but current visual analytics systems
suffer from a significant communication gap between the human and the computer
which prevents them from reaching their full potential. Specifically, there
currently exist no generalized techniques to enable the computer to easily and
intuitively understand the user's background knowledge, analysis process, or
intent during an analysis task. Lacking this, the computer has limited means to
identify the user's needs and provide timely and appropriate computational
support. The PI's goal in this project is to develop computational techniques to
quantify and extract the user's high-level knowledge by analyzing his/her
interactions with a visual interface. Toward this end, the research agenda
consists of two complementary components: data modeling and user modeling. In
data modeling, the user's interactions are used to learn the parameters of an
algorithm, computational process, or representation of the data that best
reflect the user's domain knowledge about the data. In user modeling, the same
interactions are used to infer aspects of the user's reasoning process and
cognitive style. Together, the results of these two modeling processes will give
the computer the means to better understand the user's analysis process and will
enable it to better support the user in performing his/her
task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work will have both immediate and
long term impact on the research and application of visual analytics. In the
short term new techniques for data and user modeling will advance existing
systems and practices in interactive data analysis, while in the long term
project outcomes will help establish the foundations of a human+computer
approach to visual analytics that more effectively supports the user's analysis
process, which in turn will impact the development of real-time, mixed-
initiative visual analytics systems for addressing the challenges of big data.
In addition, through an integrated research and education agenda, students will
be trained with the appropriate balance of expertise in human reasoning and
computational science, preparing them to conduct independent interdisciplinary
research and lead future efforts in visual analytics.