* 1452254
* Hydrogen isotope response of algal lipids to variable nutrient concentrations in Swiss lakes
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Sarah Ladd, Ladd                    Sarah          N
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 03/31/2017
* USD 184,000.00

Dr. S. Nemiah Ladd has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral
fellowship to study how fossilized algal remains record nutrient pollution. This
fellowship will allow an early career American scientist to carry out a research
project at Eawag, the Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology.
Eutrophication (nutrient pollution of lakes and other aquatic ecosystems) is
commonly caused by fertilizers and detergents. It can result in harmful algal
blooms and widespread fish death, and reduces the economic and aesthetic value
of water bodies. The Swiss government has been especially proactive about
reducing the causes of eutrophication and remediating polluted lakes. However,
despite concerted efforts over the past thirty-five years, a range of nutrient
concentrations persists among lakes in the central Swiss plateau. This project
will develop a novel tool to reconstruct past nutrient levels in lakes from
molecular algal fossils in lake sediment. It will also refine the use of
existing proxies of past climate, which are based on the same sedimentary
markers. During her fellowship, Dr. Ladd will promote the education of young
scientists from developing countries by collaborating with the Eawag Partnership
Program (EPP) to create a mentoring program to support visiting graduate
students. Because EPP fellows will take newly honed skills back to their local
institutions, and use them to address local problems, support of the EPP
fellowship program will more broadly impact the advancement of science in Africa
and Asia, and facilitate the study of a range of environmental, economic, and
social issues related to water use and quality throughout the developing world.

Lipids produced by algae are resistant to degradation and can persist unchanged
in sediment for millions of years. They typically record the hydrogen isotope
composition of the water in which the algae grew, which is controlled by
climatic variables such as temperature, rainfall, and atmospheric circulation
patterns. Algal lipids have therefore been developed as a useful proxy for past
climate. However, several other variables can influence the isotopic composition
of algal lipids. Of particular importance for this project, in laboratory
studies hydrogen isotope fractionation in marine algae is highly sensitive to
nutrient availability. By measuring isotope fractionation in algal lipids from
living algae, falling particles, and surface sediment in Swiss lakes with
variable phosphate concentrations, this project will for the first time
establish whether nutrient availability and growth rate affect hydrogen isotope
fractionation in natural settings, and for freshwater algae. In the second phase
of this work, the environmental histories of different lakes will be
reconstructed by applying the results of the calibration study to sediment
cores. Determining the natural variability among lakes with identical climate
histories will permit a more complete assessment of ongoing pollution
remediation strategies.

This award was supported with funding from the Office of International and
Integrative Activities.