* 1452793
* CAREER: Real-Time 3D Reconstruction and Manipulation for Underwater Intervention - A Career Development Plan
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Matthew Johnson-Roberson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 01/31/2020
* USD 531,916.00

Underwater robotic vehicles like AUVs (Autonomous Underwater Vehicles) and ROVs
(Remotely Operated Vehicles) have occasion to interact with the environment in
many tasks including deep-water science, resource extraction, and sub-sea
construction, and maintenance. Crucial to these tasks is the ability to
interpret the operating environment to ensure safety and effectiveness. This
project proposes the development of algorithms for quickly constructing 3D
models of the environment from pictures and video obtained with an underwater
camera. In the short term, this means augmenting how humans control AUVs and
ROVs. In the long term, the PI's career plan aims to produce systems that can
safely interact with the environment without direct human control. Beyond the
technical goals, this proposal lays out a plan for education and outreach to
encourage, foster, and promote both engineering science and marine exploration
to a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-time underwater 3D reconstruction
is an enabling technology for many other research areas, including manipulation,
navigation, obstacle avoidance, intelligent sampling, and adaptive surveying.
This career development plan approaches the general vision problem by analyzing
the constraints imposed by the underwater domain. The PI proposes a principled
approach for online 3D reconstruction that handles both the propagation of light
in water and a formulation that includes prior shape knowledge. Additionally,
scene understanding is framed to allow for the segmentation and classification
of underwater optical data based upon a joint model of the 3D structure and the
photometric properties of the scene using a state-of-the-art dimensionality
reduction approach.