* 1452258
* Travel Support for Student Participation to the 51st Annual Society of Engineering Science; Purdue University; West Lafayette, Indiana; October 1-3, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Pablo Zavattieri, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

The award supports student participation at the 51th Annual Society of
Engineering Science (SES) Annual Technical Meeting, to be held at Purdue
University, West Lafayette, Indiana, October 1-3, 2014. Founded in 1963, the
purpose of the SES is to promote free exchange of information on all aspects of
engineering science and to provide a forum for discussion, education, and
recognition of the talents of the engineering science community. The support
will have significant impact by encouraging broad participation among students
in the activities included in the meeting. In particular, the PIs will actively
seek the participation of groups underrepresented in science and engineering.
This will serve individual students by providing an opportunity to present their
work at a major professional conference, and it will help to generate interest
and participation among new members of the Society, which ultimately serves the
broader technical community of researchers in engineering science and mechanics.
A student poster competition will be held for both undergraduate and graduate
students attending the conference. All students participating in poster
competition will also be expected to present their work in regular sessions as
well, giving them experience in presenting their work in front of scientists and
engineers. National Science Foundation support will help support student travel
and registration in order to encourage participation in the presentation
competition.

The 51st Annual SES Meetings at Purdue will promote the development and
strengthening of the interfaces between various disciplines in engineering,
sciences, and mathematics with 5 tracks, 38 symposia and one student poster
competition. The following scientific areas are covered: Mechanics of Fluids and
Thermal Systems, Biological and Biomimetic Materials, Mechanics of Solids and
Structures, Mechanics in Materials Science, Engineering Science in Education,
Dynamics and Control. In addition to regular sessions, three symposia in honor
of the three SES medalists are also organized. The results of the meeting will
be collected in a book of abstracts made available to all registrants.
Information about keynote talks and the abstracts is planned to be disseminated
through the SES webpage to the engineering science community at large. The
poster competition will bring together dozens of top graduate students in the
areas of solid mechanics, fluid mechanics, bioengineering, applied mathematics,
and other areas related to engineering science.