* 1452622
* CAREER: Next-generation inference of evolutionary paramaters from genome-wide sequence data
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Sohini Ramachandran, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,039,007.00

The goal of this project is to develop a suite of novel statistical and
computational methods for inferring detailed evolutionary histories from whole-
genomes of multiple individuals. While advances in sequencing technology have
made DNA sequencing routine in most laboratories, methods to infer evolutionary
histories from large sequencing datasets have had to make restrictive or
biologically unrealistic assumptions to achieve computational tractability. This
project will overcome the limitations of current methods by relaxing such
restrictive assumptions and it will provide users with ways to assess the
accuracy of estimates produced by the methods. This research will be integrated
with an education plan that consists of multiple activities intended to
introduce young women in high school to computer science and biology research:
offering summer research experiences in the PI's lab, inviting high school
students to collaborate with undergraduates in the PI's courses that teach
programming skills to biology majors, and teaching programming to a variety of
high school audiences.

The objectives of this project are to develop methods that accurately infer (1)
changes in population size over time, (2) rates of migration between populations
over time, and (3) genomic targets of natural selection --- all from sequence
data alone, taken from multiple individuals within a single species. The methods
developed will model recombination, produce measures of uncertainty for reported
estimates, allow for complex population histories, and identify regions of the
genome under selection. The methods developed in this project will also be
applied to test hypotheses regarding the evolutionary histories of a range of
organisms. Software produced and data analyzed in publications resulting from
the research will be made available to the public on the lab's data repository
(http://ramachandran-data.brown.edu/) and through R packages deposited on the
Comprehensive R Archive Network (http://cran.r-project.org/).