* 1452915
* CAREER: Social Networks - Processes, Structures, and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Grant Schoenebeck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2022
* USD 521,000.00

This project seeks to develop a rigorous theoretical understanding of complex
and strategic network processes, network structure, and algorithms for network
properties.   Social networks are an abstraction used to study social structure
via pair-wise social interactions, and have proven useful in analyzing how local
actions affect global trends.  Better understanding of social networks promises
a better understanding of and the ability to influence a wide range of
phenomena, including:  what technologies/practices people and firms adopt, how
information is transmitted and aggregated, and how network structure relates to
the agents' ability to search within the network.  In all of these instances
individuals' activities can have a global-scale impact, which is mediated by a
network.  The increasing presence of computer-accessible data (e.g., websites,
user-generated content, usage data from telecommunications, apps, web-browsing,
etc.)  has rekindled an interest in this field because of the new ability to
gather data to test theories on a large scale.  This project seeks to develop
new algorithms and theoretical frameworks to help fully make use of these
data.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and apply traditional
tools, insights, and approaches from theoretical computer science including
functional analysis, graph theory, combinatorics, linear algebra, probabilistic
analysis, linear and semidefinite program hierarchies, complexity theory, and
game theory to the study of network processes and structure.  This project will
transform the way we use social network data by: 1) developing the technical
tools required to achieve a better understanding of specific complex and
strategic processes (including those mentioned above), 2)  identifying network
structures that are efficiently verifiable and are useful for understanding
nuances in the network processes,  and 3)  improving our understanding of
certain network processes by explicitly accounting for agents' strategic
reasoning.  The technical content of this project will have direct applications
to related fields such as probability, economics, sociology, and statistical
physics.  Additionally,  a key goal of this project is to move beyond worse-case
analysis; if successful, this will pave the way to exporting theoretical
computer ideas to many disciplines where their current application is limited
due to its fixation on worst-case hardness---in particular fields that feature
networks such as biology and epidemiology. The PI plans to develop curriculum to
introduce computer science topics to high school students and involve
undergraduates in his research.