* 1452257
* Career:  Nanoparticle-Antibody Conjugates in Medical Imaging and Environmental Sensing
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Nicole Steinmetz, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Non-technical: This CAREER award funded by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to Case Western Reserve University will pioneer
novel antibody-nanoparticle conjugates. Antibodies and their conjugates find
applications across scientific disciplines; the combination of antibodies with
nanoparticles provides a means for multiplexed, miniaturized devices with
enhanced detection capabilities. A biology-inspired nanofabrication technology
will be implemented for the design of protein-based diagnostics for health and
environment monitoring. This work promises to advance the scientific knowledge
underlying nanoparticle design rules for improved disease and pollutant
detection. With respect to future and potential biomedical applications, the
proposed biomaterials hold great potential for detection and sub-typing of
tumors, or combined with therapeutic molecules for drug- and gene-delivery.
Furthermore, the proposed nanoparticle-antibody arrays could find applications
as sensors to detect and/or purify various pesticides, steroids, and other
pollutants. Advanced medical imaging and environment sensing devices is the key
to maintain healthy living environments and societies. An important further
benefit is the training and education of students in an interdisciplinary
environment fostering team sciences, bridging bioengineering, synthetic biology,
biomedicine, and environmental sensing. K-12 and public engagement will be
promoted through the established 'The Nanoman' multimedia outreach program.

Technical: This award is to synthesize and study novel immunosensors, and to
educate the public and next-generation leaders in biomolecular research and
industry. Nanoparticle-antibody conjugates will be produced from nucleoprotein
assemblies with integrated antibody-binding domains formed by the components of
the tobacco mosaic virus. The aspect ratio (length:width) of the soft matter
immunoconjugates will be tightly controlled; therefore providing a unique
platform to investigate nanoparticle aspect ratio as a design parameter for
enhanced medical imaging and environmental sensing. The proposed nanoparticle-
antibody conjugates hold great potential for applications in biomedicine,
including cancer detection, sub-typing of tumors, as well as drug- and gene-
delivery. Furthermore, the biology-programmed nanofabrication technique will be
extended to produce spatial arrays of nanoparticle-antibody conjugates on
surfaces for sensing of pollutants in water sources. Screening and detection of
diseases as well as environment monitoring are critical to maintain healthy
living environments and societies. As part of the outreach activities, the
multimedia educational program 'The Nanoman' will serve as a platform to peak
interest in STEM research through video and gaming. Graduate and undergraduate
student training will focus on synthetic biology and biomolecular engineering
with emphasis on collaborative and interdisciplinary research.