* 1452875
* CAREER: A Closed-Loop Methodology for Investigating Trust, Culture, and Information Sharing in Global Supply Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Yanchong Karen Zheng, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will combine
mathematical modeling and human-subject experiments to study the impacts of
trust and culture on information sharing in global supply chains. Supply chains
today transcend country borders and therefore, can be difficult to manage. To
ensure economic and market efficiency, it is critical that truthful information
sharing occurs between business partners within a supply chain. This grant
supports an integrative research and education plan to advance the field of
operations management (OM) by incorporating two new aspects that have not
previously been considered: (i) behavioral motives of the human decision makers
involved in the information sharing process and (ii) cultural heterogeneity in a
global supply chain. The research will lead to the design of new supply chain
processes that incorporate behavioral and cultural factors to improve
information sharing in global supply chains. The multidisciplinary approach will
facilitate scientific collaboration across different fields including OM,
economics, psychology, and sociology. It will broaden the participation of
undergraduates, females, and underrepresented minorities in research in the STEM
domain. The unique cross-cultural focus will enable and stimulate international
collaboration in research and education.

This award will transform the Operations Management (OM) discipline by
developing a scientific methodology to incorporate important insights from
psychology and sociology into OM theories and applications. The canonical OM
research in information sharing is theoretical in nature and has mainly focused
on pecuniary incentives. However, OM systems are managed by humans who are often
subject to nonpecuniary incentives that include behavioral and cultural factors.
Thus, systems designed without considering these latent factors are prone to
failures. This grant fills this gap and strengthens the theoretical and
practical values of OM research. The research agenda contains three parts.
First, the supply chain information sharing scenario will be mathematically
modeled and analyzed based on canonical economic theories. Second, theoretical
predictions obtained in part one will guide the scientific design of human-
subject experiments both in the lab and in the field to systematically study the
impacts of trust and culture on supply chain information sharing. Third, based
on empirical insights from the experiments, new theories on strategic
information sharing will be developed to capture the elements of trust and
culture. This methodology pioneers a closed-loop framework in OM research in
which theories inform the design of behavioral experiments, and experimental
results in turn lead to enhanced theories that better predict human behavior and
improve management prescriptions.