* 1452068
* CAREER: New methods for multivariate analysis in high dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Adam Rothman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Datasets from imaging, gene microarray experiments, and many other fields often
have more measured characteristics than subjects. Analyzing these data with
standard statistical methods is either impossible or inadequate. The
investigator addresses this problem by developing new statistical methods that
are appropriate for such datasets. The investigator develops theoretical
justifications for these new methods and fast computational algorithms for their
application. Software that implements these algorithms will be made available to
the public. These new products will help practitioners in industry create better
predictive models and will also help advance research in many other fields. The
investigator will also develop new curricula, including the creation of an
undergraduate statistical computing course, an undergraduate statistical machine
learning course, a Ph.D.-level topics course, and a new track within the
undergraduate statistics major.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building statistical models
when the number of explanatory variables exceeds the sample size is an exciting
area at the forefront of multivariate analysis. Fitting these models with
classical techniques is typically impossible and some constraints or penalties
must be imposed. Penalties that encourage zeros in parameter estimates have
received substantial attention. These penalties are useful because they lead to
interpretable parameter estimates, but assuming that these zeros exist may be
inappropriate in some applications. The investigator develops and analyzes new
methods to fit models in high dimensions that do not require that zeros are
present in the parameters of interest, but still allow the practitioner to make
simple interpretations of the fit in terms of the measured variables. This
includes the development of new methods to fit multiple response regression
models and multinomial logistic regression models, as well as the development of
new methods to shrink characteristics of inverse covariance estimates that are
needed to fit predictive models. The investigator will develop new curricula and
involve Ph.D. students in the research.