* 1452523
* CAREER: Acoustic Phonons in 2D Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Kristie Koski, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 12/31/2016
* USD 252,000.00

Non-Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;This project studies how sound waves move
in a new class of atomically-thin, two-dimensional (2D) materials using a laser-
based technique, how to alter this motion using chemistry, and how to use this
knowledge to enhance technologies. Sound waves in solid materials move in the
form of "phonons," which act like individual particles of sound. Phonons can
carry heat and affect electrons that carry electrical currents, impacting
material devices and application. This project will further the understanding of
the phonon properties of 2D materials, filling a major gap in our fundamental
knowledge. This work trains undergraduate and graduate students for careers in
science and engineering. Educational and broader outreach goals include: (i)
development of a publicly available online Brillouin spectroscopy database, (ii)
initiation of an annual one-day Sciimpact-East conference to introduce
underserved high school students and teachers in the Providence, RI area to
careers in science and technology, and (iii) recruitment of under-represented
minority and female high school students and undergraduates to participate in
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;This
award supports a project to understand the phononic properties of two-
dimensional (2D) chalcogenide (S, Se, Te) and oxide materials to match our
current understanding of their electronic properties. Brillouin laser light
scattering will be used to map the acoustic phonon dispersion relations of 2D
materials, synthesized in-house. Novel intercalation chemistries will be
introduced toward systematically controlling the interlayer phonon behavior by
chemically modulating the layer-to-layer coupling. Defects (voids, vacancies,
and grain boundaries) will be engineered into 2D materials using chemical
methods for investigating their impact on fundamental phonon behavior. This
effort lays the foundation for the complete understanding and the chemical
control of phonons in 2D chalcogenide and oxide materials and will guide
understanding of mechanical behavior, heat transport and device failure in
future applications of 2D materials.