* 1452656
* CAREER: On-line Service for Predicting Protein Phosphorylation Dynamics Under Unseen Perturbations
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Yuanfang Guan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2022
* USD 939,686.00

Signal transduction through phosphorylation of proteins is a fundamental process
involved in most of the biological pathways in all living species. It is also a
dynamic process: the phosphorylation status of proteins constantly rewires in
different organisms, tissues, cell lineages, and in the same cell but under
different conditions. While experimental approaches such as phosphoproteomics
have greatly advanced the study of such dynamics, we have only recently begun to
construct computational models to estimate the phosphorylation status of
proteins under unseen perturbations. The goal of this project is to develop an
accurate and efficient method for predicting protein phosphorylation dynamics,
and to establish an on-line service system for researchers to upload their own
data and predict new dynamics under unseen perturbations. The research will
implement an on-line tool, which will have wide applications from prokaryotes to
higher, complex organisms, under a variety of conditions. Local high-school
students will be recruited to participate in the project, which may spin off for
them to compete in national and international science project
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current models for reconstructing
phosphorylation relationships between proteins using time-course data mainly
rely on searching the large space of possible network structures, a process that
is time-consuming and not directly applicable to predicting responses under
unseen interventions. This research will investigate a fundamental solution,
truncated singular value decomposition with graph partitioning, to estimate
phosphorylation levels given new perturbations. This method will be orders of
magnitude faster and more accurate than contemporary methods. These algorithms
will be tested using in silico simulation as well as phosphoproteomics data. The
research will implement an on-line tool, which will allow biology users from
diverse research domains to upload their time-course phosphoproteomic data,
retrieve the reconstructed phosphorylation relationships specific to their
organism and cell type, and predict the phosphorylation levels under unseen
perturbations. The results of the project can be found at
http://guanlab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/research.