* 1452626
* Tracking the carbon: Integrated numerical and experimental study of Earth's accretion and internal evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Rebecca Fischer, Fischer                 Rebecca        A
* Fellowship Award
* Manda S. Adams
* 06/30/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Rebecca Fischer has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral
fellowship to carry out a research and outreach plan at the Smithsonian
Institution's National Museum for Natural History and the University of
California, Santa Cruz. This research will focus on the delivery of carbon to
the Earth early in its history and the role of carbon in our planet's formation.
Simulations of planetary growth will be used to learn about the timing and
source regions of volatile delivery to the Earth. High pressure experiments will
provide insight into the effects of carbon on core/mantle chemical reactions
that took place during core formation. Modeling of the core formation process
will apply results from these experiments and simulations to investigate the
effects of carbon on the core's composition. This work has implications for the
distribution and abundance of carbon in the deep Earth, the origins of Earth's
volatiles, and the composition and formation of its core. Fischer will be
involved in mentoring undergraduate students and service activities in the
scientific community while supported by this fellowship.

This project will feature a novel combination of experimental and numerical
methods. N-body simulations of terrestrial planet accretion in our Solar System
will be used to explore the effects of imperfect accretion on resulting
planetary chemistry with a focus on volatile delivery. Carbon is known to affect
the metal/silicate partitioning of many elements at moderate pressures, but this
has never previously been investigated at the higher pressure-temperature
conditions of Earth's core formation. Fischer will use laser-heated diamond
anvil cells coupled with high precision analytical techniques to study these
effects of carbon, and use modeling to determine how carbon affects the
composition of Earth's core. This highly interdisciplinary study will create new
applications of data and simulations to the study of planetary formation and
core segregation.