* 1452477
* CAREER: Geometric Problems in General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2023
* Lan-Hsuan Huang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,648.00

Many fundamental results in mathematical general relativity concern the
interplay between the globally conserved physical quantities and the geometric
structure of our universe. This area of research in gravitational theory is
highly active and requires new ideas from various fields of mathematics. The
proposed research is important in understanding what geometric properties can be
deduced from the Einstein equations and from the conserved quantities. The
research projects may lead to the answers to some fundamental questions in
general relativity, including rigidity of the spacetime positive mass theorem
and geometric characterization of the center of mass. The research will employ
techniques from differential geometry, partial differential equations, and
geometric analysis. The project's educational activities will train a range of
students into the field of geometric analysis and related areas. The main
educational activities, including the Working Seminar, Geometry Day, and Summer
Graduate Workshop, will prepare students for necessary backgrounds to start
research in geometric analysis. Those activities will also attract students and
faculty from other universities in the Northeast to participate and will
encourage collaborations across universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project comprises two research directions to better understand the globally
conserved quantities in general relativity and their connections to the
geometric structure. The first research direction concerns the moduli space of
solutions to the Einstein constraint equations. A long term project is to fully
understand how the conserved quantities, such as the ADM energy and linear
momentum, vary on the moduli space. This project is inspired by studying
rigidity of the positive mass conjecture and minimal mass extension of Bartnik's
quasi-local mass. It is crucial to know how the conserved quantities vary under
deformations. In addition, the PI will also study local deformation theorems for
the constraint equations with dominant energy condition. The second project
concerns the center of mass and angular momentum and the question of
isoperimetry in asymptotically flat initial data sets. The PI has been
investigating several different notions of center of mass and angular momentum,
assuming parity conditions. It is desirable to continue to investigate the
physical quantities for more general initial data sets. She also intends to
study the stable constant mean curvature surfaces and isoperimetric surfaces
that are naturally related to the geometric center of mass.