* 1452855
* CAREER: Scalable Synthesis of Designed Biosurfactants to Enhance Drug Bioavailability
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Bryan Berger, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2018
* USD 399,356.00

1452855 &lt;br/&gt;Berger, Bryan W. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is estimated that
more than 40% of all currently developed drugs fail in preclinical evaluation
due to low drug solubility, which reduces in vivo bioavailability and results in
poor overall drug efficacy. In biopharmaceutical manufacturing, low drug
solubility is the most common barrier to developing an effective pre-clinical
drug formulation. Pre-clinical formulation is critical to the eventual success
of a drug, with major financial consequences of poor drug solubility during pre-
clinical formulation. Nearly 70-80% of all drugs fail during pre-clinical and
phase I clinical development, with an average investment loss of $100-800
million per drug. Additionally, there are major problems with the
biocompatibility of synthetic surfactants such as Tween 80 used to improve drug
solubility; Tween 80 has been shown to cause severe side-effects such as
anaphylaxis in IV chemotherapeutic formulations. Thus, there is a current, unmet
need to develop (1) a detailed understanding of how altering surfactant
structure influences drug solubiization to prevent poor drug solubility and
associated side-effects and (2) a flexible method for high-yield synthesis of
novel biosurfactants at a cost competitive with currently used synthetic
surfactants such as Tween 80. The goal of this CAREER proposal is to develop a
series of biocompatible biosurfactants capable of overcoming the current
limitations of commercial drug formulations in terms of cost, scale and targeted
delivery. The results of this work will contribute directly to improved drug
bioavailability, biocompatibility and efficacy and enable use of designed
biosurfactants in a wide range of commercial drug formulations. Additionally, in
partnership with Northampton Community College (NCC), the PI will develop a
laboratory course for Lehigh and NCC students in biomanufacturing, and organize
a 10-week summer internship program for NCC students interested in pursuing
post-graduate studies in STEM fields. Ultimately, the biosurfactant structure,
function and design studies described in this CAREER proposal will provide a
unique, long-term project that has direct application to a wide range of
challenges in drug formulation as well as a unique, cross-institutional
educational opportunity for Lehigh and NCC students in STEM-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will utilize an integrated, structure-guided
approach to design variants of the protein hydrophobin (HYD), a naturally-
occurring, fungal biosurfactant, to improve drug solubility, biocompatibility
and targeted delivery. Importantly, a major focus of this work is on development
and production of designed biosurfactants at a scale and cost competitive with
synthetic surfactants such as Tween 80. The challenges of engineering novel
functions into the biosurfactant to improve targeting and drug solubility will
be addressed through (1) engineering HYD variants with pH-dependent surface
activity (pH-HYD) for targeted drug release, (2) evolving HYD variants for
enhanced solubilization (s-HYD) of a given target drug and (3) integrating both
pH- and s-HYD into a commercial-scale formulation that maximizes drug solubility
and targeting. Using previous structural information regarding HYD, the
investigator will design a series of electrostatically-stabilized HYD variants,
each of which will enable pH-dependent assembly and disassembly. Similarly,
using a high-yield secretion system developed for HYD coupled to high-throughput
methods for characterization, the PI will utilize directed evolution to select
HYD variants that enhance drug solubility using a series of model hydrophobic
drug compounds as benchmarks. Lastly, by integrating both engineered and evolved
HYD variants, a novel, hybrid formulation will be identified that can both
deliver drug at high solubility and target delivery effectively. Ultimately,
this approach will lead to tailored biosurfactant properties precisely to enable
formulation of previously insoluble drugs, engineer enhanced targeting
mechanisms such as pH (pH-HYD) to reduce side-effects associated with current
drug formulations and develop a low-cost, scalable and sustainable route for
biosurfactant biomanufacturing that is broadly applicable to a wide range of
formulation application.