* 1452751
* CAREER: Capacity Planning Methodologies for Large Clusters with Heterogeneous Architectures and Diverse Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Ningfang Mi, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2022
* USD 459,588.00

This project focuses on developing innovative techniques and algorithms to build
adequate system models and support performance and reliability analysis in order
to better explain large system behavior, predict application performance, and
ensure high resource efficiency and system dependability. Large cluster
environments are an important part of today's computing infrastructure,
providing the platform for running applications that handle core business and
operational data. However, with the complexity of computing and application
infrastructure increasing and the requirements for high quality of service
growing, large cluster environments are facing the difficult task of ensuring
that applications are always available and delivering adequate performance. This
project expects to achieve new capacity planning techniques for performance
modeling, workload measurements and model parameterizations of large cluster
systems. Intelligent capacity and reliability modeling will enable service
providers to determine the best platform for their application before deploying
and running the application. It will also enable system managers to optimize the
performance, reliability and efficiency of the entire cluster
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will develop new performance
modeling methods to capture the characteristics of heterogeneous hardware
architectures and predict the behavior of an application running on an array of
computing platforms. The research will extend performance modeling to failure
awareness. The improved models will enable an accurate prediction of performance
and reliability of a complex large-scale system by capturing the characteristics
of both system workloads and failure events. In addition, the researchers will
develop new advanced techniques to parameterize performance models with
essential processing information of computational and communication components.
These essential processing information do not only limit to mean values but also
include other critical yet complicated features such as resource contention and
burstiness symptoms. The project is involved with educational activities
reaching out to students from secondary to graduate schools to aggressively
motivate students, especially women, towards science and engineering integrating
this research into curriculum development and undergraduate research activities.