* 1452928
* CAREER - Building the Vertebrate Body with Axial Stem Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2022
* Benjamin Martin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 03/31/2022
* USD 907,889.00

The human body plan, along with the body plan of all other vertebrates, is
established during embryogenesis in a progressive manner, with the head forming
first and the rest of the body growing sequentially away from the head. Recent
work in vertebrate animal models revealed the unexpected finding that a
population of stem cells, called axial stem cells, fuels the process of body
growth over long periods of time by contributing new cells to the
differentiating spinal cord, skeletal muscle, and blood vessels, among others.
Since axial stem cells have only recently been discovered, there is a severe
paucity of information regarding their normal development in any species. The
goal of this project is to establish the molecular mechanisms of axial stem cell
induction, maintenance, and fate specification in the zebrafish. This work will
provide critical insight into how the vertebrate body is created, as well as
shed light on the mechanisms leading to body plan diversity across the animal
kingdom. Undergraduate students will participate in this project, providing them
with a cutting edge research experience. Additionally, the project will also use
zebrafish as a tool to teach biological principles to high school students, and
to get them excited about developmental biology. This will be accomplished
through two mechanisms: 1) the creation of a professional development course for
high school teachers that will provide them with the training necessary to run
zebrafish development teaching laboratories at their schools, and 2) a hands-on
laboratory module for high school students. These programs are designed to meet
the needs of the changing emphasis on laboratory-based hands on learning, with a
particular emphasis on providing these educational opportunities to high-needs
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zebrafish offer an unparalleled system to
investigate axial stem cell biology. The transparent embryos, along with genetic
and cell transplantation tools, allow for the precise determination of the cell-
autonomous, temporal role of pathways and genes functioning within axial stem
cells in vivo. Using these methods, this project investigates three key aspects
of axial stem cells, including 1) how axial stem cells are induced during the
gastrula stage and maintained after gastrulation in the embryonic tailbud, 2)
the mechanism by which the canonical Wnt signaling pathway induces mesoderm
within axial stem cells, and 3) how the Sox2 transcription factor promotes
neural induction in axial stem cells.