* 1452648
* CAREER: The Molecular Basis of Visual Mate Choice in Butterflies
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Marcus Kronforst, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2020
* USD 869,000.00

IOS-1452648: CAREER: The Molecular Basis of Visual Mate Choice in
Butterflies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Years of research focused on the Drosophila eye
and vertebrate retina have revealed, in fantastic detail, the molecular and
developmental basis of vision. However, the molecular basis of visual
attraction, i.e. the genes, molecular pathways, and neural circuits that
integrate visual cues and direct a behavioral response towards a stimulus, has
not been characterized as fully. Work on Heliconius butterflies has shown them
to be primarily visual, with mate selection specifically mediated by simple
visual cues. This project will utilize these unique features of Heliconius
butterflies to characterize the fundamental biological process of visual mate
choice. The research is likely to have a variety of broader impacts on science
and society. Because divergence in color pattern and mate choice causes
speciation in Heliconius butterflies, this research will provide an integrative
analysis of the functional mechanisms responsible for the origin of species.
Finally, a major educational outreach component of the project will implement
new teaching and learning activities for students at secondary, undergraduate
and graduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental goal of this research
project is to characterize the molecular basis of visual mate choice spanning
the continuum from organismal biology and behavior all the way to specific
neural circuits and functional mutations. This will be achieved using three
complementary research projects that integrate genomics, functional genetics,
developmental biology, and comparative neurophysiology. Project 1 will generate
a reference genome sequence and use genome resequencing data from preference-
tested butterflies to map nucleotide changes responsible for divergent mate
preference. Project 2 will characterize the developmental basis of visual
preference by comparing patterns of gene expression between butterflies with
divergent wing color and mate preference, focusing on wing, eye, and nervous
system tissues, using a combination of qRT-PCR, in situ hybridization, and RNA-
Seq. Project 3 will examine the anatomical and neurophysiological basis for mate
preference, as well as functionally test genes associated with mate preference,
using comparative analyses of eye anatomy, electrophysiology, and RNAi. All DNA
and RNA sequence data will be deposited on the NCBI SRA database. Other data
types will be stored locally and made available upon request.