* 1452347
* Biogeochemical arsenic cycling in a Paleoarchean ocean basin
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Kimberly Myers, Myers                   Kimberly       D
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Kimberly D. Myers has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to investigate evidence for arsenic cycling in 3.2 billion-year-old
Fig Tree Group sediments within the Barberton Greenstone Belt, South Africa.
Microorganisms control arsenic redox reactions in modern near surface
environments. Arsenic (As) metabolism also may have played an important role in
Archean microbial ecosystems; however, current models of microbial arsenic
cycling in the Archean are poorly constrained by observations in the sedimentary
record. Arsenopyrite (FeAsS) was discovered within hematite-rich sediments
deposited in a shallow marine setting. Preliminary analyses demonstrated that
the As in FeAsS was introduced as As(III) or As(V) during or shortly after these
iron rich sediments were deposited, then later reduced, indicating a complex
arsenic redox cycle in the Fig Tree basin that may have involved microbial
activity. This research will generate results of significant interest to several
earth- and life-science research themes. It will improve our understanding of
arsenic behavior in Archean surface environments and may uncover evidence for
the earliest microbially driven arsenic cycle on Earth, a subject of interest to
many environmental and evolutionary microbiologists. This work will also
contribute to our understanding of arsenic mobility in modern reducing
sediments, and could inform remediation efforts for arsenic-contaminated
aquifers that negatively impact the health of millions of people worldwide. In
conjunction with Texas A&M University Libraries, Dr. Myers will also be
participating in a nation-wide effort to provide open-access learning materials
to university students as a low cost alternative to traditional textbook
resources. She will compose a chapter for an open-access introductory Geology
textbook comparing the Earth's geochemical cycles before and after the Great
Oxidation Event. The text will include online learning modules following the
story of this NSF-funded research project from design to execution to motivate
young geoscientists, especially women, and reinforce the role of creativity in
scientific achievement.

Dr. Myers will perform her research in conjunction with the Department of
Geology and Geophysics at Texas A&M University and the Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory, Columbia University. She will conduct fieldwork in South Africa to
further characterize As-containing jasper deposits. Rock samples will be
examined using arsenic K-edge absorption spectroscopy, and &#956;-XRF. A multi-
faceted experimental and analytical approach will be used to understand how As
was introduced, retained, and preserved in the Fig Tree Group sediments. The
mechanisms for As introduction and retention in Fe-oxy-hydroxide and silica rich
amorphous solids will be examined experimentally, with a specific focus on
impact of the oxidation state of As, and the effect of microorganisms on the
adsorption and retention of As(III) and As(V) to sediments under anaerobic
conditions. The precipitation of arsenopyrite will then be examined in these Fe-
and silica-rich solids both abiotically in the presence of sulfide, and in the
presence of a consortium of As-, Fe-, and S-reducing microorganisms.
Experimental material will be examined using SEM-EDS, Raman spectroscopy, and
arsenic K-edge absorption spectroscopy, to obtain a robust model for the
(bio)geochemical behavior of arsenic in the Archean Fig Tree depositional basin.