* 1452007
* Redefining Surface Area: Understanding Reactive Interfaces in Heterogeneous Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Li Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2018
* USD 193,050.00

Redefining Surface Area: Understanding Reactive Interfaces in Heterogeneous
Porous Media

Biogeochemical reaction rates in the natural subsurface are typically controlled
by those at the "hot" reactive interfaces where fluids and solids of different
properties and conditions meet. These interfaces are often restricted to
relatively small, sharp zones with rates orders of magnitude higher than those
at the rest of the domain. The research outcomes from this project will be
important for a broad spectrum of applications at the nexus of energy, water,
and environment. In particular, they will advance understanding and predicting
of physical, chemical, and biological processes important for shale gas
development, acid mine drainage, nuclear waste disposal, geological CO2
sequestration, geothermal energy, and contaminant transport. Fundamental
understanding of the earth systems, including the Critical Zone where humans
live, is also essential for soil fertility and productivity, water
sustainability, and energy security, all of which are subject to climate change
and intense human activities in the Anthropocene.

In this study the investigator hypothesizes that the emergence and nature of
reactive interfaces are dictated by spatial heterogeneities, the spatial
variations in porous medium properties and conditions. These reactive interfaces
ultimately govern large scale processes and system functioning. Whereas
hydrologists have documented significant impacts of physical heterogeneities on
fluid flow and solute transport in the past decades, present understanding on
the role of physical and geochemical heterogeneities in determining
(bio)geochemical processes has not kept pace. The investigator proposes to
understand fundamental principles that govern the occurrence and functioning of
reactive interfaces. The ultimate goal is to develop conceptual and predictive
framework for geochemical processes in natural, heterogeneous subsurface. The
proposed work will integrate two-dimensional flow-through experiments and multi-
scale reactive transport modeling. The 2D flow cells will be packed using
calcite, chlorite, and quartz-minerals that differ drastically in reactivity and
are ubiquitous in natural systems. Understanding reactive interfaces will enable
a significant step toward unifying observations across scales. The goal of the
education and outreach plan is to empower the science community and general
public with tools and education in ways that transcend limits of time, space,
and individual disciplines. The investigator proposes to (1) develop an online
module with a "heterogeneity" focus as part of a much-needed online reactive
transport modeling (RTM) course for delivery through Penn State's World Campus;
(2) develop a repository website that organizes the online teaching materials
for free access to the public; (3) promote diversity and environmental awareness
by offering underrepresented high school students a summer research opportunity
on "Water flow through rocks". The plan will equip the community with knowledge
and predictive tools for environmental stewardship, water management, as well as
protection and sustainable use of natural resources.