* 1452612
* CAREER: Small Molecule Redox Reactivity at MOF Secondary Building Units
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Mircea Dinca, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 625,000.00

Non-technical abstract

This project describes a career plan that integrates fundamental studies of
small molecule reactivity at redox-active metal-organic framework materials with
the creation of interactive inorganic chemistry course materials to be made
available to millions of students worldwide and with efforts to increase college
applications from high school students in inner-city Boston schools. The
materials and small molecule substrates synthesized and studied in this project
are representative of large classes of emerging materials of worldwide interest
known as metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) and of small molecules relevant in both
biology and the chemical industry.

Technical abstract

This research addresses the apparent disconnect between the ways Nature and
synthetic chemists approach the utilization of small molecules of relevance to
biological and industrial catalysis. While living systems use complex
supramolecular architectures where multiple factors - folding, active site
environment, secondary sphere interactions - contribute to substrate selectivity
and overall reactivity, metal complexes that use small molecules as substrates
typically rely on ligand design that focuses almost entirely on the primary
coordination sphere, and often fall short of the functionality seen in Nature.
The research team has shown that microporous MOFs support highly reduced first
row transition metal ions in ligand field environments that mimic those found in
natural systems. These ions interact with small molecule oxidants in ways that
are also reminiscent of reactive intermediates involved in both biological and
industrial catalytic cycles. The team's work highlights the unique role that
these materials could play as heterogeneous materials by filling an important
missing link between metalloenzymes and porous heterogeneous materials such as
zeolites. The project focuses on synthesizing new redox-active porous materials
capable of engaging small molecules for further reactivity, pursing three main
directions: (1) The synthesis and characterization of MOFs with highly redox-
active and reduced metal ions, including many that have not yet been isolated
within such materials; (2) Exploration of the redox reactivity of the new
frameworks, focusing in particular on small, industrially relevant gaseous
oxidants such as dioxygen and the halogens; (3) Developing new and predictable
soft synthetic methodologies for producing MOFs with redox-active metal centers
and a new synthetic toolbox for small molecule redox chemistry in MOFs.