* 1452298
* CEDAR: Plasma Altitude Distributions Associated with Storm Enhanced Densities (SEDs) Caused by Competing Mechanisms
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2020
* Naomi Maruyama, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 04/30/2020
* USD 219,758.00

This project is focused on determining the causes of Storm Enhanced Density
(SED) plumes resulting from strong plasma mass coupling between ionosphere and
magnetosphere. It will improve our scientific understanding of the coupling
between ionosphere and plasmasphere by effectively combining state-of-the-art
models and measurements. The major outcome will be improved physics-based models
of the Earth?s upper atmosphere and improved predictive capabilities of the
storm time response of the ionosphere and plasmasphere.&lt;br/&gt; The main goal
of this research will be to determine the relative roles of the background
neutral density, neutral wind and electric field in the plasma altitude
variation and observed variations in the magnitudes of total electron content
(TEC) in different SEDs. This study will utilize a combination of the state of
the art first principles models of the ionosphere-plasmasphere, a suite of
neutral atmosphere models, and the coupled Magnetosphere-Ionosphere-Thermosphere
model, in order to describe the various drivers and response/feedback. The
specific questions to be answered are: 1) How do the plasma height distributions
within SEDs evolve depending on the magnitude, duration, and phase of the
storms?; 2) What is the relative contribution of the in-situ chemical vs.
dynamical processes in determining the evolution of the plasma height
distributions associated with SEDs and its local time dependence?; 3) How do the
plasma height distributions within SEDs depend on the longitude, season and
hemispheric asymmetry? &lt;br/&gt; Data from the NSF-funded SuperDARN and
incoherent scatter radar projects with GPS-TEC and spacecraft data will be
combined with advanced modeling to maximize scientific return. The project will
involve participation of a summer REU students.