* 1452644
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human disturbance, habituation, and stress responsiveness in wild, endangered primates
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Carol Berman, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2018
* USD 25,200.00

As human mobility and populations expand, primates are increasingly exposed to
unavoidable, potentially stressful human influences. There is an assumption that
apparent tolerance of human presence by primates indicates habituation (primates
learn that human presence is not associated with negative consequences), and
consequently, primates no longer experience negative effects of stress. These
assumptions may be inaccurate or premature; indeed there is evidence that
unavoidable, chronic exposure of primates to tourism can be stressful, indicated
by behavioral and physiological responses, even in sites active for decades.
This dissertation aims to examine these assumptions in Tangkoko Nature Reserve,
Sulawesi, Indonesia, by investigating behavioral and physiological responses of
wild macaques to the presence of tourists and crop-guarding. It will be the
first study to distinguish between chronic and acute stress in wild macaques,
making a unique contribution to our understanding of the nature of stress
responses in primates and suggesting improved conservation methods for an
endangered primate species. The project will also provide training for a female
STEM graduate student and both US and Indonesian undergraduate research
assistants, and will include local community education and outreach efforts.

In this two-year study, the investigators will collect salivary and fecal
cortisol data and behavioral data for 12 adult macaques in each of three groups,
where groups differ in levels of human interaction. In normal (acute) responses
to stress, stress hormones rise, but return to baseline levels within a few
hours. However, chronic stress responses (in which stress hormones remain high)
can be detrimental to an individual's health and reproductive potential. Thus,
the data collected here will shed light on whether primate groups exposed to
tourism for decades fully habituate or whether their apparent tolerance masks
abnormal stress responses likely to be detrimental to fitness. Due to their
close phylogenetic relatedness, this can also enhance our understanding of human
stress response. In addition to training and outreach broader impacts, the
project will also develop non-invasive field measures of cortisol that can be
used by a variety of primate and wildlife researchers.