* 1452615
* CAREER: Mechanistic Investigations of Excited-State Proton-Coupled Electron Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Jillian Dempsey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2021
* USD 642,856.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamic and Mechanism B program
is supporting the research of Professor Jillian L. Dempsey at the University of
North Carolina. Professor Dempsey is studying mechanisms of excited-state
proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions in a series of model systems.
This work will reveal how light absorption and proton/electron transfer can be
integrated and will help identify new approaches to drive energy-intensive PCET
reactions directly with sunlight. New synthetic and spectroscopic approaches
enable the study of PCET reactions in which both the proton transfer and
electron transfer reactions can be monitored optically. In the proposed model
systems, optical detection of reaction intermediates, kinetics modeling,
thermochemical calculations and H/D kinetic isotope effects will all provide
insight to the pathways by which light absorption is coupled to proton and
electron transfer. Systematic investigations examining parameters such as
driving force, electron transfer distance and proton transfer distance will help
develop a fundamental understanding of PCET reactions involving reagents in
electronically excited states. The model systems will incorporate biologically
relevant substrates as well as complexes that were selected to reveal new
mechanistic pathways by which small, inert molecules can be activated through
PCET processes with excited-state reagents. Collectively, these investigations
will provide an improved understanding of this little-explored class of
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Dempsey will also initiate a three-
tier approach aimed at promoting diversity in science and ensuring future
generations of well-trained scientists. First, new energy-based interactive
demos will be developed. These activities, which are being utilized at the
Morehead Planetarium and Science Center and a local elementary school, are
introducing K-12 students-many of whom are from underrepresented groups-to the
field of solar energy conversion and attracting them to STEM careers. Second,
evidence-based teaching methods are being incorporated to a large chemistry
course in order to improve student learning and retention. Third, the Chemistry
Women Mentorship Network (ChemWMN) has been established and will help support
women pursuing academic careers. In addition to the educational impacts, this
work will increase knowledge of excited-state PCET processes, a class of
reactions for which there have been few systematic experimental investigations,
and reveal new photo-induced pathways to activate small molecules. By revealing
pathways by which energy-intensive PCET reactions can be initiated by molecules
in their electronic excited states, new approaches to efficiently convert solar
photons into chemical energy, addressing solar energy storage challenges may
ultimately be developed.