* 1452628
* CAREER: IDEA: Integrated Data and Energy Access for Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Kaushik Chowdhury, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 12/31/2021
* USD 505,731.00

The proposed Integrated Data and Energy Access (IDEA) framework will help
realize the promise of jointly powering and communicating with wireless sensors,
with the help of electromagnetic radio frequency (RF) waves. This research will
result in a cross-layer protocol suite, modeling tools, and experimental systems
that will be instrumental in building future RF energy harvesting networks for
healthcare, wearable electronics, smart homes, and embedded implants with
extended lifetimes. The controllable and predictable nature of RF energy and the
lack of dependence on environmental conditions distinguish this form of energy
harvesting over other renewable sources. IDEA will directly support national and
institutional level energy-efficiency related program goals by reducing
dependence on batteries and enhancing sustainability in networking. The project
involves an integrated education plan involving demonstrations at public
museums, pedagogical tools for K-12 students, a summer school focused on RF
energy harvesting, continuing education for industry personnel, and dedicated
outreach efforts to attract students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IDEA will define new protocol designs for coordinating
actions of dedicated omnidirectional and beamforming energy transmitters (ETs).
At the link layer, it will research methods for sharing the channel for the
charging and data communication functions in the network, while addressing
challenges posed by phase variance and the constructive and destructive
interference of energy signals in space. IDEA proposes new routing metrics and
protocols for creating energy paths, which will charge only selected sensors to
ensure data delivery to the sink occurs timely over these pathways. It will
yield concrete insights on the relationship between the number of ETs, their
placement, the network lifetime, and the data communication capacity given the
energy transfer requests within the network. IDEA will answer fundamental
questions on how much energy can be obtained through indoor ETs, as well as
outdoors from the ambient RF environment in the TV band, leading to the creation
of spatiotemporal energy maps. Finally, IDEA will transform the concept of RF
harvesting sensors to a platform for network deployment through a testbed of
software-defined radio ETs and circuit designs for RF harvesting boards.