* 1452390
* CAREER: A reversible dynamic hydrogel system for studying stemness and drug responsiveness of cancer stem cells
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Chien-Chi Lin, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 06/30/2021
* USD 496,610.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis is to fund an interdisciplinary research project that integrates
knowledge and technology from polymer science and engineering, peptide and
macromolecular chemistry, as well as cellular and molecular biology related to
cancer stem cells (CSCs). CSCs are highly metastatic and resistant to drug
treatment. This research will develop biomaterial matrices with controllable
biophysical and biochemical properties that enable both exploratory and
mechanistic studies at cellular and molecular levels. The research results from
this study will be integrated into the PI's teaching of both undergraduate and
graduate students. The research outcome will be disseminated through
conventional venues (i.e., presentations and publications), and will be
integrated into diverse educational activities that are designed to promote the
awareness of both biomaterials and cancer biology. To broaden the impact of this
project, the educational and outreach activities will include participants at
the campus, regional, and international levels. The palnned outreach activities
are designed for students from the young and underrepresented groups (6th
graders to high school students). Furthermore, free workshops incorporating
hands-on activities on hydrogel fabrication will be offered to high school
educators. Introductory level topics on biomaterials and cancer stem cell
biology will be incorporated into all
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;The goals of this CAREER
project are to develop modularly crosslinked 3D hydrogels with a built-in
mechanisms for tuning matrix properties to understand the self-renewal,
differentiation, and drug responsiveness of cancer stem cells (CSCs). The
research objectives of this project are to synthesize hydrogels with covalent
crosslinks and reversible supramolecular linkages for repeatedly tunable
hydrogel stiffness. Using this dynamic hydrogel system, it would be possible to
evaluate the effects of matrix properties on self-renewal and differentiation of
CSCs. This material platform will also allow hypothesis-driven studies related
to stiffness-dependent activation of Notch signaling, a pathway involved in drug
resistance in CSCs. This research will be integrated into educational activities
that involve students, especially those from the underrepresented groups from
6th graders to graduate students, high school educators, and international
audiences. Specifically, with this CAREER award, the PI will mentor
undergraduate and graduate students in research and learning, and will offer
workshops and hands-on activities to minority students and high school
educators. In addition, the research results of this project will be
disseminated internationally through collaboration with scientists in Republic
of Korea.