* 1452831
* Identifying Neurosensory Solutions to the Binding Problem in Animal Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,12/31/2021
* Mark Bee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 12/31/2021
* USD 680,000.00

Human and animal behavior is guided by continuous and often complex sensory
input. Nervous systems must parse this input stream and bind together those
pieces corresponding to actual objects in the environment. As an illustration,
consider the command to STOP. The human visual system effortlessly binds an
octagonal shape with red coloration into a unified visual percept that elicits
stopping behavior. Likewise, different sounds in the spoken word "stop" become
bound into an auditory percept that also elicits stopping behavior. Efforts to
understand how nervous systems solve these so-called "binding problems" have
advanced the fields of cognitive and computational neuroscience. By comparison,
much less is known about how nonhuman animals create bound percepts that
correspond to the variety of things of interest to animals (e.g. prey,
predators, mates, communication signals). Hence, important knowledge gaps remain
concerning the brain mechanisms that allow animals to solve binding problems.
This project integrates behavioral and electrophysiological experiments to
uncover general mechanisms of auditory perceptual binding in an animal model for
which vocal communication in noisy social environments is key to successful
reproduction. This research is important because basic knowledge of neurosensory
mechanisms that enable animals to solve auditory binding problems could benefit
society by helping to improve hearing prosthetics and speech recognition
systems, which perform poorly in noisy acoustic scenes. This research will also
lead to answering new questions about how neural systems shape the evolution of
communication behaviors. In addition, the project will create research
experiences for a minimum of 15 undergraduates, advance the training of a
postdoctoral scholar, and integrate research and teaching with public outreach
aimed at elementary school kids in a large metropolitan area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates auditory binding in green
treefrogs (Hyla cinerea), a well-known animal model in studies of hearing and
sound communication. Aim 1 uses behavioral experiments to identify cues that
promote auditory binding. Two experiments will test the hypothesis that
synchronous onsets/offsets, common spatial origin, and harmonic relatedness
function to bind together separate parts of the frequency spectrum of
vocalizations analogous to formants in human vowel sounds. Aim 2 involves
electrophysiological recordings from single neurons in the auditory midbrain to
identify neural correlates of auditory binding. Three experiments will test the
hypothesis that changes in the responses of neurons sensitive to spectral
combinations correlate with changes in the behavioral decisions made in response
to manipulations of the auditory binding cues from Aim 1.