* 1452744
* Collaborative Research: Quantification of Gravity Wave Momentum Fluxes and Instability Events in the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere (MLT) Region at High- and Mid- Latitudes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Michael Taylor, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2018
* USD 196,103.00

This project involves comprehensive observational studies, guided by state-of-
the-art modeling, to quantify gravity wave (GW) momentum transport and the
instability dynamics that drive energy and momentum deposition and GW spectral
evolution in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) region. The
observations will build on recent successes by this team employing an Advanced
Mesosphere Temperature Mapper (AMTM), the Weber Wind and Temperature sodium
lidar, and other correlative instrumentation operated at the Arctic Lidar
Observatory for Middle Atmosphere Research (ALOMAR) in northern Norway (69.3oN).
These earlier correlative measurement capabilities have demonstrated an
excellent potential to quantify GW momentum fluxes, and the GW characteristics
that account for these fluxes, to a degree not possible with traditional airglow
imagers or wind profiling radars or lidars. As such, this program represents a
new frontier in the community's ability to measure, explore and understand
small-scale GW and instability dynamics in the MLT that directly impact the
Space-Atmospheric Interaction Region (SAIR) of prime importance to the NSF
Aeronomy and CEDAR programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will continue
to employ the high-quality correlative wintertime measurement capabilities at
ALOMAR and will include extensive summertime Na lidar and AMTM measurement
capability recently available at Bear Lake Observatory (BLO) and the nearby Utah
State University (USU) campus (41.9oN). Together these two data sets will
provide an excellent measure of the different geophysical forcing effects on the
high- and mid-latitude MLT region. These facilities provide the best potential
for multiple correlative data sets, given the on-site access to lidar operators.
These proven measurement capabilities will also facilitate estimates of the
spatial and temporal scales of the GW packets, accounting for mean forcing and
the generation of secondary GWs, which are largely unknown at present, but are
needed for understanding and parameterizing GW effects in weather, climate, and
general circulation models addressing both research and societal needs. The
measurements from these two stations, if successful, will provide the necessary
inputs for a realistic model development.