* 1452492
* CAREER: Development of DNA nanocarriers to redirect immune cells toward chosen targets
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Matthias Stephan, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2020
* USD 504,492.00

PI: Stephan, Matthias &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1452492&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Medicine currently lacks an intervention that can
rapidly educate the immune system to eliminate diseased cell populations, such
as those produced by cancer or virus infections. For example, although vaccines
can train the immune system to selectively destroy diseased cells without
damaging healthy tissue, they may require months to elicit responses, by which
time the condition can become lethal. To address this problem, the project
proposed here merges concepts from materials science, immunology, and gene
therapy to create injectable reagents that can quickly reprogram circulating
immune cells to recognize and destroy tumors. Specifically, it tests the
hypothesis that targeted, gene-bearing nanoparticles can genetically reprogram
circulating T cells to express receptors that recognize tumor targets, so they
can rapidly eliminate them. Early results based on laboratory-raised lymphocytes
already establish that a novel nanoparticle configuration can efficiently
transfer tumor-reactive receptor genes into these cells. The results of the
project could be transformative, by creating a basis for developing a repertoire
of gene modification systems customized to rapidly generate immunity against any
targetable pathogen; using these, treatment of cancer or viral infections could
begin immediately following diagnosis by simply applying the appropriate
nanoparticle reagents. Also, as an alternative to immunizing populations to
protect against uncommon diseases, nanoparticle programming of immune cells
could provide this protection "on demand." Thus, the project may impact public
health by enabling rapid responses to outbreaks and epidemics. In addition, the
investigator's interdisciplinary team of chemists, bioengineers and
immunologists will directly integrate this research into a variety of teaching
and educational outreach programs to provide K-12 students and their teachers
with real-world-based, state-of-the-art learning experiences concerning how
developments in biomaterials can impact
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vaccination evolved into one of the most
important therapies of modern medicine, and advances in nanotechnology have
provided tools that can amplify immune responses to vaccines. However, even
though vaccines can create T cells with defined specificities, they do so slowly
and often produce insufficient numbers to control established disease. To date,
no methodology is available that can rapidly educate the immune system to
destroy diseased cells. This project proposes to develop an injectable synthetic
vehicle that can quickly reprogram circulating T cells to recognize and destroy
diseased cells. It will test the hypothesis that these lymphocytes can be
genetically reconfigured by targeted, gene-bearing nanoparticles to express
disease-recognizing receptors, enabling them to bring about rapid rejection of
erratic cells. Pilot in vitro studies already establish that efficient transfer
of leukemia-reactive T cell receptor (TCR) genes into lymphocytes can be
achieved via appropriately engineered nanoparticles. The long-term project goal
is to develop a broad repertoire of injectable gene modification systems
customized to treat diverse conditions. This goal will be pursued via three
specific aims: (1) optimize the design of a nanoscale gene delivery system that
achieves persistent and robust transgene expression in proliferating T cells;
(2) investigate how internalization of polymeric nanocarrriers affects T cells
at the molecular level; and (3) measure how the introduction of specific
receptor genes into circulating T cells induces disease regression in mice. DNA
encoding a TCR specific for the Wilms tumor antigen will be encapsulated in
lipid bilayer-coated porous silica nanoparticles, which will be selectively
targeted to circulating T cells by coupling anti-CD3 antibodies onto them.
Initial experiments will determine whether stable receptor expression can be
achieved in dividing lymphocytes by inserting into the TCR gene a
Scaffold/matrix attachment region (S/MAR) sequence, which enables plasmids to
self-replicate as episomes. The possibility that nuclear localization signals
will increase gene transfer into T cells will also be investigated. Detailed
gene expression profiling will clarify how nanoparticle uptake affects
lymphocytes at the molecular level. The therapeutic potential of the technology
will be tested in leukemia-bearing mice receiving systemic injections of DNA
nanocarriers at different doses and frequencies, and the percentage of
reprogrammed T cells in the peripheral blood will be quantified by flow
cytometry. Differences in tumor progression between treatment groups will be
measured using serial bioluminescence tumor imaging. Technologies arising from
the project could potentially impact any disease that has a defined antigen for
receptor targeting. They are based on a novel scheme that can quickly induce
active immunity "on demand", and the therapeutics involved are amenable to rapid
distribution, simple storage and easy application. Considering the shortcomings
of conventional immunotherapy, this approach could evolve into a new
biotechnology arena with broad applications. The research will also be directly
integrated into educational programs promoting awareness of career opportunities
at the interface of materials science and immunology.