* 1452541
* CAREER: Mapping the Role of Somatosenses in Youth-Based Creative Activity and Community Engagement
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Allison Hayes-Conroy, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 05/31/2021
* USD 449,730.00

This project will analyze the role of the physical body in motivating youth to
participate in creative social activities that positively influence their lives
and the lives of their communities. The project will focus on the
somatosensorial system - the complex system that enables feeling in the human
body - in order to understand how the body's capacity for feeling matters to the
motivation of youth as well as to the outcomes of their social activities. The
research and pedagogical programs of this CAREER project integrate
international, participatory and student-driven research on youth-based,
creative action groups (e.g. dance, theater, and clown troupes, urban gardeners,
community musicians) in Philadelphia, PA and Colombia, South America. Both
locally and abroad, the project will attend to at-risk or violence-afflicted
youth, and will generate valuable linkages between youth-based groups and
university students and researchers. Youth participants in the research will be
respected as co-collaborators of the project and will be involved in research
activities that enhance their intellectual and social capacity for attending to
their communities.

Through their creative social activities, youth often engage various corporeal
capacities of sense, including: auditory senses piqued through music,
kinesthesia roused through the movement of limbs, and other widely varied forms
of sensorial and intero- or visceroception. The research program seeks to answer
the following four questions regarding the role of the sensorial body in youth-
based creative social activity: (1) What are the types of somatosensorial
perceptions that are roused through diverse creative social activities? (2) How
do these seemingly individual perceptions matter to the development of creative
social projects that address the needs of others? (3) How does diversity and
difference influence the physical experience of participation in creative social
activities? And (4) can multi-scalar mapping of these dynamic activities help to
explain spatial variation in the ability of youth groups to work affectively and
effectively with their communities? The research program will proceed through a
series of focus groups, mapping workshops and mapping surveys, coupled with
extended participant observation with youth networks in Medellín and Bogotá,
Colombia as well as course-based research activities in Philadelphia, PA. The
project's in-depth, participant-driven methodology will provide detailed
understanding of how youth are motivated to partake in creative social projects
in and through their bodies, including how sensations like movement
(kinesthesia) and observations of others' body movements and reactions enable
non-verbal communication and cooperative interest, how embodied activities shift
youth's sensation and perception of their internal material self
(interoception), and what limitations exist to motivation and collaboration via
the sensorial body.