* 1452725
* RSB/Collaborative Research: A Risk-Informed Decision Framework to Achieve Resilient and Sustainable Buildings that Meet Community Objectives
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Bruce Ellingwood, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2019
* USD 760,000.00

Strong winds, such as those produced by tornadoes and hurricanes, have resulted
in billions of dollars in damage annually and continue to threaten the safety of
building occupants. Much of the United States that is susceptible to these
hazards also has expansive soils, where slab-on-grade construction is
commonplace. A new type of modular residential building system, consisting of
precast concrete elements combined with light-frame wood sub-systems, including
a basement, will be investigated to achieve the following objectives: (1)
provide life safety for occupants by enabling them to shelter in the basement,
(2) utilize recycled sustainable backfill that will improve sustainability while
decreasing the chance of expansive soil damage to the above-grade portion of the
building, and (3) decrease the risk of tornado and hurricane wind damage by
providing a stiffer and stronger living area through the addition of precast
concrete elements. The building design will be optimized by considering how a
building should be designed to contribute to community resilience while
maintaining a prescribed level of sustainability and keeping homeownership costs
at a reasonable level. While an integrated building system of precast concrete
and light-frame wood components is not the norm in the current construction
market, it represents an opportunity to investigate a new type of system that
may reduce the cost of single and multi-family home ownership during the life-
span of the building and, at the same time, improve the quality of life from a
community perspective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the attributes
that make a community resilient will be de-aggregated to the building level to
facilitate development of the soil-foundation-structure-building envelope system
through a process that seeks to optimize building performance with respect to
resilience and sustainability goals. The resulting building performance criteria
will take into consideration common construction practices, while balancing
community preferences with individual-level risk perceptions. The optimization
will involve multiple objectives and constraints associated with specified
resilience and sustainability attributes. The research hypotheses are that it is
possible to develop risk-informed performance criteria for individual resilient
and sustainable buildings exposed to a spectrum of natural hazards that can be
matched to community goals, that building attributes can be identified and
parameterized to support this general risk-informed decision framework, and that
the risk-informed decision framework supporting these performance criteria for
individual buildings will enable enhanced community resilience and
sustainability by targeting public and private investments to manage life-cycle
costs. This research will enable the following outcomes: (1) development of a
decision framework that allows community resilience goals to be reflected in the
design of complete building systems through de-aggregation of identified
community attributes, (2) ability to relate building performance criteria to
influencing factors at the community level and integration of sustainability
metrics and risk perceptions of decision makers, (3) creation of a new concept
for hybridized construction that is balanced between resilience and
sustainability objectives, (4) application of the decision framework to a range
of test bed problems to demonstrate its ability to handle different size
populations and demographic configurations, and (5) a student-centered learning
experience. The de-aggregation of the attributes that make a community resilient
and a building sustainable will enable a decision framework that addresses the
paradoxical issue of single building optimization for community objectives and
leads to practical performance-based criteria for an innovative building system.
This approach will facilitate a new generation of improved performance-based
building standards to achieve community resilience and sustainability goals.