* 1452971
* CAREER: An online global monograph of Magnaporthales - evolution, taxonomy, biogeography and biology of the rice blast fungus and allies
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2023
* Ning Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2023
* USD 719,390.00

Magnaporthales, an order of fungi with over 200 species, contains important
pathogens of cereals and grasses, including the rice blast fungus. The rice
blast fungus is the most destructive disease of rice, which is a staple food
source for about half of the world's human population. Despite their scientific
and economic importance, Magnaporthales fungi have not been studied
comprehensively, and the diversity, taxonomy and evolutionary relationships of
Magnaporthales species remain unsettled. There is no consensus on which
scientific name to use for these important pathogens, and this impedes
communication among scientists, animal and plant health inspection services, and
other user communities around the world. Recent major changes in the
international naming system for fungi have added to the confusion of names and
distributions for these fungi. This project will generate molecular data and
evolutionary analyses for the understudied species that will be presented in a
comprehensive monograph on the Magnaporthales, which will available online to
researchers and the broader user communities worldwide at no cost. This research
will facilitate future work on Magnaporthales systematics, genetics,
biodiversity, plant protection and quarantine
feasibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objectives of this project are: 1)
to sample from the understudied grassland ecosystems, and to discover, diagnose
and describe new taxa in Magnaporthales using both traditional culture-based and
next-generation metagenomic sequencing methods; 2) to build a robust
phylogenomic tree for all Magnaporthales taxa; 3) to use the phylogeny in
improving our understanding of the evolution of pathogenicity and other traits
of Magnaporthales fungi; 4) to produce a global monograph of Magnaporthales; and
5) to train students and postdocs to conduct research across the entire spectrum
of these activities. The project includes studies of phylogenomics, evolution,
taxonomy, biodiversity, organismal biology and metagenomics. The global
monograph of Magnaporthales will include: traditional morphological
descriptions, diagnostic illustrations, distribution maps, host-range
information, interactive identification keys to genera and species, as well as
DNA barcodes. Genomic sequences for the representative taxa also will be linked
to the cyber-enabled monograph. The PI will engage high school, undergraduate
and graduate students, and a postdoctoral fellow, with a focus on teaching and
training of underrepresented minorities.