* 1452538
* CAREER: Applying phenotypic variability to identify resilient Acropora cervicornis genotypes in the Florida Keys
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2021
* Erinn Muller, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2021
* USD 706,687.00

Caribbean staghorn coral was one of the most common corals within reefs of the
Florida Keys several decades ago. Over the last 40 years disease, bleaching,
overfishing and habitat degradation caused a 95% reduction of the population.
Staghorn coral is now listed as threatened under the U.S. Endangered Species Act
of 1973. Within the past few years, millions of dollars have been invested for
the purpose of restoring the population of staghorn coral within Florida and the
U.S. Virgin Islands. Significant effort has been placed on maintaining and
propagating corals of known genotypes within coral nurseries for the purpose of
outplanting. However, little is known about the individual genotypes that are
currently being outplanted from nurseries onto coral reefs. Are the genotypes
being used for outplanting resilient enough to survive the three major stressors
affecting the population in the Florida Keys: disease, high water temperatures,
and ocean acidification? The research within the present study will be the first
step in answering this critically important question. The funded project will
additionally develop a research-based afterschool program with K-12 students in
the Florida Keys and U.S. Virgin Islands that emphasizes an inquiry-based
curriculum, STEM research activities, and peer-to-peer mentoring. The
information from the present study will help scientists predict the likelihood
of species persistence within the lower Florida Keys under future climate-change
and ocean-acidification scenarios. Results of this research will also help guide
restoration efforts throughout Florida and the Caribbean, and lead to more
informative, science-based restoration activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acropora
cervicornis dominated shallow-water reefs within the Florida Keys for at least
the last half a million years, but the population has recently declined due to
multiple stressors. Understanding the current population level of resilience to
three major threats - disease outbreaks, high water temperatures, and ocean
acidification conditions - is critical for the preservation of this threatened
species. Results from the present study will answer the primary research
question: will representative genotypes from the lower Florida Keys provide
enough phenotypic variation for this threatened species to survive in the
future? The present proposal will couple controlled laboratory challenge
experiments with field data and modeling applications, and collaborate with
local educators to fulfill five objectives: 1) identify A. cervicornis genotypes
resistant to disease, 2) identify A. cervicornis genotypes resilient to high
water temperature and ocean acidification conditions, 3) quantify how high water
temperature and ocean acidification conditions impact disease dynamics on A.
cervicornis; 4) determine tradeoffs in life-history traits because of resilience
factors; and 5) apply a trait-based model, which will predict genotypic
structure of a population under different environmental scenarios.