* 1452916
* CAREER: 2D Nanoelectronic Devices Integrated with Nanofluidic Structures for Biosensing Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Xiaogan Liang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The ability to detect and quantify low-abundance biomolecules is critical for
clinical diagnostics and drug development. For example, such ability can be used
for early-stage cancer diagnosis. Surface plasmon resonance is the standard
method for such analysis, but it still suffers from drawbacks such as low
sensitivity, poor detection limit, and slow analysis process. These limitations
motivate the efforts to create new nanoscale electronic biosensors for realizing
efficient, label-free, multiplexing biomolecule quantification at low detection
limits. The work described in this proposal aims at constructing a new biosensor
by integrating emerging two-dimensional (2D) nanoelectronic materials into
nano/microfluidic structures. Such a 2D-material-integrated nanofluidic
biosensor, if successfully realized, will greatly advance the capability for
illness-related biomarker detection and quantification. The work proposed here
holds significant potential for realizing new cost/time-effective immunoassay
chips that can address global needs for new capabilities for diagnosis and
stratification of diseases and US industrial competitiveness. Beyond advancing
fundamental academic research capabilities, the proposed education/research-
integrated program will provide relevant knowledge and technical skills to a
broad range of people, including K-12 students/educators, undergraduates,
graduates, as well as students from underrepresented and minority groups.
Specifically, the proposed education/outreach program will include a new after-
school program for instructing K-12 students to learn basic knowledge related to
microfluidic/electronic-integrated biosensors; extending the collaboration with
academic programs at the University of Michigan to provide research
opportunities for undergraduates; introducing new topics related to nanofluidics
and nanoelectronics into graduate/undergraduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed device-oriented research seeks to
leverage superior electronic/structural properties of 2D materials and unique
electrokinetics in nanofluidic devices for enabling low-abundance biomolecule
detection at single-molecule levels. To realize this goal, the PI will overcome
a series of challenges related to nanoelectronics, nanofluidics, and biosensing.
Specifically, (i) create a nanofabrication method capable of integrating
nano/microfluidic structures with nanoscale 2D transistors and producing large
device arrays, therefore enabling the device miniaturization and multiplexing
capability required for the envisaged bio-assays. (ii) Create a
biofunctionalization route for realizing the selective functionalization of
nanoelectronic sensors and an electrokinetic approach for efficiently
transporting/concentrating target molecules toward the sensing areas, which are
critical for preventing non-specific adsorption and obtaining a low limit-of-
detection required for low-abundance molecule quantification. Non-specific
adsorption will be further suppressed through using specific blocking buffers
and optimizing nanofluidic architectures. (iii) Obtain a comprehensive
understanding of the complex interactions between nanoelectronic and nanofluidic
characteristics of the proposed device, which include electrokinetic transport
rates of biomolecules toward sensors, effects of nanofluidic environments on
biomolecule concentration distributions, dynamic behaviors of transistor
parameters in response to bioconjugation processes, and relationship between the
dissociation constant of an analyte-receptor pair and the sensor's detection
limit/specificity. (iv) Develop multiplexed device arrays capable of rapidly
determining multiple biomolecule concentrations. The proposed biosensor, if
successfully created, can firstly serve as a generic device platform for
analyzing a broad range of molecular interactions. Especially, it can be used
for measuring the affinities and kinetics of various analyte-receptor pair
interactions with sensitivities down to femtomolar concentrations (or single-
molecule-level detection limits). Such knowledge will greatly advance the
understanding of complex cellular events, such as the development of cancers and
immune-responses. The large arrays of the proposed biosensors would eventually
allow for rapid (minute-scale sample-to-result elapsed times), highly precise
(single-molecule-level detection limits) immunoassay for clinical diagnostics.
The detection principle of the proposed biosensor is completely electrical and
does not need any off-chip optics required for conventional fluorescence-based
assays. This will enable stand-alone device capability required for point-of-
care applications.