* 1452948
* CAREER: Using C. elegans to Understand how a Fundamental Cellular Stress Response is Integrated into a Tissue System at the Interface with the Environment and to Improve Education
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2022
* Keith Choe, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 756,070.00

Very little is known about how extracellular matrix barriers and inducible
cytoprotective transcription factors function together to detect environmental
stress and promote homeostasis. The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has a single
antioxidant/detoxification response transcription factor named SKN-1. The
principle investigator of this award has made the surprising discovery that
osmotic and genetic distortion of the cuticle activates several SKN-1- dependent
cytoprotective genes and that SKN-1 strongly influences cuticle structure and
expression of cuticle remodeling genes. The central hypothesis for the research
in this CAREER award is that SKN-1 is activated by a cuticle associated
environmental stress sensor and that SKN-1, in turn, directs or modifies cuticle
synthesis or remodeling during stress or aging. Nematode parasites damage 80
billion dollars worth of crops each year, burden animal husbandry, and infect
1/3 of humans world-wide. Therefore, this project is an important starting point
for a basic understanding of how SKN-1 and the nematode cuticle interact to
influence resistance to pesticides, anti-parasitic drugs, and plant and animal
host-immune responses. A new advanced research course will train a generation of
beginning scientists on molecular genetics research and foster collaboration
among seven C. elegans laboratories studying a broad range of topics. Additional
outreach activities will directly improve STEM training and literacy for high
school students and teachers, many from predominantly underserved
communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SKN-1 and its homologs are master regulators
of cytoprotective genes that promote stress resistance and longevity throughout
the animal kingdom. The study objectives are to leverage molecular and genetic
approaches in C. elegans to: 1) identify osmotic signaling from the cuticle to
SKN-1; 2) investigate whether, why, and how SKN-1 modifies the cuticle; 3)
develop C. elegans learning modules and a teacher workshop; and 4) teach an
advanced C. elegans research course for beginning scientists from seven labs.
Biochemical assays, RNA interference approaches, transcript profiling,
histologic and ultrastructure analyses, and genetic studies will be performed to
achieve these objectives. Osmolarity is one of the most broadly shared and
ancient forms of homeostasis. This project will provide novel genetic and
molecular insights into osmo-sensing and signal transduction. For many of the
same reasons that it is a powerful research model (e.g., simple and inexpensive,
but permits sophisticated genetic and molecular approaches), C. elegans has
tremendous unmet potential in education. The PI will collaborate with an
institutional pre-collegiate training program and high school teachers to
develop and implement learning modules and training workshops that utilize RNA
interference and green fluorescent protein technologies to stimulate interest in
gene regulation and demonstrate broad application of basic research. Results
from the studies will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at
regional and national scientific meetings.