* 1452886
* CAREER: Trajectories of ecosystem recovery in coastal wetlands under a changing climate: connecting the dots with student research, citizen science, and classroom data analyses
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Marcelo Ardon-Sayao, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2017
* USD 279,624.00

Coastal wetlands provide important ecosystem services, such as flood protection,
habitat for wildlife, and water quality improvement. Despite the recognition of
their valuable services, local land use and global climate change are driving
the loss of coastal wetlands. This project will advance our understanding of
coastal wetland structure and function, while answering questions relevant to
management that can help prevent wetland loss. This project will determine the
capacity of North Carolina coastal wetlands to continue to provide ecosystem
services under a changing climate. The project will engage middle school
teachers, undergraduate and graduate students, and citizen scientists in long-
term ecological research by creating new curricula, field based exercises, a
graduate course, and a citizen science mobile device application. The project
will support three graduate students, five undergraduate students, and four
middle school teachers over five years. The project will also advance the career
of a young investigator that is a member of an underrepresented group. This
research will adapt recently developed methods to identify 'early warning
signals' that will indicate the resilience of forested wetlands and marshes to
drought, storms, and increased salinity and help forecast the loss of coastal
wetlands. The project will use remote sensing, tree ring analyses, field surveys
and experiments, and new statistical methods to examine the effects of droughts,
storms, and increasing salinity on forested wetlands and marshes. The proposed
research will: (1) Determine the spatial extent, time frame, and biogeochemical
consequences of forested wetland retreat using a combination of remote sensing
and tree ring and sediment cores. (2) Measure the recovery trajectory of
ecosystem processes to disturbances in coastal wetlands in different ecosystem
states and with varying degrees of management. (3) Test the resilience of
ecosystem processes to disturbance in coastal wetlands by conducting a 5-year
field experiment.