* 1452039
* Collaborative Research:   Coupled Geochemical and Geobiological Characterization of Dissolved Organic Matter Oxidation to Carbon Dioxide
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* David Arscott, Stroud Water Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Organic molecules dissolved in aquatic ecosystems represent the largest pool of
organic matter transported through river networks and one of the most complex
mixtures on Earth. The processing of these organic molecules by microorganisms
resulting in their conversion to CO2 contributes to the large exchange of CO2
between the aquatic environment and the atmosphere with implications for global
climate change. Despite the importance of this phenomenon, as much as 80% of the
organic carbon susceptible to microbial metabolism remains unidentified. The
goals of this study are to use recent advances in low through-put, ultra-high
resolution analytical organic chemistry to identify and characterize the pool of
biologically reactive molecules and to extend the ability of commonly used high
through-put, low-resolution optical techniques to provide information about the
temporal dynamics of these molecules in river networks. The outcomes of this
research could advance the understanding of the link between the composition of
organic molecules in a river network and the evasion of CO2 to the atmosphere,
answering the question of what makes an organic molecule biodegradable. The
researchers will work with educators who teach K-12 students in making processes
that are invisible to the naked eye accessible and compelling as the educators
develop curricula that depict the influence of molecular geochemistry and
microbial geobiology to life on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
hypothesize that: (1) biologically reactive but molecularly uncharacterized
humic molecules account for the majority of dissolved organic matter that
bacteria respire to CO2; (2) the constituents of colored or fluorescent
dissolved organic matter can be associated with groups of individual molecular
formulas through the use of advanced statistical analyses, including Spearman
Rank and 2-D correlation analyses; and (3) dissolved organic matter molecules
that are ubiquitous across distant watersheds span the biological reactivity
spectrum, while molecules unique to a watershed are predominantly reactive and
readily converted to CO2. The research will be performed in streams within 2
well characterized river basins, one in the temperate forests of Pennsylvania
and one in the tropical evergreen forests of Costa Rica. Water samples will be
collected under baseflow and storm flow conditions, across stream orders and
seasons, and separated into biological reactivity classes using stream water-fed
plug flow bioreactors. The samples will be molecularly characterized using
Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass Spectrometry as well as UV-
visible absorbance and fluorescence spectra with excitation emission matrices.
The successful completion of the research should advance the ability to use
optical sensors to understand carbon flow through river networks and advance the
understanding of the molecular nature of the dissolved organic matter that fuels
the evasion of CO2 from streams and rivers to the atmosphere.