* 1452488
* CAREER: Adaptive Acoustic Metamaterials with Switchable Functionality: A Design Platform Enabled by Nonlinearity
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Stefano Gonella, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 01/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant is
to enable the design of innovative nonlinear metamaterials for acoustic and
elastic wave control with reversible switching between pre-designed sets of
complementary functionalities. The wave control strategy is enabled by the use
of internal material nonlinearities as a vehicle to couple the qualitative
dynamic response of the material system to distinguishing characteristics of the
impinging wave. The approach will result in the first comprehensive and
versatile platform to design broad families of programmable metamaterial
architectures that can reconfigure their response to different external tuning
parameters, or autonomously adapt their performance to evolving operational and
environmental conditions. This functional switching is achieved without
macroscopic shape or size changes in the material systems, thereby allowing
their use as integrated structural elements. The approach is well suited for
important engineering applications including vibration control, blast
protection, sound manipulation, and cloaking of underwater vehicles and
structures. The project will promote the use of laser vibrometry for dynamic
testing of structures with complex geometries, and will develop new
visualization-based teaching tools for simplifying the learning experience in
the fields of structural dynamics and acoustics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research strategy revolves around the idea of nonlinearity-induced modal mixing.
Through the generation of higher harmonics, the dynamic response of a nonlinear
crystal can undergo jumps across the multiple available wave propagation modes;
as a result, the system experiences a blend of mode shapes and displays a
behavior that is typically associated with high-frequency regimes even while
subjected to low-frequency excitations. The reversible activation and
deactivation of nonlinearity is obtained either via external parameter tuning or
as a spontaneous response to changes in the amplitude of excitation. The
research team will model a broad spectrum of candidate metamaterial
architectures, including granular crystals and soft cellular materials, with the
double scope of identifying optimal configurations and providing a mechanistic
insight in the observed phenomena. Experimental tests using a 3D laser
vibrometer will be conducted to validate the theoretical findings and assess the
measurability and magnitude of the induced wave manipulation effects.