* 1452169
* CAREER: Enabling Enhanced Communication through Human-Machine-Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Cara Stepp, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2020
* USD 537,538.00

The problem of low information transfer rates (ITR) is a critical one for people
with severe speech and motor impairments, who must rely on augmented and
alternative communication (AAC) to interact with other people. The PI's goal in
this research is to develop new technology that will enable severely paralyzed
individuals to communicate in a manner that is as fast and reliable as human
speech, which would transform their lives by enabling greater independence. To
this end, she will bridge the fields of AAC and human-machine interfaces (HMI)
in order to develop tools that are fast and clinically viable in a two-pronged
approach. She will explore surface electromyography (sEMG) as a control
methodology to improve communication fluency for AAC device users, by developing
algorithms to automatically determine the best placement for facial sensors to
detect residual muscle movement in the head and neck. And she will overcome low
ITR by improving HMI control through other modalities (e.g., gaze) in "dynamic
interfaces" that automatically optimize for a given user's capabilities, and
which also incorporate phoneme-based and text-based inputs.

Project outcomes will enhance our fundamental understanding of head and neck
sEMG control, and will improve the functionality of communication via HMIs
regardless of input modality. Specific research goals include: Development and
testing of algorithms to automatically determine optimal user-specific neck and
face sEMG sources as an input modality for HMI control; Determining the
usability and relative performance of phonemic (speech) and orthographic (text)
AAC interfaces; Development and testing of methods for dynamic interfaces that
speed HMI control based on predictive speech production models and additional
input modalities. The project will also include a novel educational component
that will enable cross-pollination between the fields of communication sciences
and engineering. The PI will sponsor an organization for undergraduates in
communication sciences and biomedical engineering at Boston University, where
students work in teams to develop custom solutions for individuals with
communication impairments to fill the gap between state-of-the-art HMI research
and commercially available AAC devices. And she will develop novel educational
design content, based on case studies, for a new course for first-year
undergraduates and for outreach to K-12 students.