* 1452595
* CAREER: Evolutionary Data Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Stratos Idreos, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 01/31/2020
* USD 550,000.00

We are entering the era of data deluge. Businesses, sciences and government
organizations collect overwhelming amounts of data on a daily or even hourly
basis. But data becomes useful information (knowledge) only after proper
analysis. Data systems drive the analysis of data by servicing query requests.
The way a system stores, accesses and processes data, defines the architecture
of the data system. Over the past five decades the database research community
and industry have designed numerous data systems architectures; a fundamental
problem now is that there is no single data systems architecture that fits the
ever-increasing kinds of data driven applications and scenarios. This is a
critical problem for numerous reasons. First, anyone in need of a data system is
confronted with numerous complex options, e.g., relational databases, NoSQL,
NewSQL, column-stores, row-stores, and the list goes on. This overwhelming array
of choices makes bootstrapping data-driven applications difficult and time
consuming, requiring expertise often not accessible due to cost issues (e.g., to
sciences or small businesses). Furthermore, many new kinds of data-driven
applications are characterized by (a) varying workload patterns, i.e., varying
patterns in data and queries and (b) new requirements in terms of interactive
query processing and data exploration, i.e., when in need to quickly find useful
knowledge in a big pile of data without a predefined exact goal. What these
cases have in common is that one cannot tell a priori which data system
architecture is the best fit as there is no predefined or fixed workload. An
application may change over time and then a different architecture will be best.
In short, this is a "one size does not fit all world" which sacrifices
flexibility for performance. However, as sciences and businesses increase their
ability to collect more data and thus create more data-driven applications and
scenarios, this model does not scale. The goal of this proposal is to maintain
the performance characteristics of the "one size does not fit all" world, while
adding the flexibility to effortlessly support emerging applications and varying
workloads.

The researchers will study a new class of database architectures, evolutionary
data systems, which evolve continuously to match the application's needs. The
way data is stored and the way data is accessed changes to accommodate the data
and query patterns. There is no need to make a priori complex set-up decisions,
locking an application to a fixed system architecture that may soon become
suboptimal due to workload changes. Instead, one starts using an evolutionary
system simply by identifying the data. Then, as new data and queries come in,
the system evolves such that its architecture matches the properties of the
incoming workload. At any given point in time, an evolutionary system may employ
multiple competing solutions down at the low level of database architectures
such as using various combinations of data layouts, access methods and execution
strategies. Then "the fittest wins" and becomes the dominant architecture until
the environment (workload) changes. The researchers will demonstrate solutions
that can seamlessly evolve (back and forth) between different architectures,
i.e., from key-value stores to column-stores, from read-optimized to write-
optimized systems and from structured to schema-free systems. In addition, the
researchers will develop solutions for several key challenges: how systems
evolve, management of overheads, how to extend an evolutionary system as well as
comparison with brute force approaches.

For further information see the project web site at:
http://daslab.seas.harvard.edu/evosys