* 1452889
* CAREER: An Interdisciplinary Study of Learning: Student Understanding of Linear Algebra in Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Megan Wawro, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 07/31/2022
* USD 779,686.00

Title:&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: An Interdisciplinary Study Of Learning: Student
Understanding Of Linear Algebra In
Physics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consistent with the national charge for
the advancement of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
disciplines, the National Research Council's (NRC's) report (2012) "Discipline-
Based Education Research: Understanding and Improving Learning in Undergraduate
Science and Engineering" describes a need for interdisciplinary studies
regarding learning and the transfer of knowledge for students in upper division
STEM courses. This project will contribute towards this national need for basic
research by investigating students' learning and understanding of key topics and
ideas from linear algebra - a fundamental mathematics topic for STEM majors in
multiple disciplines - as applied to undergraduate upper-division physics. In
connection with this, the project will provide new insights in improving
undergraduate education within the STEM disciplines. The results of this study
will not only extend the research base of what is known about student
understanding of mathematics and physics across disciplines, but it will also
contribute to pedagogical implications at the undergraduate level by leveraging
the synergy between mathematics and physics education research on teaching and
learning. The project will also contribute to the development of innovative
assessment instruments for undergraduate mathematics learning.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate research and education to investigate
eigentheory and related key ideas from linear algebra within the framework of
quantum physics. The research focal points will be to: (1) characterize the
various ways in which students reason about and symbolize concepts related to
eigentheory in quantum physics; (2) determine how students' language and symbols
for concepts related to eigentheory compare and contrast across mathematics
contexts and quantum physics contexts; and (3) explore how instructors' use of
language and mathematical symbols relates to students' understanding,
symbolization, and interpretation of eigentheory in quantum physics. To help
foster and diversify the research investigations, data will be collected from
the quantum physics courses at three academic institutions: Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University; Oregon State University; and the University of
Maine. The project will also produce and vet a conceptually oriented multiple-
choice extension (MCE) assessment instrument for eigentheory. Included in the
research to address items (1)-(3) listed above will be textbook analysis, the
MCE eigentheory instrument creation and implementation, interview protocol
development and implementation, classroom observations and interviews with
participating instructors, and bridging sequences development. To enhance and
expand the overall infrastructure and collaborations for research and education
across disciplines, this instrument together with research results from the
investigations will be disseminated widely through research and practitioner
publications, presentations, and workshops in mathematics and physics education.