* 1452967
* CAREER: Elucidating conformational landscapes in proteins using high-sensitivity pulse EPR spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Stefan Stoll, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/29/2020
* USD 637,226.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Stefan Stoll of the University of Washington is
developing high-sensitivity instrumentation and methodology for the
determination of the nanoscale structure of flexible proteins. The flexibility
of proteins is a prerequisite for their activity, but is difficult to quantify
experimentally. The methods developed in this project provide tools to
accurately probe fundamental chemical processes underlying life at the molecular
level. The broader impacts include potential benefits to human health, as the
molecular-level knowledge attainable through the methods developed in this
project furthers our ability to rationally design new drugs and
therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on instrumentation
development of high-sensitivity pulse electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectroscopies for biostructural applications, specifically double electron-
electron resonance (DEER) spectroscopy. DEER is a pulse EPR technique that can
quantitatively determine protein conformational distributions and flexibility by
measuring nanometer-scale distances between spin labels attached to proteins.
The research approach consists of three thrusts: (1) Develop a pulse EPR
spectrometer with improved sensitivity for DEER and related methods to be able
to accurately measure conformational landscapes in proteins and complexes even
at very low concentrations. (2) Quantify protein conformational change in a
small soluble ligand-binding protein to benchmark the methodology and to gain
insight into conformational dynamics and equilibria involved in ligand binding.
(3) Elucidate the conformational landscape in fragments of a cardiac ion
channel, in order to test and validate the methodology on a more complex
membrane protein system.