* 1452211
* EAGER: Building a Starting Core for No-Boundary Education and Research Network
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Xiuzhen Huang, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The team proposes a new concept of "No-Boundary Thinking (NBT)", which emerged
from an NSF EPSCoR-supported Workshop in Bioinformatics at Little Rock, Arkansas
in 2013, as well as follow-on meetings and discussions. The aim is to build a
starting core to further explore no-boundary thinking in education and research
through an innovative network of universities and projects. No-boundary thinking
will be the key connection among a distributed set of researchers, students and
science challenges. This project is a joint effort of 24 faculty members from 19
institutions from 13 states, with the represented research areas including
fundamental life sciences, biology, agriculture, biophysics, biochemistry,
engineering, computer science, mathematics, and
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of NBT is no-boundary problem
defining. The goal is to educate and train students with NBT through development
of a "No-Boundary Education and Research Network". The team will Identify 3-4
no-boundary research problems for which current interdisciplinary research or
bigdata approaches do not work well and apply no-boundary thinking in problem
defining. The focus is problem defining, not just problem solving. Then,
students will learn with a no-boundary thinking approach through research
projects and problems, which should lead to an understanding of the roles of
data, approaches, and infrastructure/High Performance Computing in problem
defining and solving, and provide them with opportunities to learn to integrate
data collection, approach design, and infrastructure to address scientific
research challenges. Outreach will include a national meeting to discuss the
impacts of current interdisciplinary research and big-data to science and
education, and how to further promote NBT nationally.