* 1452339
* An Experimental Study on the Role of Pore Fluid Pressure During Slow Slip in Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Melodie French, French                  Melodie        E
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 168,834.00

Dr. Melodie French has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral
fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the University of
Maryland, College Park. She will use experimental methods to characterize the
effects of pore fluid pressure on slip processes in subduction zone rocks.
Geophysical observations indicate that high fluid pressures occur in regions of
subduction zones characterized by slow slip, which is behavior intermediate
between standard seismicity and steady creep. Despite the fact that slow slip
likely increases shear stress on the seismogenic plate boundary and may
contribute to the nucleation of destructive earthquakes, little is known about
the effects of very high fluid pressure on slip processes at the relevant
pressure and temperature conditions. The results of this research program will
constrain the processes that cause slow slip in subduction zones. Undergraduate
students will be included in the execution of the research as part of their
senior thesis requirements. In addition to working with students on the
technical aspects of the research, Dr. French will mentor students in fulfilling
requirements that develop their scientific communication skills.

Seismic hazards associated with slow slip include (1) triggered seismicity along
the updip seismogenic portion of subduction zones and (2) downdip and landward
propagation of a seismic slip event. The focus of this work is to determine the
micro-mechanisms of slow slip, and to provide constitutive relations that can be
used to model seismic hazards associated with slow slip events. To accomplish
these goals, Dr. French will conduct a set of experimental studies to document
faulting and slip under the temperature and stress conditions that slow slip
occurs. The effects of both high and increasing pore fluid pressure on failure
rates, stress drops, and strength will be determined in antigorite-rich
serpentinite. A set of novel experimental stress paths will be employed to test
published and new hypotheses on the stabilizing effects of pore fluid. In
addition to the experimental work, detailed microstructural analyses will
characterize and quantify the deformation mechanisms that cause slow slip
behavior.