* 1452943
* CAREER: Understanding Endothelial-Mesenchymal Transformation in the Heart Valve
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2021
* Kartik Balachandran, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 10/31/2021
* USD 508,000.00

This NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award will study the
mechanisms by which the cells of the heart valve can change from a stable,
endothelial state into a mobile, mesenchymal state, via a process termed
endothelial-mesenchymal transformation (EndoMT). Heart valves are sophisticated
structures that function in a complex mechanical environment, directing flow by
opening and closing more than three billion times during a normal human
lifetime. The valve is unique within the circulatory system in its ability to
undergo EndoMT, a process that is crucial to the growing embryo, and also to how
the valve adapts to the mechanical environment to maintain itself and to respond
to injury. The award will support fundamental research into the mechanobiology
of EndoMT to determine how friction of the blood, flexing of the valve and other
mechanical effects change the biological response of the living tissue. Broader
impacts include the development of new treatments for valve disease and
improving tissue engineering strategies to build new heart valves. The
educational component is centered on exposing underrepresented high-school
seniors to multidisciplinary engineering research at a week-long summer camp.
The camp will integrate theory and practice of mechanobiology and artificial
tissue fabrication, and is planned to increase student awareness and interest in
science and engineering.

The research objective of this award is to advance the understanding of the role
of cellular structure, architecture and mechanical milieu in the regulation of
EndoMT. The following objectives are to be undertaken to understand this
phenomenon: (I) Engineer a microfabricated system that applies defined strain,
fluid flow and substrate stiffnesses to valve endothelial cells. (II) Examine
the EndoMT process in these cells under mechanical and architectural regimes
that mimic early development, homeostasis, growth, injury and disease using live
imaging. (III) Examine the mechanoregulatory genes that control the EndoMT
process via pharmacological inhibition or gene deletion. This award will provide
important insights into the mechanoregulation of cellular phenotype and
plasticity in the cardiac valve, and the key signaling molecules that control
these processes.