* 1452666
* Linking geochemistry and geomicrobiology in selenium-contaminated soils
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Carla Rosenfeld, Rosenfeld               Carla          E
* Fellowship Award
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Carla Rosenfeld has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral
fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the University of
Minnesota, the Smithsonian Institution National Museum of Natural History, and
the University of Maryland, College Park. For her research, Dr. Rosenfeld will
combine microbiology and advanced analytical chemistry to understand the
biological processes that influence selenium (Se) environmental impacts.
Selenium contamination is a global problem, with many regions afflicted due to
various anthropogenic activities. Microbial processes significantly influence Se
mobility and bioavailability, and of particular interest are microorganisms that
can remove excess Se from the food chain and water supplies. While microbial Se
transformations in anaerobic environments have been more extensively studied,
microbial interactions with Se in aerobic environments (i.e., the majority of
soil environments that host plant and animal life) are not well understood.
Clarifying what microorganisms are involved in Se biogeochemistry and how Se
contamination influences and is influenced by microbial diversity in aerobic
ecosystems is critical for understanding and predicting Se persistence and
environmental impacts. In addition to studying microbiological influences on Se
contamination, Dr. Rosenfeld will develop a hands-on, inquiry based
geomicrobiology investigation at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural
History for museum visitors and K-12 classes. Additionally, Dr. Rosenfeld will
mentor undergraduate and high school student researchers to develop and pursue
their own research projects.

This research will dramatically improve our ability to address Se contamination
by specifically linking Se in soils with microbial diversity and microbially
mediated Se transformations in aerobic environments. Dr. Rosenfeld will collect
soils from a Se-contaminated mine site as a function of distance from the plant
root of three different plant-types (non-, primary- and secondary-Se-
accumulators). Isolates of culturable Se-tolerant/transforming organisms will be
identified and their relative abundance within the entire microbial community
will be assessed. Culture-independent NextGen sequencing techniques will be used
to analyze soil microbial community diversity as a function of distance from
root surface, plant-type, and Se-content. Lastly, synchrotron radiation
techniques will help to assess the connection between (micro)biological
components and microscale Se chemistry as a function of plant-type.