* 1452820
* CAREER: Foundational Aspects of Discrete Optimization: Theory and Algorithms
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Amitabh Basu, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant aims to break new ground in
the fundamentals of discrete optimization. Discrete optimization provides
solution methods for solving large-scale decision making problems where a
combination of discrete choices (e.g., should this power generator be on or
off?) and non-discrete choices (e.g., what concentration of a chemical is to be
maintained in a chemical process) have to be made to optimize a given objective
(such as minimize costs, or environmental impact of a process, or maximize
profits). These solution methods are widely applied in a diverse suite of
scientific, technological and logistical problems, and are grounded in
mathematical theory that has been built in the last 50-60 years. However, these
techniques are showing signs of stagnation in the face of some of the complex,
large scale problems of today?s modern applications. Significantly new ideas at
the foundational level are required to keep pace. This grant aims to meet this
challenge by making breakthroughs in the mathematical theory, and leverage that
theory to forge more efficient tools for discrete optimization. Part of the
relevant mathematics is suitable for introducing motivated high-school students
and undergraduates to this research. It hopes to showcase the beauty and
enormous applicability of mathematics to solve important problems, and attract
students to pursue careers in scientific, technological, engineering and
mathematical fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical breakthrough will be
achieved in three aspects of mixed-integer optimization: (i) cutting planes,
(ii) duality theory and, (iii) linear programming components of the branch-and-
cut paradigm in mixed-integer optimization solvers. A part of the effort will be
focussed on translating techniques developed for linear problems to the
nonlinear setting. Techniques from convex geometry, geometry of numbers,
functional analysis, algebraic topology and real algebraic geometry will be
employed in tackling (i), (ii) and (iii). Many of these connections are recent
insights made in the last 5-6 years and have proved extremely useful in
resolving decades-long open questions in the field of mixed-integer
optimization. There is a lot of hope that such rapid progress can be continued
by deeper investigation of the connection between these areas of mathematics and
mixed-integer optimization. In the process, fresh dialogue can be facilitated
between mathematicians and engineers through this research. The overall
technical contribution will be towards developing the theoretical foundations of
linear and nonlinear mixed-integer optimization, and provide radically new ideas
for cut generation and branching in solvers.