* 1452635
* CAREER: Entanglement, Pairing and Superfluidity at the Interface between Atomic and Nuclear Physics.
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Joaquin Drut, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Many areas in physics are entering an information age, with computation at the
forefront of research. One of the key notions in this new era is the quantum-
mechanical property of entanglement, which characterizes how quantum particles
are correlated with each other purely as a result of their quantum-mechanical
nature. The influence of inter-particle interactions on entanglement is a
challenging question, as interactions (in particular strong ones) drive phase
transitions and are responsible for intriguing properties of matter.
Information-related quantities, such as the entanglement entropy, play an
essential role in quantum phase transitions and are central to seemingly
disparate areas, such as quantum computation and black holes. The PI will
leverage computational progress in atomic, nuclear and condensed matter physics
to pursue a deeper understanding of strongly interacting superfluid systems at
the interface between those areas, where entanglement properties remain largely
unexplored. This project will provide precise predictions of entanglement and
its correlation with thermodynamic observables across a wide variety of systems.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be engaged at multiple levels, with
emphasis on an ongoing curriculum and track-developing collaboration with the
University of North Carolina at Pembroke.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
for a precise characterization of a wide range of strongly coupled, non-
relativistic, few- and many-fermion systems of relevance to atomic, molecular,
and nuclear physics. The systems considered here will include multiple spatial
dimensions, free space, harmonic traps, and weakly to strongly interacting
regimes. Thermodynamic properties (static, dynamic, structural, and pairing
correlations) and their connection to entanglement (entanglement entropies,
mutual information) will be determined using non-perturbative approaches,
including numerical lattice field theory methods as well as semi-analytic
expansions (e.g. the virial and operator-product expansions). To this end,
advanced computational methods and algorithms will be implemented and new
approaches will be explored to calculate entanglement entropies. The methods
(codes, scripts, technical notes) and the data (from auxiliary field
configurations to the physical results) will be made available online.