* 1452613
* CAREER: Fundamental Studies of Cross-Kingdom Aggregate Biofilms for  Energy-Efficient Wastewater Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Caitlyn Butler, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2022
* USD 526,287.00

1452613&lt;br/&gt;Butler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Fundamental Studies of
Cross-Kingdom Aggregate Biofilms for Energy-Efficient Wastewater
Treatment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wastewater treatment is becoming increasingly
energy-intensive as treatment requirements become more stringent. A process
known as Algal-Sludge Granule treatment uses larger particles which can be
separated from the wastewater and, because of their size, settle more easily.
The proposed process would occupy a smaller treatment footprint than many algae-
based wastewater treatment systems and has the potential to be used as a
bioenergy feedstock. The merits of this process make it compelling for adoption
as a secondary treatment approach. However, this novel process is still in the
early stages of development and much more knowledge is needed to understand the
aggregation and function of these cross-kingdom granular biofilms. The PI will
work with a teacher from the Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech to build
technical literacy in hearing-impaired students, using the highly visual
components of Algal-Sludge Granules to teach concepts of mass-balance,
environmental contamination and water and wastewater treatment. During the grant
period as many as 60 undergraduates per year (300 total) could participate in
new project-based learning and there is potential for more than 500 hearing-
impaired students to gain exposure to environmental engineering curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research will demonstrate: 1) the mechanisms
of initial granulation, 2) the structural integrity of different granule
morphologies and how physical characteristics relate to performance and
microbial ecology, and, 3) the resiliency of Algal-Sludge Granules under
conditions of stress. Before the discovery of Algal-Sludge Granules, using
granules cultivated with both microalgae and bacteria in treatment systems was
unprecedented. Large granules of phototrophs and bacteria are rarely observed in
the environment. This study is an investigation of the characteristic and
performance of a unique microbiological system where eukaryotes and prokaryotes
exist through symbioses. This fundamental investigation will improve the
understanding of cross-kingdom microbial interactions in a biofilm aggregate but
also provide valuable information to advance a promising treatment technology
towards implementation. At the point of initial granulation, the coordination of
bacteria and phototrophs, by correlating the expression of quorum-sensing
signaling molecules and lecithin proteins with dissolved oxygen concentrations,
will be studied. The physical characteristics of three common Algal-Sludge
Granule phenotypes by observing granule morphologies and measuring their yield
strength in response to physical stresses imposed by a nano-compression
instrument will be documented. The relation of the physical characteristics to
microbial ecology through DNA-based molecular techniques and performance of
different Algal-Sludge Granule phenotypes in bench-scale reactors will be
studied. The functional redundancy and diffusion resistance leads to Algal-
Sludge Granule resiliency under conditions of stress by investigating chemical
fluxes using liquid-ion exchange and amperometric microsensors and correlating
any changes in treatment performance to shifts microbial ecology will be
demonstrated. The resulting data will build knowledge that will help inoculate,
operate and validate Algal-Sludge Granule treatment, advancing Algal-Sludge
Granule process toward implementation. This study will also define the
relationships between phototrophs and bacteria in the context of meeting
wastewater objectives, which until now is largely unexplored.