* 1452557
* CAREER: Developmental Network Architecture Underlies Patterning Precision and Robustness
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,03/31/2022
* Angela DePace, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 03/31/2022
* USD 500,002.00

All animals begin as a single fertilized cell. During development, this cell
divides and its progeny turn on distinct subsets of genes to build different
types of cells like those in muscles, nerves and blood. This process is precise;
tissues and organs are the correct size and shape and they occur in the correct
position. This process is also robust; development unfolds accurately under a
wide range of environmental and genetic assaults. Yet changes to animal
physiology in disease or evolution are often due to alterations to development.
This award addresses this critical paradox: how does development both buffer
against change, and yet respond and adapt to change to produce new creatures?
With respect to broader impacts, fewer than 10% of entering life science Ph.D.
candidates will attain tenure-track academic jobs. Scientific training must
therefore include skills that are useful in academia, government and the private
sector. This award will support efforts to teach scientists how to communicate
effectively, which is a fundamental and universally valued skill. The principal
investigator will expand the scope of an innovative graduate course she directs,
tailor it for undergraduates, and make modular materials available online so
that other people can deploy it. This teaching effort will lead to a new
generation of scientists adept at communicating across disciplines and with the
public, and with skills that are highly valued in careers outside of academia.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The central hypothesis is that developmental precision
and robustness are encoded in the circuits of gene regulatory networks, and by
extension, the regulatory DNA that wires them together. By studying how such
circuits are built, and how they behave under perturbation, we can learn how
they can be precise, robust and yet evolvable. Shadow enhancers, distinct pieces
of regulatory DNA that drive the same target gene expression pattern, increase
the precision and robustness of developmental systems but the mechanism is
unknown. The DePace lab conducts their studies of gene regulatory networks in
fruitfly embryos because the rules governing development are extremely similar
between fruitflies and other animals, including humans, but fruitfly embryos
offer substantial experimental advantages for deciphering the underlying
principles. The DePace lab recently uncovered a pair of shadow enhancers in
fruitfly embryos that respond to the same regulator in opposite ways. This
project will interrogate the function of this novel circuit using quantitative
experiments and computational models. Aim 1 will determine how the activity of
the bifunctional regulator (a transcription factor) is controlled. Aim 2 will
determine how the circuit affects patterning precision and robustness in the
embryo. This research will: 1) probe the molecular mechanism of transcription
factor bifunctionality, a general problem in interpreting the genome, 2)
determine the role of a novel transcriptional circuit in embryonic patterning
precision and robustness and 3) establish a powerful model for studying the
mechanism and consequences of distributed regulatory DNA, which is a significant
but under-studied class.