* 1452228
* Student Travel Support for the 2014 Internet Measurement Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Mark Allman, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

The 14th ACM SIGCOMM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), sponsored by ACM
SIGCOMM and ACM SIGMETRICS, in cooperation with USENIX, will be held in
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, November 5-7, 2014. This award provides
funds to assist approximately 12-14 graduate students from US institutions to
attend this conference. IMC is the primary venue for presenting new research
results on collecting and analyzing measurements of the Internet. Attending
conferences such as IMC is of paramount importance for graduate students
pursuing research in the field. Authors have the opportunity to present their
work and all attendees have a chance to interact with many others performing
leading-edge research in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award serves to
widen the audience attending the Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), raising
the level of interaction and the potential for new collaboration, new
investigations, and higher quality research. Given the rising cost of
international travel, the grant will enable students (who otherwise do not have
sufficient funds) to attend the conference in Canada. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, by enabling students to attend who might not otherwise be able, will
increase the dissemination of the conference's research results to a larger and
more diverse audience. It also integrates research and education of graduate
students by allowing students to observe high-quality presentations and interact
with senior researchers in the field. By giving preference in grant awards to
women and minority students, it is hoped the participation among these
underrepresented groups will be widened. Furthermore, by advertising to a wide
range of colleges and universities, participants from a more diverse set of
institutions should be able to attend and benefit from the conference.