* 1452183
* CEDAR: Analysis of High Resolution Stratospheric Observations of Polar Mesospheric Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Amber Miller, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2019
* USD 237,746.00

A unique data set consisting of high-resolution optical images of Polar
Mesospheric Clouds (PMCs) observed from a stratospheric balloon platform in
January of 2013 will be analyzed. PMCs have proven to be excellent tracers of
dynamics in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT). Complex morphological
structures in their brightness distribution provide observable consequences of
the deposition of energy and momentum by atmospheric gravity waves (GW) in the
MLT. This high-resolution data set of optical images provides a unique window
into the poorly understood instability and turbulent dynamics on the smallest
scales (between roughly a meter and a few km). Through this analysis,
morphological features identified in individual images will be compared with
those predicted in numerical models in order to identify key dynamical features
present in the data on these small scales. Despite the limited field of view
available in these images, the analysis of this data set will enable the
identification of features that show a range of dynamics, providing evidence for
transitional scales and instability accompanying GW breaking or Kelvin-Helmholtz
instabilities. It will also enable the identification of features that place
bounds on the local Reynolds number, and therefore the background turbulence
level. This project will provide research opportunities for graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students.