* 1452646
* CAREER: The Ultimate Machine, Modeling neuromuscular control and musculoskeletal dynamics to improve human ability
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2022
* Katherine Steele, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 01/31/2022
* USD 636,266.00

This CAREER grant focuses on the development and evaluation of novel
computational tools to predict changes in human movement with exoskeletons.
Recent technological advances have created new exoskeletons, external devices
including orthoses and braces, which can apply passive or active torques to the
human body. However, the ability of these devices to make consistent
improvements in movement remains challenging. A fundamental knowledge gap exists
in how the human body responds and adapts when wearing these devices, hindering
performance and development. To overcome this gap, this research will use a
combination of musculoskeletal simulation and experimental motion capture to
create a conceptual framework for modeling and predicting changes in
neuromuscular control and musculoskeletal dynamics when wearing devices that
apply assistive, augmentive, or preventive torques to the human body. Two model
systems that apply external torques to the ankle will be used to experimentally
test and evaluate this framework: passive ankle foot orthoses for assisting
movement and active ankle orthoses for enhancing power. These systems will be
tested with individuals with stroke or cerebral palsy who commonly use orthoses
to improve movement, as well as unimpaired individuals. Prior simulations of
human movement have largely focused on the musculoskeletal system, but few
techniques exist to model neuromuscular control and muscle recruitment. Dynamic
simulation provides an ideal framework to specify and test different
neuromuscular control strategies and expand our ability to design optimized
exoskeletons. This research will develop algorithms to model neuromuscular
control with dynamic simulation, predict changes in human movement with
exoskeletons, and experimentally evaluate this new framework. All algorithms
developed will be shared in an open-source simulation framework, OpenSim, for
other researchers and educators to use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will provide the foundation to improve movement for individuals with
neurological disorders, such as cerebral palsy and stroke, and others who can
benefit from advances in wearable technology. The technical advances in
algorithm development and neuromuscular simulation will provide a new set of
tools for researchers and clinicians to use in the design, evaluation, and
prescription of devices to enhance human movement. To help train engineers who
can apply their knowledge to the complexities of the human body, a
multidisciplinary education program focused on human engineering will be created
at the University of Washington for students in engineering and medicine.
Students will participate in journal clubs, coursework, and design projects
where they will create open-source orthoses for individuals with disabilities.
We will also develop open-source outreach modules focused on human engineering
in partnership with local programs that encourage under-represented groups to
pursue careers in engineering, including women, minorities, and individuals with
disabilities. These modules will be shared on-line for other groups to use and
help encourage a diverse community of future engineers. Together this work will
help to accelerate the design and prescription of exoskeletons for individuals
with neurological disorders and promote a community passionate about enhancing
the performance of the ultimate machine - the human body.