* 1452337
* Experimental tests aimed at understanding debris flow initiation from runoff
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Marisa Palucis, Palucis                 Marisa         C
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 10/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Marisa C. Palucis has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the California
Institute of Technology. The initiation mechanisms and hazards associated with
debris flows generated through runoff are poorly understood, but are common in
areas recently burned by fire, and in semi-arid to arid regions with sparse
vegetation and an abundance of exposed bedrock. Dr. Palucis' investigation will
focus on examining two possible mechanisms that may initiate debris flows
generated by runoff, progressive transport of the sediment and elevated pore
pressures. The results will be used to inform about location (i.e. slopes) and
environmental conditions (i.e. grain size and discharge) leading to debris flow
initiation, which is needed for hazard mapping and assessment, especially in
fire prone regions of the world. The education plan will consist of developing
and implementing interactive desktop laboratories will be presented on a monthly
basis to K-8 students within the Pasadena Unified School District (PUSD). Also,
two undergraduate students will be mentored through Caltech's Summer
Undergraduate Research Fellows (SURF) program, where the students will design
and perform flume experiments over the course of 10-weeks.

The PI will conduct multiple flume experiments to investigate these two
mechanisms, where the flow discharge (and hence shear stresses on the bed),
grain size distribution (which may control pore pressure generation in granular
flows), and slope are tested independently. These experiments will provide a
valuable and robust dataset linking sediment supply characteristics and flow
hydraulics on steep slopes. The experimental data collected here will provide
one of the most detailed datasets to date on sediment transport modes and will
bridge the gap between data being collected in the field and experimental data.
Debris flows are a major geomorphic process in mountainous landscapes, though
most models currently do not account for debris flows as sediment transport
agents. Therefore, better definition of the parameter space describing debris
flow occurrence is a key ingredient for predicting landscape evolution over
longer timescales.