* 1452728
* CAREER: Directing Epithelial-Mesenchymal Tissue Self-Structuring and Remodeling With Multi-scale Mechanical Interactions and Principles of Mechanobiology
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Edward Sander, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 01/31/2021
* USD 508,000.00

The goal of this NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant is
to establish an integrated research and education program centered on
understanding how physical forces contribute to the initial formation and later
changes in epithelial-mesenchymal structures (EMS), such the bi-layered
epidermal and dermal structure of skin. These structures are present in most
body tissues and they are critical to tissue health. During the process of
tissue formation, cell-to-cell and cell-to-extracellular matrix interactions
combine to produce organized, functional tissues with EMS. Later in life,
however, these tissues have limited capacity to regenerate themselves in
response to injury, disease, or aging. Efforts to direct tissue self-structuring
and remodeling for medical purposes are progressing, but they are still hampered
by not knowing how the interactions between cells and matrix are coordinated
biochemically and mechanically to produce a healthy tissue. These interactions
are complex and produce behaviors that cannot be easily understood using a
simple approach. This research will provide an essential computer model that can
incorporate data and observations from different experiments into a unified
picture so that basic principles of mechanobiology can be understood and used to
help control tissue formation and remodeling. The project is expected to produce
new discoveries and insights on the role of physical forces in epithelial-
mesenchymal interactions in skin. The knowledge gained and tools developed may
also be broadly applicable and useful to other parts of the body where EMS
occur, such as blood vessels, lungs, intestines, and kidneys. Broader goals of
the project include generating more public awareness, understanding, and
excitement for how mathematics, engineering, and computer modeling can be used
to simplify complex biological processes, particularly those that involve
mechanical forces. Research findings from this project will be put into learning
modules accessible for young students from K-12 in collaboration with the
University of Iowa outreach programs. Research will also be put into
undergraduate and graduate biomedical engineering courses, and into a publically
accessible and freely downloadable multimedia iBook with live cell imaging and
computer simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In vitro time-lapse imaging
experiments on keratinocytes and fibroblasts will be used to develop and tune a
multi-scale computational model for understanding and predicting how physical
forces drive self-structuring and remodeling of EMS in skin. This will be
accomplished by: (1) quantifying the effect of substrate stiffness, composition,
&amp; loading environment on mechanosensing and the self-assembly process of
keratinocytes; (2) developing a mechanistic network-based model of
mechanosensing keratinocytes that interfaces with an existent multi-scale model;
(3) testing the hypothesis that mechanical crosstalk between keratinocytes and
dermal fibroblasts influences self-structuring and EMS formation in an
engineered skin system; and (4) extending the cell model to include 3D
fibroblast-driven remodeling.