* 1452510
* Motor Control of Flight Maneuvers
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Michael Dickinson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 742,057.00

Based on the number of extant species, insects are arguably the most successful
group of animals on earth and the ability to fly is central to their eminence.
Although past research has made great progress in understanding the basic
aerodynamic mechanisms employed by insects, we know much less about how these
animals control the motion of their flapping wings, which is the basis of their
remarkable agility. Insects such as flies are endowed with only a dozen or so
tiny muscles at the base of the wing with which to control wing motion. This
research project will use a combination of genetic and optical techniques to
directly observe how insects use their muscles to adjust the flapping pattern of
their wings. The investigations will help uncover one of the greatest mysteries
about these extraordinarily successful creatures and provide insight for the
design and fabrication of miniature mechanical devices such as insect-sized
flying robots. In addition, the outreach and training effort of the project will
include support of undergraduate research during the academic
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will focus on fruit flies (Drosophila
melanogaster), which are capable of rapid aerial maneuvers and are amenable to
many genetic approaches for recording and manipulating muscles and motor
neurons. In particular, by expressing the genetically-encoded, optical calcium
sensor GCaMP, the investigators will directly observe the activity of the entire
steering muscle system while animals perform visually-elicited flight maneuvers.
The functional role of muscles used for different maneuvers will be investigated
with high spatial and temporal resolution by combining electrophysiology with
high speed videography. The project will also explicitly test the role of
specific muscles using optogenetic reagents to activate motor neurons in intact
animals. Collectively, these approaches will determine how insects perform
flight maneuvers using such a limited set of muscles and expand our knowledge of
the general principles of motor control employed by a group of earth's most
successful creatures. Results from the studies will be disseminated through
publication in peer-reviewed journals and through presentations at scientific
meetings.