* 1452479
* CAREER: Information and Communication Technology Use in Communities with Limited Technical Infrastructures
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Susan Wyche, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2022
* USD 582,613.00

This project investigates the relationship between how communities with limited
technical infrastructures interact with computing and the discovery of
technological solutions to globally connected problems in human-computer
interaction (HCI). Technological advances in computing are traditionally
understood as coming from industrialized nations, or those that invest heavily
in technology research and development. For the U.S. to remain a global
innovation leader, it must significantly enhance the capacity and ability of
individuals and organizations to innovate. Based on an integration of human-
centered design and postcolonial theory, this research will lead to improved
models of innovation and advance our understanding of where and how
transformative ideas emerge. Through ethnographic investigation this work will
also fill a gap in knowledge regarding how constraints that exist in the U.S.,
but are more visible in sub-Saharan Africa, can motivate innovations in
computing. Centers of information and communication technology (ICT) innovation
are shifting in the world. Emerging economies, such as Kenya, are no longer
simply the recipients of innovative design from industrialized nations, but may
develop ingenious strategies to navigate economic and technical constraints when
using ICT. These workarounds are less obvious to those living in technology-rich
environments, but they have motivated innovative computing applications used
worldwide, such as mobile banking. Recognizing Kenya's rural residents and slum
dwellers as ICT innovators rather than passive adopters of Western technologies
has broader theoretical implications, including completely reimagining
approaches to design in HCI. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research plan includes a
series of theory-driven, ethnographic, and design-based studies that will result
in three outcomes: (1) Discovery of empirical evidence that provides a
fundamental understanding of how economic and infrastructural constraints
visible among sub-Saharan Africa's rural residents and urban slum dwellers
affect computing use and can influence innovative design for the rest of the
world. (2) Improving upon two models of innovation using the empirical evidence
as an intervention in a series of design-based studies to assess and compare the
effectiveness of these models to yield design recommendations in these areas:
sustainable HCI, collapse informatics in situations such as power outages,
Internet data management, and crowd work and entrepreneurship. (3) Advancing the
design workbook method by developing and evaluating a portfolio of conceptual
designs that explore new practical possibilities raised by results from the
ethnographic and design-based studies. Researchers based in the U.S. and Kenya
will assess the potential to translate these ideas into marketable realities. An
integrated education plan will provide students with international research
experience and opportunities to develop new technologies that target global
problems.