* 1452163
* CAREER: Role of geometry in dynamical modeling of human movement: Applications to activity quality assessment across Euclidean, non-Euclidean, and function spaces
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2022
* Pavan Turaga, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2022
* USD 552,000.00

Human movement is a complex multi-dimensional dynamical process arising out of
complex non-linear interactions between various muscles and joints as well as
interactions with external forces and objects. These physical factors often
impose certain analytical constraints on movement data obtained from external
sensors, often with associated geometric representations. Examples of such
representations abound in the area of human activity analysis, where several
contemporary and emerging human shape and movement representations such as
silhouettes, stick-figure sequences, orientation signals, and optical- flow have
intricate signal spaces, often described in the language of Riemannian geometry.
The research thrusts focus on foundational methods for extracting meaningful
dynamical attributes that will dovetail into the application thrust. The
application centers on computational modeling of qualities of physical
activities from low-fidelity sensing infrastructure, which is an important
component for technology-mediated physical rehabilitation and preventive
interventions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Classical vector-valued signal processing
and machine learning has had a large impact in the area of understanding and
modeling human activities, but their applicability is significantly limited when
it comes to signal-spaces with non-Euclidean geometry. This research project
aims to advance a new class of robust, non-parametric dynamical modeling
approaches, which will extend from classical vector-valued observation spaces,
to finite-dimensional Riemannian manifolds, as well as to infinite-dimensional
function-spaces. In order to be general enough to account for various geometric
spaces as mentioned here, a framework that is free of restrictive assumptions on
parametric forms of dynamics is needed. Further, integrating dynamical analysis
with Riemannian geometric theory allows the analysis to extend to several
feature spaces including depth maps, shape sequences, stick-figures, and
orientation data, without re-defining the fundamental models for activity
analysis.