* 1452114
* A Pilot Project: Inquiry-based science learning using cultural heritage materials and other locally accessible resources
* EDU,EES
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Valinda Carroll, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 01/31/2017
* USD 255,728.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Historically Black Colleges and
Universities Undergraduate Program has identified STEM teacher preparation as
one of its priorities and is committed to funding innovative models to support
STEM teacher preparation and professional development. With support from the
National Science Foundation, the professional development program at Hampton
University will implement comprehensive strategies designed to transform STEM
teaching and learning in an effort to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields. The one-year pilot study, designed to
assist high school science teachers with developing inquiry-based learning
activities, will impact a large population of minority students and provide
opportunities for collaboration and career advancement for teachers. This
project has the potential to be a model for increasing the number of minority
students pursuing STEM degree programs and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to enhance the abilities of teachers to provide inquiry-
based learning activities for their students by: 1) augmenting curriculum
offerings to increase teachers' inventory of teaching activities, materials and
tools; 2) increasing teachers' knowledge of STEM education; and 3) establishing
collaborative networks with HU professors. It is expected that this project will
enhance the teachers' content knowledge and expose them and their students to
new concepts using materials related to their lives, history and culture. The
inquiry-based activities manual, a product of this program, will be disseminated
widely and thus benefit a large population.