* 1452840
* CAREER: Coherent Single-Photons for Quantum Information
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2022
* Edward Flagg, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 700,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Condensed Matter
Physics program in the Division of Materials Research, the Physics at the
Information Frontier program in Physics and the EPSCoR program. Quantum
computation and communication offer great potential benefits to processing power
and communication security by exploiting the non-intuitive properties of quantum
mechanics. Photons will play an active part in future quantum information
processing schemes, and semiconductor nanostructures called quantum dots are
likely candidates to act as photon sources. Currently, however, photons produced
by quantum dots are not suitable because of spectral diffusion experienced by
the dots. The goal of this research project is to identify, model, and establish
effective strategies to mitigate the factors responsible for spectral diffusion.
The project involves graduate and undergraduate students who are being trained
in optical and spectrographic measurement techniques, quantum optics, and
condensed matter physics. Also integral to the project is the development,
evaluation, and dissemination of an optics-related learning module for 4-H youth
groups in West Virginia. The optics learning module fills a gap in the physical
science curriculum available to 4-H group leaders, and will improve the
students' science literacy and increase the number pursuing science-related
careers. Volunteers from graduate and undergraduate physics societies are
involved in the development and testing of the learning module, whereby they
gain valuable outreach and educational experience that will help prepare them
for future public education efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Photons emitted by quantum dots are potentially important in
a number of quantum information processing applications, but because their
coherence is currently non-ideal, that potential remains severely limited. The
level of coherence of quantum dot photons is reduced by spectral diffusion due
to interactions between a dot and its local environment, specifically
fluctuations in the nearby charge distribution. In order to significantly
improve the degree of coherence of quantum dot photons there is a critical need
to identify and be able to control the environmental and external sources of
spectral diffusion in the dots. The goal of the research project is to
characterize the magnitude and timescale of spectral diffusion under different
experimental conditions, model the interaction of the dots and the environment,
and design photon sources with reduced or no spectral diffusion. The rationale
for this approach is that reducing or eliminating spectral diffusion in a
variety of situations is expected to enable the design of quantum dot-based
photon sources with significantly higher fidelity performance than is currently
possible in interference-based quantum information processing protocols. A
complementary outreach effort involves graduate and undergraduate students in
the design, evaluation, and state-wide dissemination of an optics-related 4-H
learning module.