* 1452718
* CAREER: Hierarchical Probabilistic Models for Networks with Rich Data in Scientific Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Aaron Clauset, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 01/31/2020
* USD 575,014.00

This project will create advanced algorithms for automatically extracting and
evaluating the hierarchical organization of real-world networks. Networks are a
ubiquitous feature of complex social and biological systems, including species
or genetic interaction networks, online social or offline friendship networks,
and more. Interest in networks now spans nearly every scientific discipline.
Increasingly, however, answering key scientific questions about complex networks
requires new algorithms that can automatically extract their underlying
organizational patterns from rich network data, and connect these patterns with
scientific hypotheses. This project creates computational methods that can, for
example, recursively separate a network's core from its periphery, distinguish
local and global connectivity patterns within a network, and relate these
patterns to auxiliary information about vertex attributes and connection
strengths and types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project will use
state-of-the-art probabilistic generative models to: (1) Create advanced
algorithms that automatically extract general forms of hierarchical patterns in
connectivity, in a manner that is readily interpretable by scientists; (2)
Create evaluation methods for distinguishing between alternative structural
patterns and for detecting random patterns; (3) Characterize their limitations
when applied to answer broad classes of scientific questions and data types,
and; (4) Apply these algorithms, in collaboration with domain experts, to answer
specific questions about the structure and function of real networks, for
example, interactions among biological species, gene recombinations in human
pathogenic species, and social interactions among humans. The results of this
project will generate new insights into a wide variety of socially and
biologically important domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to creating
advanced algorithms with broad applications across science, this project will
train new graduate and undergraduate students in cutting-edge research
techniques within the interdisciplinary field of network science, develop and
disseminate new educational material on network science, disseminate public-
domain software implementations of algorithms, and address real scientific
questions in collaboration with scientists from physics, biology, public health,
and statistics.