* 1452854
* CAREER: Finding Levers for Privacy and Security by Design in Mobile Development
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Katherine Shilton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,136.00

Mobile data are one of the fastest emerging forms of personal data. Ensuring the
privacy and security of these data are critical challenges for the mobile device
ecosystem. Mobile applications are easy to build and distribute, and can collect
a large variety of sensitive personal data. Current approaches to protecting
this data rely on security and privacy by design: encouraging developers to
proactively implement security and privacy features to protect sensitive data.
Although there are many technical innovations available to help developers
protect user data, adoption of these innovations is low. Reasons for low
adoption range from a lack of training in privacy or security design to the fact
that privacy-enhancing features and best-practice data security measures are
often expensive to implement, or even counter to business models that require
user profiling or monitoring. Low adoption of privacy and security protection
mechanisms is a social problem that inhibits a secure and trustworthy mobile
ecosystem. It is unknown what factors can motivate developers to implement
privacy or data security features when faced with disincentives such as longer
development timelines, markets for personal data, and tensions between data
protection and data-enabled services. Understanding developer decision-making is
central to addressing this problem: the decisions made by developers are
fundamental to enabling privacy and security by design to succeed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project 1) studies developers to discover work
practices that encourage privacy and data security by design; and 2) builds
tools to encourage such work practices. This project uses surveys and field
experiments to determine factors that motivate privacy and security by design.
It develops and test evidence-based toolkits for mobile developers to improve
privacy and data security in the mobile data ecosystem. The project asks the
following research questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. How do mobile application developers
define privacy and security by design?&lt;br/&gt;2. What practices in mobile
application development encourage developers to prioritize data protection?
&lt;br/&gt;3. How can development tools encourage developers to prioritize data
protection during design?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By answering these questions, the
project illuminates development culture, illustrates how developers understand
privacy and security needs, and discovers practices that prioritize privacy and
security. The project explains the impact of development practices on privacy
and data security outcomes, advancing knowledge in software engineering and
secure and trustworthy computing. Findings and products from this project
support the rapidly developing mobile technology sector in enabling privacy and
data security by design. Finding development practices that encourage privacy
and data security by design improves technology transfer of technical
innovations from the secure and trustworthy cyberspace research community, and
bolsters protections for this sensitive data.