* 1452923
* CAREER: Overcoming limitations to approximating combinatorial optimization problems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Alexandra Kolla, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 11/30/2018
* USD 394,199.00

This proposal seeks to develop a comprehensive understanding of the limitations
of approximation algorithms for combinatorial optimization problems.
Combinatorial optimization problems are of great importance to various areas
such as operations research, machine learning, VLSI design, computational
biology and statistical physics. The task of finding algorithms for
combinatorial optimization problems arise in countless applications, from
billion-dollar operations to everyday computing tasks. Many optimization
problems are NP-hard and thus cannot be solved exactly in polynomial time unless
P=NP. However, the majority of such problems are key elements to practical
applications where often, if the optimal solution is hard to find, producing an
approximate solution su;ffices.

The research proposed will study the limitations of approximation algorithms
posed by the Unique Games Conjecture and the limitations posed by the presence
of unlikely worst-case instances. The PI aims to design a methodology to
partially or fully overcome such limitations by addressing both of those
factors. The proposal outlines a challenging plan focusing on research in a
broad cross-section of spectral graph theory, convex optimization, multi-
commodity flows, and harmonic analysis. The contributions of the work described
in this proposal will have great impact on the theory of approximability as well
as real world problems for which efficient, exact algorithms will be provided
for semi-random instances and will naturally result in collaborations between
researchers across many different fields such as mathematics, theory of computer
science, industrial engineering, operations research and networking.