* 1452763
* CAREER: Neuromechanics of functional impairment of upper extremity following stroke and its effective restoration by retraining muscle activation patterns
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Sang Wook Lee, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,445.00

PI: Lee, Sang Wook&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1452763&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is a multi-year program of interdisciplinary research and
educational activities that investigate neurological and biomechanical factors
associated with functional impairment of the arm and hand post-stroke. While
devastating impact of stroke on both lower and upper extremity function has been
recognized, functional impairment of the upper extremity (arm and hand) is found
to be particularly more severe. Thus there is an urgent need for the development
of an effective strategy to reverse damaging impact on the upper extremity
functionality for stroke survivors. But complexity of neurological abnormalities
associated with the upper extremity impairment, along with its sophisticated
biomechanics, poses substantial challenges to understanding neuromechanical
processes associated with the functional impairment of upper extremity following
stroke. The novel experimental and modeling methods proposed in the study will
help clarify such mechanisms of the upper extremity impairment post-stroke, and
the outcome of the proposed project will be of great interest to scientists
studying neurophysiology and neuroscience of stroke, engineers designing
rehabilitative devices for stroke survivors, and physicians and therapists
treating them. More importantly, improved rehabilitation outcomes resulting from
the proposed novel training method will benefit patients as their quality of
life will be greatly improved. In addition, the proposed collaborative research
activities will strengthen the relationship between the Catholic University of
America and the nation?s leading clinics, the National Rehabilitation Hospital
and the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, and will provide students with
unique educational opportunities, including enhanced laboratory experience,
clinical work with patients and physicians, and hands-on work experience in
nation's leading rehabilitation hospitals. This award is being made jointly by
two Programs: (1) Biomedical Engineering, (2) General and Age Related
Disabilities Engineering, both in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental
and Transport Systems Division in the Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project attempts to elucidate key
aspects of the neuromechanical process of the upper extremity functional
impairment post-stroke, and to develop a novel strategy to improve upper
extremity functionality of the stroke patients. Accordingly, the first two aims
examine the following aspects of the functional impairment of upper extremity
post-stroke: 1) neurological abnormalities affecting multi-muscle control, and
2) biomechanical pathway that such abnormalities translate into functional
impairment. The proposed modeling methods clearly differ from existing
approaches, as neurological abnormalities in multi-muscle control will be
examined in a system perspective, rather than focusing on individual components
(aim 1); and the proposed biomechanical model is based on "force-based"
modeling, which contrasts to conventional "moment-based" modeling techniques
(aim 2). The knowledge gained from these aims will be utilized to pursue the
third aim of the project (aim 3), which is to develop biomimetic devices that
can effectively promote neural plasticity of patients; a new type of devices
driven by "exotendons", emulating human musculotendon anatomy, will be
developed, which will enable a unique rehabilitation training method, i.e.,
targeted assistance of impaired muscles (aim 4). This assistance technique
presents a new approach that focuses on restoration of muscle coordination,
which is fundamentally different from existing approaches that attempt to
restore kinematics, and is expected to greatly improve rehabilitative benefits
of the training. The pursuit of the proposed project will also provide unique
educational opportunities for students in the School of Engineering of the
Catholic University of America. Interacting with an interdisciplinary team of
engineers, physicians, and therapists, students will have clinical, hands-on
work experience in top-ranked rehabilitation hospitals. The investigator plans
to particularly engage students from underrepresented group (i.e., Hispanic
origin) in the research projects, for which they will work closely with patients
on "patient-specific" device design. Research topics covered by the proposed
project will also be incorporated into the curriculum. Furthermore, the
educational benefit of the proposed project will be extended to K-12 STEM
education via a series of "case-study" presentations by the undergraduate
interns to K-12 students within the District of Columbia Public School System.
The broad spectrum of topics addressed by this project, including biomechanics,
biological system modeling, neural signal/processing, and device design is
expected to greatly improve students' "hands-on" experience, and research
opportunities provided by the proposed activities will greatly help them prepare
for their careers as successful biomedical engineers.