* 1452669
* Collaborative Research: What's the question? A cross-linguistic investigation into compositional and pragmatic constraints on the question under discussion
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Mandy Simons, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 11/30/2019
* USD 81,998.00

The greatest value of language resides in its meaning, in the information that
is exchanged in discourse. This project is part of a broad scholarly effort to
find out how that meaning is determined, and to identify what inferences can be
drawn from what is said. Recent research on meaning in language, including much
published work by the four PIs on this project, shows that the meaning of a
sentence is dramatically affected by the context in which the sentence is
uttered. Specifically, the three-institution project team has shown in past work
how the meaning of a sentence is greatly affected by what question the speaker
seeks to address. The fact that a sentence meaning can only be fully grasped in
terms of the question the uttered sentence answers creates a problem because the
question addressed by a given utterance is typically implicit. So, often a
listener can only fully understand the meaning of an uttered sentence by
recreating the question that was answered. To do this, the listener must reason
from many available clues, for example the intonation used in the utterance, and
what is known of the speaker's intentions. The goal of this project is to
conduct empirical and theoretical work which will identify the process by which
implicit questions are revealed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work to be undertaken
in this project is of intrinsic interest in understanding human culture and
human communication, and also has significant practical applications, for
example in the field of Natural Language Processing. To build computers that can
understand and use language, the features that inform human language
understanding must be identified. The project also offers advanced training
opportunities for young researchers at US institutions, develops experimental
and other research methodologies that can impact a broad range of fields, and
analyzes a foundational problem in language which is related to strategically
valuable natural language technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is set
in the context of a Question Under Discussion model in which the context
incorporates a dynamically evolving stack of questions. The problem for this
model is to figure out what question is addressed by any given stretch of
discourse. Three types of constraint on the question will be explored cross-
linguistically: lexical constraints contributed by, for instance, focus
sensitive expressions and factive predicates, information-structural
constraints, including those imposed by intonation and cleft constructions, and
contextual constraints, such as Gricean principles. This goal is pursued by
expanding methodologies which the three-institution team has jointly pioneered
in previous work: a mix of experimental research, corpus-based studies of
naturally occurring utterances, and cross-linguistic fieldwork. The development
effort is spearheaded with English and Paraguayan Guaraní (Tupí-Guaraní) and
selective work is performed on other languages to test aspects of the work that
are particularly germane, including K'iche' and Kaqchikel (both Mayan),
Hungarian (Ugric) and Tagalog (Austronesian). Throughout the project, there will
be an emphasis on the development of data-collection methods appropriate for use
with theoretically untrained native speakers