* 1452061
* EAGER:  Modeling systemic risk: Finding precursors of emerging financial crises
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2015
* H. Eugene Stanley, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 08/31/2015
* USD 57,721.00

In our modern world, the critical infrastructure systems like electric power,
water supply telecommunications and banking and finance that affect all areas of
daily life are usually interdependent. Even though systemic risk is not unique
to markets and financial institutions, the far-reaching consequences from the
failure of a financial institution are in general much more significant than the
impact of the demise of a non-financial institution. The failure of individual
companies within a particular industry will not propagate throughout the
corporate system, but the failure of a one large bank can bring the economy to
the brink of disaster. This proposal will use tolls from economics, physics,
computer science and statistics to build a model that will monitor financial
systems and develop an early warning system for impending financial crises.

The goal of this project is to use concepts from complexity science and
interdependent network theory to create a signaling mechanism for potential
financial crisis cascades based on the complex interdependencies of different
economic and financial networks. The research will demonstrate short-range and
long-range correlations in interacting networks and identify and describe the
dependencies of different financial networks as a complex system. It will model
the cascading effect of a crisis using dependency links that connect the failure
of one network node to the failure of another network node. The proposal will
combine information from bank analysis, investor sentiments, sovereign debt and
regulatory frameworks to create monitoring system and a potential early warning
for the global financial system.