* 1452411
* CAREER: The structural basis of the multivalent readout of histone PTMs and PTM/interaction mediated modulation of nucleosome dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Catherine Musselman, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 970,868.00

Every eukaryotic cell contains a copy of the genome in its nucleus, but only a
subset of genes is turned on in any given cell at any given time. Proper
regulation of genes is critical in development and basic biological function
from the cellular to organismal level. The eukaryotic genome exists in complex
with proteins called histones. The histone/DNA complex is called chromatin and
is composed of repeating subunits called nucleosomes. Each nucleosome looks like
a spool wrapped with string in which the histones form the spool and a segment
of genomic DNA is the string. It is the way in which the DNA wraps the histone
core (called nucleosome structure) and the organization of the nucleosomes with
respect to each other that allows or restricts access to the underlying genome,
determining patterns of gene expression. This project addresses the fundamental
questions of how patterns of small chemical tags, termed post-translational
modification (PTM), are read-out by other proteins associated with chromatin
(called co-factors) and how this association may alter nucleosome structure to
affect precise regulation of downstream events. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy will be used to study a variety of nucleosome constructs to
determine how a specific model transcription factor associates with a nucleosome
containing different patterns of PTMs and how this association alters the
nucleosome structure and its dynamic behavior at atomic
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the education and
training of undergraduate and pre-and post-doctoral students both in the
classroom via courses instructed by the PI, as well as in the laboratory in
which they will carry out the project goals. In addition, the research team will
partner with the Iowa-based non-profit organization, the Workplace Learning
Connection, to establish an internship program in the laboratory for high school
students. Students in from Iowa City and surrounding counties will gain 45-90
hours of laboratory experience, working on various aspects of the project for
which they will receive high school credit. This program will provide students
with a tangible research experience in the basic sciences, and will also allow
the PI to establish mentoring relationships with them that are expected to last
well beyond their time in the laboratory. The investigator will continue these
activities to contribute towards increased participation in STEM areas, which is
imperative for the growth and stability of the United States economy as well as
our global competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The main objective
of the proposed research is to understand the fundamental and biologically
important mechanisms by which histone post-translational modifications (PTMs)
regulate chromatin structure. The investigator and her students will utilize NMR
spectroscopy and other biochemical and biophysical methods to investigate the
interaction of a model system, the BPTF PHD-finger-Bromodomain motif with
modified nucleosomes. The investigators hope to understand, in detail, how a
multi-domain motif recognizes PTMs at the level of the nucleosome, especially
how distinct patterns of PTMs across multiple histone tails are specifically
read out. In addition, through measurement of NMR relaxation parameters, they
will address the important questions of how histone modifications and effector
domain binding regulate the conformational dynamics of the nucleosome, likely
stabilizing or destabilizing conformational states that may be essential for
downstream function. This research will be fully integrated with a plan for
education outreach, focused on sparking interest of high school students in STEM
fields.