* 1452443
* CAREER: Sociolinguistic Structure Induction
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Jacob Eisenstein, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,995.00

One of the principal functions of language is to manage social relationships.
Yet much of our current language technology fails to account for how language
varies across social contexts, or how it depends on speakers' attitudes and
identities. As a consequence, existing language technology is brittle to
variation, particularly in non-standard dialects and informal social contexts.
This CAREER project is aimed at closing this gap, by building data-driven
computational algorithms and representations that are capable of identifying
social meaning in large corpora of text and speech. The scope of the research
includes local social variables, such as the address terms used to modulate
formality in conversation ("Ms", "dude"), as well as group-level dialect
differences across large communities. The expected results of the research
include: (1) new computational methods for studying language's social function
and, correspondingly, new insights; (2) leveraging these insights to enable new
computational linguistic applications, and to improve the robustness of existing
technology; (3) better engagement between computer science and the social
sciences in augmenting the tools that researchers require in order to access
large-scale naturally occurring social and linguistic data; and (4) improved
education on the analysis and interpretation of such data for undergraduate and
graduate students and the public at large.

This project uses unsupervised structure induction techniques to identify the
latent structures that connect linguistic and social phenomena. Sociolinguistic
structures can be mined from a diverse array of data sources, including social
media and digitized humanities archives. The project aims at interactions
between linguistic and social phenomena on multiple levels of detail: (1) macro-
level sociolinguistic structures, such as the intersecting social identities
that drive dialect variation; (2) micro-level sociolinguistic structures, such
as the array of address terms that modulate formality in dialogue; and (3)
dynamic sociolinguistic structures, such as the transmission of new words,
orthographies, and syntactic constructions across social media. Identifying
these sociolinguistic structures requires new learning algorithms and
representations, driven by theoretical insights from the social sciences. The
findings of this project are disseminated in venues that target both the
computational and social science communities, and the outreach and education
components include building new bridges between these communities.