* 1452593
* BRAIN EAGER: Functional dynamics of whole brain activity, behavior, and development from birth to adulthood
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2019
* Aravinthan D Samuel, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 11/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

From birth to adulthood, the brain and nervous system continuously expand and
develop to keep up with the growing body. Neurons and connections must
constantly be added or changed for any animal, including humans, to gain new
behaviors or retain old ones. This project is to develop and apply technology to
monitor brain and behavior from birth to adulthood of the roundworm C. elegans,
an important and widely studied model for neuroscience. A controlled environment
will be created where individual animals are born, roam freely, and grow to
adulthood while a microscope continuously scans the activity patterns of every
neuron in the worm's nervous system. Because of their rapid maturation (&lt;2
days) and small nervous system (&lt;302 neurons), the technology will be used to
answer fundamental questions about the developing brain. For example, how do
highly conserved behavioral patterns like forward and reverse movement emerge
from a nervous system that adapts to a body that grows ten-fold from birth to
adult? Coordinating the parallel development of brain, body, and behavior is a
problem faced by all animals. The accessibility of C. elegans will yield the
first comprehensive measurements of brain and behavior development in any
animal. Bringing together developmental biology, neurophysiology, and
neurotechnology will train young scientists who will work at the rich interface
between the physical and life sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A system will be
developed-- a motorized, rotating agar-coated ball-- upon which a nematode can
freely move without interruption as it feeds, grows, molts through four larval
stages, and becomes an adult. Throughout the nematode's life, the system will
record the activity of the entire nervous system visualized throughout its
optically transparent body using a confocal microscope that achieves video-rate
volumetric recording. These experiments will provide unprecedented datasets that
describe the behavioral life history of an individual animal in temporal
correlation with whole brain activity patterns. Comparison of these rich
datasets between wild-type animals and informative mutants will allow dissection
of a wide range of interconnected and shared processes in neurodevelopment,
regulation, learning, and memory. For example, understanding the developmental
progression of the motor circuit will be achieved by obtaining circuit-wide
measurements that describe how the 20-neuron motor circuit that drives the
forward and backward movements of the 0.1-mm long juvenile worm is expanded into
the 80-neuron motor circuit that drives the same movements of the 1-mm long
adult. These studies will illuminate system-wide changes in the nervous system
as it dynamically keeps up with animal growth.