* 1452800
* CAREER: Vapor Intrusion, Knowledge Brokers and Environmental Health - A Three-Dimensional Perspective
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2021
* Kelly Pennell, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2021
* USD 501,263.00

1452800&lt;br/&gt;PI: Pennell, Kelly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Vapor
Intrusion, Knowledge Brokers and Environmental Health - A Three-Dimensional
Perspective&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The average person spends 90 % of their time
indoors, which makes indoor air quality extremely important. There are many
sources of indoor air contamination, but one that is too often overlooked is the
transport of subsurface vapors into indoor air spaces (i.e. vapor
intrusion).Vapor intrusion is notoriously difficult to characterize because
extremely low chemical concentrations in indoor air are health-relevant and
modeling indoor air and subsurface environments requires sophisticated
approaches. This project will bridge the gap that exists between air transport
modeling of above ground spaces and subsurface spaces. The research introduces a
novel approach, where for the first time a volatile organic chemical vapor
intrusion model will incorporate atmospheric, indoor and subsurface
environments, in an effort to address unexplained preliminary field data
collected by the PI, as well as some recent reports of unexplained field
observations in the literature. Since vapor intrusion regulations are rapidly
emerging, new knowledge generated must be translated by scientists and engineers
to engage with key stakeholders, quickly and effectively. The educational goal
of this proposal is to train students as knowledge brokers to build bridges
between academic researchers and key stakeholders, such as regulators,
professionals, legislators, and community members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
modeling will involve computational fluid dynamic approaches. The field data
sets include variations in indoor air concentrations and soil gas concentrations
that are inconsistent with existing numerical models. Qualitatively, the field
data does not mimic the current conceptual understanding of vapor intrusion,
which makes current vapor intrusion models extremely limited in their ability to
describe field observations. The proposed model will advance the field of
environmental engineering by establishing important, and previously omitted
connections between the subsurface and aboveground domains that are relevant for
environmental fate and transport. Moreover, vapor intrusion characterization
also requires scientific knowledge from many different disciplines (e.g. soil
scientists, industrial hygienists, analytical chemists, environmental engineers)
to fully understand the matter. This project will develop a new vapor intrusion
modeling technique that combines subsurface fate and transport modeling with
mechanical and industrial engineering approaches for modeling aboveground air
transport. Research results will be integrated into vapor intrusion assessment
practices, so that exposure risks are assessed using accurate science-based
methods. The results of the research will be shared with relevant stakeholders
to ensure research results gain relevancy for policy decisions.