* 1452852
* CAREER: Role of Variations in Tissue Material Properties in Bone Fracture Behaviors
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Eve Donnelly, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2022
* USD 542,000.00

This NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will develop a
research and educational program that is expected to identify and predict how
the changes in bone tissue composition that occur in osteoporosis will affect
bone fracture behavior. The research program is expected to clarify the
underlying causes of osteoporotic fractures and help to identify diagnostic
indicators for them. This has important potential benefits for society and the
US economy because hip fractures are an important cause of disability, and
prevention of fragility fractures represents an opportunity to reduce a large
and growing segment of healthcare expenditures in the US. The educational
program is expected to benefit society by 1) enhancing infrastructure for
education by developing curricular materials for composite materials and
biomaterials, and making them available in a national database of teaching
materials and 2) broadening participation of underrepresented groups and
advancing discovery while promoting teaching, training, and learning by engaging
underrepresented minority undergraduates in long-term research
positions&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although osteoporosis is known to cause
pathologic changes in bone tissue composition that are statistically associated
with fragility fracture, the mechanisms by which pathologic changes in bone
tissue composition affect fracture risk are unknown. The objective of this
project is to mechanistically link the effects of pathologic changes in
microscale composition to fracture behavior at the millimeter length scale in
bone. In particular, we address microscale variation in material properties,
i.e., heterogeneity, which is emerging as an important contributor to bone
toughness. The research approach is to establish composition-nanomechanical
property relationships by mapping properties in cortical tissue from samples
that span a wide spectrum of macroscopic hip fracture morphologies. Then, the
research team will create finite element models of the specimens, incorporating
specimen-specific distributions of material properties to predict fracture
behavior at larger length scales. This work is transformative because it
integrates experimental orthopedic research with computational fracture
mechanics by combining patient data from the former discipline with the rigorous
modeling of the latter discipline.