* 1452122
* CAREER: Chemical Modification of Protein for Intracellular Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Qiaobing Xu, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 03/31/2021
* USD 498,899.00

Non-technical: This NSF CAREER award, funded by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to Tuft University, will study an effective
approach to deliver proteins intracellularly using a combination of lipid-based
nanoparticles and the chemical modification of proteins, for possible biomedical
applications. Many protein-based drugs in the market elicit their
functionalities by targeting specific cell surface receptors. There are a number
of diseases, including genetic diseases and cancers, which have the potential to
be treated through proteins with a target inside the cell. However, proteins are
usually not able to cross the cell membrane. Hence it is necessary to develop an
effective approach to transport the protein inside the cell safely and
efficiently. This proposal aims to develop lipid-based nanoparticles to deliver
the protein inside the cells. The protein will be chemically modified to
facilitate its binding with the lipid nanoparticle. Such a nanocomplex could be
efficiently taken up by the cells and the protein will then be released inside
the cell to reach the therapeutic targets. This enabling technology may open the
door for generating new therapies for a variety of diseases. These results are
anticipated to have a positive impact on the fields of nanomedicine and protein
based biotherapeutics. The research will advance our understanding of the
influence of chemical modification of protein on their physical properties and
biological functions. The proposed work will train high school, undergraduate,
and graduate students in the area of nanomedicine, and the outreach program will
provide an encouraging and collaborative learning program.

Technical: There are many protein-based drugs currently available, such as
cytokines, growth factors, and monoclonal antibodies. Most of these drugs
function by interacting or binding with specific cell surface receptors.
However, the delivery of proteins safely and efficiently to intracellular
targets remains challenging. An enabling technique that can facilitate the
efficient intracellular transduction of proteins or peptides will open the door
for generating new therapies for a variety of diseases, including some diseases
traditionally viewed as not treatable with drugs. This research will establish a
novel method for the reversible modification of proteins, and provide an
effective lipid-based nanoparticle formulation that could deliver proteins
intracellularly. Such a strategy for intracellular protein delivery could be
made universal by easily adapting this delivery method with other proteins or
peptides for the development of new drugs for different diseases. This research
is expected to advance our understanding of the influence of chemical
modification of proteins, on their physical properties, and biological
functions. The proposed work will train high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students in conducting scientific research in the area of nanobiotechnology. The
summer camp program will let the students gain the knowledge and experience of
nanobiotechnology, and stimulate the prospective students' passion and interest
in sciences at the early stages of their career development.