* 1452533
* I-Corps Teams: Agriculture/Hydroaquaponics Greenhouse Bioscience Smart Phone App Simulations &amp; Software and Science Education Curriculum Module
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2015
* En Cheng, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

There is a lot of technological interest over the past few years around growth
of lettuce and other hydroponic greenhouse plants, as well as fish in aquaria.
Managing the health of hydroponic gardens and aquariums are important to a
number of agricultural and fishing industries as well as universities, schools
and communities for educational and gaming purposes. The proposed product is an
innovative mobile and web-based App which connects to real plants and provides
gardening/farming intelligence at one's fingertips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today
data collection, management, and analysis of plant and fish health is very
inefficient for smaller growers, hobbyists and schools, and very costly for the
larger agricultural and fishing industries. The team has created a data
collection portal and social media platform to collect and share information
hydroponic and aquaponic farmers which should improve sustainable monitoring for
greenhouse foods and aquaria. The platform leverages a hydroponic sensor
developed at University of Akron that can detect hydrology, pH, electrical
conductivity, nutrient levels, and temperature of hydroponic plants and
aquaponic systems. The platform couples sensor data with computer simulations
and end-user applications to allow information access and guidance in real-time.
The platform developed includes social media connectivity over the web, where
users can network with other growers can share information and ask each other
questions. The platform will also generate visualizations of raw data to help
users track and analyze their hydroponic and aquaponic systems.