* 1452463
* CAREER: Semidefinite Programming (SDP) Extended Formulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Sebastian Pokutta, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 03/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will explore the
power of Semidefinite Optimization problems. This broad class of optimization
problems is fundamental to solving many real-world problems in engineering and
computer science as well as pivotal in analyzing the theoretical performance of
algorithms. Approaches based on semidefinite optimization often provide superior
algorithms yet at the same time the power of semidefinite optimization problems
is only partially understood. The leitmotif of this grant is: How best to
exploit the power of semidefinite optimization problems? This grant will relate
the structure of optimization problems to their representability as semidefinite
optimization problems and explore new ways of solving large semidefinite
programs efficiently. Moreover, it will relate semidefinite optimization to the
weaker but more easily solvable class of so called linear optimization problems.
Understanding the power of semidefinite optimization problems will advance both
our understanding of theoretical computational complexity as well as practical
feasibility of solving semidefinite optimization problems. As such the results
will positively impact both society and the U.S. economy. The tightly integrated
educational program will broaden the involvement of under-represented groups and
enhance engineering education.

The expressive power of semidefinite programs will be studied in the natural
framework of extended formulations, which is a unified way of denoting
optimization problems. Extended formulations have been highly successful for
linear programming, answering long standing open problems. However very little
is known about the more general and significantly more complex semidefinite
case. A major aspect of this CAREER grant is to study both the construction of
small semidefinite extended formulations, as well as strong lower bounding
techniques, potentially allowing for efficient approximations of hard
combinatorial optimization problems. Structured extended formulations derived
from hierarchies have proven to be powerful however it is not well-understood
when they can be outperformed by more general formulations. Closely related to
these aspects is the question regarding the relation between semidefinite
extended formulations and linear extended formulations. While linear programs
can be solved rather efficiently for largest scale instances, semidefinite
programs are notoriously hard to solve in practice, so that it can be desirable
to solve a linear approximation instead. It is known that this is not possible
in general, however for large classes of problems of interest linear programming
based approximation might provide sufficient guarantees and identifying
sufficient conditions is part of this grant.