* 1452549
* CAREER: Engineering Non-Growth Metabolism for High-Yield Biochemical Production
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Keith Tyo, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,000.00

1452549 &lt;br/&gt;Tyo, Keith E. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes are a promising
catalyst to convert renewable resources such as sugars and non-food biomass into
fuels and chemicals that are essential to our society. This proposal addresses a
key challenge to realizing microbial catalysts, namely increasing the rate and
efficiency that a microbial catalyst can produce the fuel or chemical. This
proposal will substantially improve microbial catalysts by investigating the
underlying enzyme regulation that limits catalyst productivity. While the
regulation of many enzymes has been studied in isolation, the systems-level,
condition-dependent regulation of enzymes has proved difficult to elucidate, but
this understanding will be essential to engineering high productivity microbial
catalysts. If successful, this proposal would impact the biomanufacturing
competitiveness of the United States by reducing production costs of a wide
range of drop-in replacements for diesel, jet fuel, and gasoline, as well as
chemicals used to make plastics, preservatives, flavors and fragrances, and many
other consumer products. The proposed work will also train students at the
undergrad, master and doctoral levels through research, a new course in Global
Health and Biotechnology and a certificate program in Sustainability and Global
Health. The certificate will provide future biological engineers with an
integrated understanding of biotechnology, challenging societal problems, and
tools for market analysis and risk. The certificate will be piloted in the
current proposal as a master?s program. This program will result in greater STEM
educational infrastructure and promote interaction of under-represented
minorities in low-income countries with STEM trainees. This will benefit our
global partners through increased scientific activity and collaboration,
technoeconomic analysis of country-specific societal challenges, as well as our
society by training globally minded engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
rationale for the proposed work is to enable high flux metabolism in the absence
of cell growth for highly productive non-growth-associated biomanufacturing
processes. Developing cells with fast, non-growth product metabolism would
remove a major barrier to a thriving biomanufacturing economy, by optimizing
substrate conversion to product without sacrificing substrate consumption for
cell growth. However, many biochemical products are growth-coupled, and in
general non-growing cells have low metabolic rates. The overall objective of
this proposal is to identify allosteric regulation and post-translational
modification (enzyme-level regulation) that represses glycolytic metabolism in
non-growth conditions. The central hypothesis is that enzyme-level regulation
dominates metabolic downregulation in stationary phase. The proposed work will
launch two new methods for engineering and characterizing metabolic regulation
and developing a systems-level understanding of non-growth central carbon
metabolic regulation. The proposal will generate minimal cells at the proteomic-
level, circumventing problems with genetic deletions. The proposal will also
develop a method for rapid, targeted degradation of proteins to engineer
bioconversions with near optimal yields by knocking down byproduct enzymes. The
method will enable new biological studies, as it will be useful for making
conditional mutants to perturb biological systems in new ways. The second method
will identify rate-limiting enzymes, based on thermodynamics, and thus focus
engineering efforts on specific enzymes. The developed workflow will determine
if reactions are near equilibrium (non-rate-limiting) or away from equilibrium
(rate limiting) for a broad range of industrially relevant conditions. The novel
workflow will be deployed to study central carbon metabolic regulation to garner
a systems-level perspective on regulation of organic acid and terpene
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biotechnology and
Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems
and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.