* 1452902
* CAREER: Harnessing Endogenous Defense Systems as Genetic Tools for Microbial Communities
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2022
* Chase Beisel, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2022
* USD 621,686.00

The goal of this CAREER project, funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology
Program in MCB and the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program in
CBET, is to make genetic tool development in non-model microorganisms a simple
and straightforward process. The projected approach is to harness common defense
systems as the basis for developing genetic tools for diverse microbes. While
defense systems naturally reject foreign DNA, these systems have the potential
to be harnessed as standard tools to efficiently introduce recombinant DNA and
to perform genetic manipulations. If successful, the resulting tools could
revolutionize our ability to study and engineer members of microbial
communities, in turn impacting areas ranging from improving crop health to
combatting insect pests. In conjunction with the proposed research, the project
will develop a new laboratory course on genome engineering as well as equipping
local community centers in Southeast Raleigh with science and engineering
activities to engage underprivileged youth in the surrounding
neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The long-term goal of this
research is to develop standardized approaches for genetic tool development in
microorganisms. This research project tackles two of the most formidable
challenges: efficiently transforming recombinant DNA and manipulating gene
sequence and expression. The working hypothesis is that the restriction-
modification systems and CRISPR-Cas systems native to a microorganism can be
harnessed to overcome both challenges. To explore this hypothesis, the project
will investigate how recreating the methylation pattern of a host bacterium in
Escherichia coli can bypass the host's restriction-modification systems. In
addition, the project will investigate the extent to which the host's native
CRISPR-Cas systems can be employed for genome editing and transcriptional
regulation. Three microorganisms common to the human gut microbiota, a data-rich
community, will be investigated. Two of these microorganisms, Eubacterium
rectale and Prevotella stercorea, come from abundant phylogenetic groups lacking
any genetic tools, whereas the third, Escherichia coli, has extensive tools and
thus serves as a useful starting point for the projected work.