* 1452164
* Integration of Developmental and Metabolic Signals in Meristematic Proliferation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/16/2014,07/31/2015
* Xuelin Wu, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 07/31/2015
* USD 96,700.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Most of the cells within one's body are in one of the
following states: they either keep dividing to generate more cells, which is
called the undifferentiated state; or they assume their final fate as specific
types of cells, such as a skin cell or a bone cell, and they are called
differentiated. For a body to function properly, all the cells need to be kept
in their respective mode. If undifferentiated cells differentiate at the wrong
time, there would be too many or too few cells to carry out the function of the
specific organ. On the other hand, if differentiated cells randomly become
undifferentiated and start dividing again, they can grow into cancers.
Therefore, it is important to learn how cells are kept in one state, or how they
switch between the two states, when the undifferentiated cells are allowed to
grow in numbers. The goal of this research is to answer these questions in
plants. This is because nearly all organs in higher plants are derived from the
structures called meristems, within which the continuous presence of stem cells
serves as the source of development, after germination. In addition,
differentiated plant cells can dedifferentiate and form meristems. For example,
one can use plant cuttings to grow new plants. And most importantly, it has been
shown that many basic mechanisms controlling cell division and differentiation
are similar in most organisms. Recent studies show that for stem cells and
undifferentiated cells to divide, the organism needs to have sufficient
nutrients, including simple sugars. This project investigates how metabolic
sugars control the decision by plant stem cells to divide. The successful
completion of this work will elucidate new components in plant meristem
regulation, and lead to subsequent studies that will be aimed at linking
developmental signals and nutrient sensing with the final cell cycle decisions
in the meristematic tissues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The work
proposed in this study answers one of the most fundamental questions in tissue
proliferation in plants, and the results from this study can potentially lead to
better understanding of mechanisms controlling tissue proliferation in all
multicellular organisms. Thus, this project has enormous potential to address a
number of priority national needs. The results from this study will be published
in scientific journals and presented at research conferences, and the plant
materials generated from this study will be made available for the research
community. During the course of the described project, broad and systemic
training will be provided to both graduate and undergraduate students, with an
emphasis on involving minority students. Additional efforts will be made to
foster high school students for their interest in science and research during
the summer months.