* 1452475
* CAREER: Structured Indoor Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Yasutaka Furukawa, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 01/31/2018
* USD 239,030.00

Many objects around us are associated with certain functions. We use a switch to
turn on a light, push a button to call an elevator, and open a door to enter a
room. While 3D digital mapping is getting increasingly more attentions due to
the rapid advancements in the 3D reconstruction techniques and the 3D sensing
hardware, current methods are merely optimized for geometric fidelity and lack
such functional information. This project discovers rules governing indoor
scenes from a database of indoor 3D models, and then develops an algorithm to
reconstruct functional indoor 3D models. High fidelity 3D models, if equipped
with functional information, would facilitate fundamentally new applications
that influence our lives at a much deeper level. The developed technologies have
many different applications, from helping indoor navigation to assessing
compliance with building codes, accessibility codes, and energy efficiency
levels. The broader impacts of the project include architecture, civil
engineering, urban geography and sociology, real estate, and transportation. The
research of this project is well integrated with the education. The education
plan includes an interdisciplinary course with Sam Fox School of Design & Visual
Arts at Washington University, and co-developing a K-12 teaching module with a
local high school teacher, which is estimated to impact 2,500 high school
students.

The central idea of this research is to discover structural elements
constituting an indoor scene, together with their hierarchical and functional
relationships. For example, a building consists of stories, each of which
contains rooms, each of which contains windows. Doors connect rooms, and an
elevator door is a passage connecting different floors. First, the project
defines a novel structured scene representation together with its rigorous
structure grammar. Second, the project derives a principled new structured
reconstruction algorithm that follows the rules in the structure grammar. Third,
the structured model representation and reconstruction algorithm open up new
opportunities to enable a highly tunable reconstruction system. This project
develops a system that is capable of enforcing richer classes of geometric
constraints far beyond existing methods, and controlling the properties of an
output model effectively to meet the demands of specific applications directly.
The developed technologies can be transformed to other geometry reconstruction
and shape extraction problems, such as 2D shape segmentation, 3D outdoor
architectural modeling, and 4D dynamic scene reconstruction.