* 1452000
* CAREER: Spatial Foundations of Symbolic Numeracy Skills in Young Children
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Elizabeth Gunderson, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,227,559.00

Spatial skills strongly predict STEM achievement in children and adults. This
project, led by a researcher at Temple University, aims to understand the
relationship between spatial and numerical skills at a more fine-grained level,
among pre-k through 4th graders, with the ultimate goal of harnessing this
relationship to improve math achievement. This project (1) investigates how,
when, and why spatial skills influence numerical skills; (2) examines how
spatial and numerical skills develop among children at risk for under-
representation in STEM fields, namely girls and students from low-socioeconomic-
status (SES) backgrounds; and (3) establishes causal relationships between
spatial and numerical skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish goals (1) and
(2), Study 1 uses a two-year longitudinal design, with students from a range of
SES backgrounds starting in pre-k, 1st-, and 3rd-grades. Researchers assesses
students twice a year, measuring multiple aspects of spatial skills (e.g.,
mental rotation, proportional reasoning, spatial working memory), numerical
skills (e.g., cardinality, arithmetic, fraction concepts), and number line
knowledge, a "bridge skill' that integrates space and number. Reading
achievement is assessed as a control measure. The researchers hypothesize that
initial spatial skills will predict growth over time in numerical skills; that
spatial skills will be most important for numerical skills when new number
concepts are first introduced; and that number line knowledge will help to
explain the relations between spatial and numerical skills. To accomplish goal
(3), Studies 2-4 use randomized experiments to improve spatial skills and number
line knowledge, testing the hypothesis that improving these skills leads to
improvement in numerical skills. The project also looks at potential gender
differences and individual differences in spatials skills that might predict
differences in numerical skills. The project integrates the research and
educational activities both through university teaching and mentoring as well as
through the establishment of work circles with practicing teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project identifies specific skills and training
techniques that increase children's numeracy skills, which may be especially
important for girls and children from low-SES families. This foundational
research builds a strong basis for the development of curricular interventions
aimed at improving math learning and STEM representation in at-risk children.