* 1452367
* REU Site: RE-ICE: Research Experiences in Integrated Computational Entomology
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Eamonn Keogh, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 03/31/2018
* USD 389,550.00

As participants in the University of California-Riverside (UCR) REU Site
program, 'Research Experiences in Integrated Computational Entomology,' students
engage in full-time research for ten weeks in an active interdisciplinary
research community. In addition to immersion into research, students begin the
summer with an introduction to the research tools of computer science,
engineering and entomology at UCR, where they learn basic skills in computer
science, data statistics, and lab/field work in entomology and biology. REU
students are mentored by two faculty members, one from the Computer Science
Department, and one from the departments of Entomology, Ecology or Biology. The
students work on projects that leverage the power of computers to solve problems
in entomology. Examples of projects include flying insect classification using
images/videos, using sensors to quantify the foraging behavior of bees, and
monitoring insect sounds as a measure of biodiversity and the health of the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UC Riverside is one of a handful of accredited
R1 research-intensive universities in the US designated as Hispanic Serving
Institutions, with a student population that includes almost 30% Hispanic and
approximately 50% first-generation college students. This REU Site program
emphasizes recruitment and retention of underserved minorities, and provides
skills in public dissemination of research findings. The project will not only
provide STEM research opportunities for ten students each year, but will also
promote STEM education throughout communities with low numbers of college-
educated scientists and engineers, by training students who will become actively
engaged in outreach efforts and serve as role models in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure Division within the Directorate for Computer and Information
Science and Engineering and the Division of Biological Infrastructure in the
Directorate for Biosciences. More information on this project is available at
the web site: www.cs.ucr.edu/~eamonn/REU/ .