* 1452605
* Ground Level Measurements of Terrestrial Gamma Flashes
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Randolph Duran, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Satellite observations of intense millisecond flashes of gamma rays (Terrestrial
Gamma Flashes - TGFs) produced at the tops of thunderstorms have shown that
lightning can accelerate electrons to very high energy levels, well above 100
million electron volts (MeV). A recent experiment at Louisiana State University
(LSU) has now shown that TGFs are produced by lightning near the Earth's
surface, and that the gamma ray intensity at the source is extremely high. The
TGF and Energetic Thunderstorm Rooftop Array (TETRA) at LSU shows the existence
of ground-level TGFs associated with nearby lightning. This project is a follow-
up experiment, TETRA-II, intended to measure the energy and intensity spectrum
with improved statistics, extend the energy range, determine the height at which
TGFs are produced, and provide for the first time correlated radiation and
meteorological data. TETRA-II will be located at two sites in Puerto Rico and
Jamaica, at locations where thunderstorm activity is significantly higher than
at the current TETRA site in Louisiana and where satellite overflights will
enable looking for TGFs simultaneously from the ground and from
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Satellite
observations of TGFs have shown the connection between the gamma rays and
lightning. Typically, though, it is difficult to associate the gamma ray events
with individual well-localized thunderstorms. The ground-level observations
reported by TETRA have made it possible to associate the gamma rays with
lightning within 3 miles or closer to the detectors, and have made it possible
to begin to study the correlations with detailed radar images of the
thunderstorms. TETRA-II will be located in a region chosen to have high
lightning density and a high frequency of TGFs seen by orbiting gamma ray
satellites; it will be designed to have a factor of 5 better statistics than
TETRA for individual events and a higher energy range (up to 10 MeV) so that
measurements can be compared to model predictions; and it will be operated in
conjunction with both a local array of low frequency (LF, ~100 kHz) lightning
detectors and broadband global and regional networks capable of observing intra-
cloud in addition to cloud-to-ground lightning, together with nearby radar. As a
result, TETRA-II is expected to provide unique and detailed new data about TGFs
observed close to lightning, providing new information both about the production
mechanisms of the high energy radiation and about the connection with the
lightning events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;TETRA-II will
be built and operated largely by a student team. Equipment funds have been
provided by the Louisiana Board of Regents, with the equipment construction to
be performed by students from LSU and two nearby HBCUs (Southern University in
Baton Rouge and Xavier University in New Orleans). LSU staff will do the primary
design, train and supervise the students, and oversee the construction. At the
same time, an array of low frequency lightning detectors will be deployed and
operated by the student teams in Puerto Rico and Jamaica in order to make final
determinations of the sites, explore remote operations at the two sites, gain
experience with the lightning detection, and organize the Puerto Rico and
Jamaica teams to be able to perform continued maintenance and operation of the
detectors in the field. After a year of initial detector construction and
testing by the students in Louisiana, the detector array will be deployed during
the summer of 2015. The array will be operated remotely and the data analysis
led from Louisiana, with contributions from the student teams in Puerto Rico and
Jamaica.&lt;br/&gt;Initial results are expected by the fall of 2015. A goal will
be to use TETRA-II to provide research opportunities for students from LSU,
Southern, Xavier, Univ. of Puerto Rico, and Univ. of the West Indies in Jamaica
for at least 5-10 years. The experiment will also contribute to the development
of research capability in Puerto Rico and a developing nation in the Caribbean
(Jamaica). This NSF support is intended to provide operating funds for LSU and
the Univ. of Puerto Rico at Bayamon. The Jamaica collaborators will request
independent funding from US-AID.