* 1452230
* CAREER: Direct Drive E-Field Motors for Sustainable Power Conversion
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Daniel Ludois, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Electric motors and generators, or more generally "electric machines," are a
fundamental building block of modern society. Over 99% of all the electricity on
the planet originates from an electric generator regardless of how it is spun
(wind, coal, nuclear, etc.) and roughly 2/3 of that energy goes on to power
electric motors. There is a worldwide market of $73.2 billion annually for
electric machines. As electric energy consumption steadily increases annually,
these ubiquitous workhorses continue to be mass-produced for performing the
pumping, heating, cooling, drilling, pressing, cutting, grinding, and moving
that occurs every minute of every day. Traditional electric motors rely on
magnetism to function, and are made of steel, copper wire windings, and
permanent magnets. These materials are mostly sourced from abroad, especially
copper for the windings and rare earth elements for the magnets. These elements
are expensive and have a volatile market. This project focuses on overcoming
technical barriers in order to create motors that use electric fields, rather
than magnetism, to operate. Electric fields would allow other materials, e.g.
aluminum and plastic, to be used which are lighter weight and lower cost than
materials for magnetism based motors. These materials could be domestically
sourced, in addition to being more easily recycled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational aspects of the project are focused on increasing the scientific and
engineering literacy of pre-college and college students as well as the general
public. Hands-on science and engineering demonstrations for pre-college students
will stimulate STEM education and entice students to pursue STEM fields in their
careers. College courses will be reworked to allow students to gain skills as
effective researchers. Science Caf√©s held for the general public will serve as
grass roots discussions on relevant energy science and engineering topics to
increase science literacy in the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motors
utilizing an electric field as the torque-producing mechanism (E-field Motors)
can have significant materials, manufacturing, and operational advantages over
their magnetic counterparts. To realize the potential of E-field machines the
project will develop analytical E-field machine models encompassing
electrostatics, fluid mechanics, and dielectric materials to form a multiphysics
analytical model/methodology for E-field machine development. These models will
be applied to reduce the mechanical gap between rotors and stators of the
E-field motor via hydrodynamic bearing action with a dielectric fluid. The gap
reduction will drive up the operational electric field and electrostatic shear
stress simultaneously. This approach will be validated by multiphysics finite
element simulations, bench scale experiments and E-field machine prototypes
based on the multiphysics analytical design. Performance of the prototypes will
be compared to traditional magnetism based motor designs. By exceeding the
performance of magnetic motors, the project will transform the life cycle of
electric motors by making them more recyclable through reducing the raw
materials they require. Since E-field systems use electric fields to produce
torque, rare earth magnets and silicon steel would no longer be required, and
copper could be be replaced with aluminum.