* 1452377
* EAR-PF: The Silicification of Soft-Bodied Biotas: Reconstructing the Preservation, Ecology and Environments of Earth's Earliest Animal Communities
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Lidya Tarhan, Tarhan                  Lidya          G
* Fellowship Award
* Judith Skog
* 12/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Lidya Tarhan has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out a research and broadening participation plan, focused on the
diversification of complex life, at Yale University and the California Institute
of Technology. Through a multidisciplinary approach, employing novel
geochemical, petrographic, paleobiological and experimental techniques, she will
investigate the biogeochemical processes and particularly the role of early-
stage silicification in the fossilization of Earth's earliest animal
communities. Exceptionally preserved soft-bodied fossil assemblages offer unique
windows into the biology, ecology and chemistry of ancient communities and
environments. Developing models to explain the fossilization pathways
responsible for this exceptional preservation is essential to reconstructing the
initial steps in biological diversification, as well as the environmental
conditions that prevailed during the radiation of early complex life. Further,
many of the emerging analytical techniques Dr. Tarhan will utilize may help to
shed light not only on the processes responsible for the exceptional
preservation of fossils in sandstones, but also the role played by early- and
late-stage cementation in the development of porosity and permeability in
sandstone petroleum reservoirs. Her mentoring and outreach efforts will be
carried out in association with the world-class collections and educational and
outreach programs of Yale University's Peabody Museum. For instance, she will
foster the development of scientific inquiry and critical thinking skills of
student groups underrepresented in the sciences through participation in the
Peabody's EVOLUTIONS after-school program, as well as by mentoring undergraduate
geoscience research projects.

The Ediacara Biota, Earth's earliest animal ecosystem, is preserved in terminal
Ediacaran (~580-541 million years old) strata worldwide. Ediacara fossil
assemblages consist of exceptionally preserved soft-bodied forms of enigmatic
morphology and affinity. The majority of Ediacara fossil assemblages are
preserved in situ as casts and molds in sandstone beds. However, there is little
mechanistic understanding of how the soft-bodied Ediacara Biota and similar
sandstone-hosted younger biotas were preserved, hindering attempts to
reconstruct the biology and ecology of these seminal communities. Our knowledge
of the ecology of these organisms-information that is essential to analyzing the
transition from the Ediacara Biota to the faunas of the Phanerozoic (our current
eon of Earth history) and to resolve the ecological and biogeochemical character
of the Ediacaran-Phanerozoic transition-is currently incomplete. A full
understanding of the fossilization pathways unique to this interval in Earth
history is essential to reconstruct the complexity of these early animal
ecosystems. This work will shed light on long-standing issues in Ediacaran and
early Phanerozoic paleobiology, and also illuminate the role played by
environment in the early development, radiation and preservation of complex life
on Earth.