* 1452413
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Native Language Transfer and Second Language Acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Roumyana Slabakova, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 12/31/2016
* USD 14,981.00

The proposed study consists of an experimental investigation of transfer from a
learner's first language (L1) in the acquisition of a second language (L2),
couched within the theoretical framework of generative second language
acquisition. The focus of the investigation is on pronominal features in French,
which differ in theoretically relevant ways from those instantiated in the
English pronominal system, but are similar to those in Spanish. In order to test
effects of transfer and the additional difficulties of feature reassembly, both
English- and Spanish-speaking L1 learners of L2 French are included (in addition
to French native speakers), and will be tested on two experimental tasks, one
offline and one online. The study addresses specific difficulties that language
teachers encounter in class every day. Thus it will benefit society because it
will allow language educators to better understand the learning process and
target specific problems in a direct way, by creating an adapted curriculum
according to the learners' needs. The acquisition of clitic and strong pronouns,
and particularly their semantic interpretation, is a difficult aspect in the
development of a new language, and only through a systematic and theoretically
founded investigation can we increase and advance our knowledge about how this
process evolves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will increase our
understanding of the development of interlanguage grammars and the creation of
new linguistic representations when non-native speakers acquire a second
language. It combines elements of theoretical linguistics, L2 research and
psycholinguistics in a way that the three subfields can inform each other and
later inform other fields such as language pedagogy and teacher education. The
linguistic phenomenon under investigation, particularly the combination of
lexical items and semantic features proposed in this study, is the ideal area to
test and advance the currently very prominent SLA hypothesis: the Feature
Reassembly Hypothesis (FRH). The study investigates L2 acquisition of French 3rd
person pronouns by L1 speakers of English and of Spanish. The FRH states that
feature bundles are transferred from L1 to L2, and mismatch in the available
features in the native and target language will likely be a source of difficulty
for L2 learners. Because the object pronominal system of Spanish and French is
almost identical in terms of lexical feature encoding, but the system of English
pronouns is vastly different, L1 English and L1 Spanish learners of French are
predicted to show different patterns of errors. The study focuses on the
acquisition of the strong pronoun vs. clitic pronoun distinction, which English
doesn't have, but French and Spanish do, and on the role of the feature [Human],
which is part of the feature composition of English pronoun but not those of
French or Spanish. Similarly, there is a grammatical distinction of gender
encoded on the pronouns of French and Spanish, but not in English, where the
distinction of gender is semantic (biological gender). This comparison allows
for the evaluation of transfer, feature reassembly and input salience. Unlike
much work on the area, the project seeks combined theoretical and applied
knowledge gains, by considering both the question of learners? internal
representations as well as input and instruction.