* 1452545
* EAR-PF: Diffusion anisotropy in Earth's inner core
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Jeffrey Pigott, Pigott                  Jeffrey        S
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 04/30/2018
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Jeffrey Pigott has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct research at Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) and
carry out activities to broaden participation in the Earth sciences. Earth's
inner core has recently been revealed to be structurally complex, with
significant seismic anisotropy, seismic waves traveling faster in the polar
direction than in the equatorial plane. This seismic anisotropy varies in
magnitude hemispherically and as a function of depth. This project aims to
determine how this seismic anisotropy relates to crystal structure and solid-
state deformation. To increase diversity in the geosciences, Dr. Pigott will
mentor an undergraduate researcher and leverage existing partnerships with
Cleveland area high schools.

The seismic anisotropy in Earth's inner core likely results from
crystallographic preferred orientation of the hexagonal close-packed (hcp) iron-
nickel alloy that is thought to be stable under inner core conditions, but how
this texturing developed remains a subject of debate. Constraining the diffusion
anisotropy and solid-state viscosity of the inner core is critical to
understanding the link between deformation and seismic anisotropy. Dr. Pigott
will quantify the self-diffusion anisotropy in Earth's inner core through
atomistic simulations and first principles calculations of the axial self-
diffusion coefficients in hcp-Fe at inner core conditions coupled with diffusion
experiments using the analog metal hcp-Zn. Internally-consistent first
principles calculations of the elasticity of hcp-Fe will elucidate the
relationship between diffusion, deformation, and elasticity and allow for robust
modeling of the state and evolution of Earth's inner core.