* 1452099
* CAREER: New Frontiers in Sequential Decision Making with a View Towards Mobile Health Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Ambuj Tewari, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,939.00

This NSF CAREER project uses machine learning to advance the science of health
interventions delivered via mobile devices. The field of mobile health (mhealth)
is advancing rapidly spurred by the widespread use of mobile devices across the
world. Mhealth researchers are using mobile devices to diagnose, manage, and
treat a variety of health conditions including, but by no means limited to,
alcohol abuse, depression, obesity, and smoking. The project creates new
learning algorithms that learn to personalize mhealth interventions to the
changing needs of individual users. It also develops techniques that use the
social network among users to intervene so that the entire network is steered
towards positive health outcomes. The project will give undergraduate
researchers the opportunity to work on cutting edge data science driven by
socially relevant problems. It will develop new graduate level courses on
sequential decision making. Software including simulations specific to health
domains, implementations of learning algorithms, and mobile apps that deliver
interventions will be publicly released. Research results will be communicated
to, and feedback solicited from, the general public under the auspices of the
newly formed Michigan Institute for Data Science (MIDAS). Involvement of under-
represented minorities will be encouraged via the NextProf Science workshop and
Faculty Allies for Diversity program at the University of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves solving three technical
challenges. First, existing algorithms for sequential decision making, such as
contextual bandit algorithms, need to be redesigned to make them suitable for
adoption in mhealth. The project will develop actor-critic contextual bandit
algorithms that separate the representation of the policy from the
representation of the reward function. Having an interpretable, low dimensional
policy space is crucial for interpretability of the learned policy by the domain
scientist. Second, most of the literature on bandit problems and reinforcement
learning assumes stationarity, an unreasonable assumption in mhealth. Using
recent advances in the field of no-regret learning, the project will develop
learning algorithms that can deal with non-stationarity. Third, the science of
network interventions is in its infancy. The project will serve a catalyst for
its development by synthesizing recent advances in high dimensional statistical
learning and control of complex networks to design learning algorithms that
intervene at a small number of nodes in a time evolving network to achieve a
desired long term objective.