* 1452351
* CEDAR: Simultaneous Fe and Na Doppler Lidar Measurements of Heat and Constituent Fluxes in the Mesopause Region and Neutral Metal Layers, Winds and Temperatures in the Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2022
* Chester Gardner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Two Doppler lidars, a newly developed iron (Fe) Doppler lidar and an existing
sodium (Na) Doppler lidar will be operated simultaneously at Table Mountain near
Boulder, CO, to acquire vertical profiles of neutral atmospheric horizontal and
vertical winds, temperatures, and Fe and Na densities in the mesosphere and
thermosphere to study coupling and transport processes between 80 and 150 km.
The thermospheric metal layers themselves involve the coupling between ion and
neutral metal layers, and the neutral winds and temperatures derived from these
layers are two critical parameters needed for advancing our understanding of the
space-atmosphere interaction region. The neutral wind and temperature data in
the mesosphere and thermosphere will help validate global models that cover the
lower and upper atmosphere (e.g., WACCM and WAM). The simultaneous measurements
of Fe and Na layers and their fluxes will provide crucial information on the
thermospheric metal layer formation, differential meteoric ablation, and cosmic
dust velocity distribution. This work will lead to improvements in quantitative
estimates of the cosmic dust input that has implications for a variety of
geophysical processes throughout the polar atmosphere and Southern
Ocean.&lt;br/&gt; Specifically, the dual lidar observations, along with
correlative studies and model simulations, will be used to: (1) Characterize the
recently discovered thermosphere Fe and Na layers above Table Mountain to
determine how frequently they occur, how high they extend, how long they
persist, and what mechanisms cause them to form; (2) Characterize neutral winds
and temperatures in the 100-150 km region of the thermosphere by using the
thermosphere Fe and Na layers as tracers. Explore coupling and transport
processes via comparison with the Whole Atmosphere Model (WAM) simulations; and
(3) Make simultaneous measurements of wave-induced vertical heat fluxes and the
dynamical and chemical fluxes of Fe and Na in the mesopause region (80-105 km)
to quantify the differential meteoric ablation of Fe and Na, constrain the
various cosmic dust velocity distribution models, help validate the University
of Leeds chemical ablation model (CABMOD) and significantly improve estimates of
the global influx of cosmic dust. This project will provide research
opportunities for a postdoc and a graduate student.