* 1452422
* EAGER: CHS: Collaborative Research: Analyzing Elder Care to Guide the Design of Caregiver Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Barbara Cherry, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 38,825.00

One approach to expanding the availability of elder care and reducing elder care
costs is to increase the number of elders who can live independently in their
own homes which is referred to as "aging in place". This is an attractive option
because elders prefer to live independently and report better health and quality
of life when they do, and because aging in place can reduce the increasing costs
of elder health care. However, aging in place still requires caregivers, and
caregivers are in short supply. One approach to expanding the availability of
caregivers for elders who are aging in place is to develop robots that can serve
as caregivers in these homes. Research already suggests that many elders are
open to this possibility, especially if it allows them to retain their
independence. Furthermore, many elders report that for many tasks they would
actually prefer to be helped by a robot rather than another human. As is the
case for human caregivers, robot caregivers will be enmeshed in a larger complex
social network and technical system beyond just the caregivers and the person
who is being cared for. This larger context will need to be understood in order
for robotic caregivers to successfully deliver the care that is needed, such as
to know who to contact and with what information if the person that they are
assisting is not following his or her usual patterns of behavior. This project
will explore and describe how caregiving robots should function by analyzing the
current form of caregiving in elders' homes, by creating a detailed account of
current elder care practices, and by translating this account into design
recommendations for caregiving robots.

The analysis will begin by describing the complex socio-technical context of
current and future caregiving systems, specifically in terms of the work
function and the work domain of the human or robot caregiver. Work function will
be described independently of who or what will perform those functions. Work
domain will be analyzed using a variety of techniques such as Abstraction-
Decomposition Spaces (ADSs) and Contextual Activity Diagrams (ConADs). ADSs will
map the relationships between a home's overall objectives and physical resources
at several different levels of abstraction, such as by mapping the objective of
providing a safe physical environment to different resources that are available
to assist with transfers. ConADs will relate different work functions to
different work situations, such as by relating the administration of medications
to the appropriate time of day and location in the home. Based on these analyses
of work function and work domain, the project will draft, refine, and validate
formal descriptions of design requirements for caregiving robots.