* 1452091
* Mountain Stream Sediment Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Stephen Lancaster, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 02/29/2020
* USD 374,687.00

A non-technical description of the project that shows the project's importance
and significance

The environment of rivers and streams is important to wildlife that lives in and
around these flowing waters. The sediment that accumulates on the riverbed, and
how this material moves, is a critical component of the ability of different
species to survive or flourish. However, first-hand knowledge of the processes
of sediment movement is very limited and difficult to obtain. This project will
collect data on the movement of particles in a gravel-bed mountain stream in
western Oregon that is a fundamental habitat for Coho salmon. Knowing how and
when these gravels move will help develop strategies for preserving proper areas
of the stream to encourage the spawning and foraging of these fish. This project
will also apply innovative instrumental solutions to actively monitor the
movement of gravel through embedded transponders that will help model river
transport in other important locations. The development of the small-scale
hydropower system used in this research may provide a reliable means for
delivering power to instruments in remote locations where solar power is not
practical. The project will work with managers and scientists from the Siuslaw
National Forest (Oregon), who are actively engaged in stream restoration. The
study will provide research projects for a graduate student and research
experience for undergraduate research assistants. A technical description of the
project

This project will develop instrumentation to make continuous measurements of
sediment transport and flow, as well as measurements of detailed flow
hydraulics, channel geometry, and major roughness elements, in order to develop
empirical relationships predicting sediment transport in debris-laden mountain
streams. A fixed antenna array will monitor movement of gravel embedded with
passive integrated transponder (PIT) tags, and logging pressure transducers will
monitor flow stage between antennas and, thus, water surface gradient at the
antennas. Detailed characterization of flow hydraulics, channel topography, bed
texture, and in-stream debris will round out the data necessary to characterize
total boundary shear stress, form drag, and skin friction with empirical
relationships. A small-scale hydropower system will sustainably power the
antenna array at a site where clouds and topography limit sunshine during the
rainy season. The field effort will be accomplished in a steep stream where
large wood is placed to create shelter and floodplain inundation for foraging by
native Coho salmon. Sustainable habitat improvements may hinge on reliable
prediction of how sediment moves in the vicinity of large wood structures.