* 1452670
* CAREER: Static and Dynamic Magnetization Properties of Spintronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Claudia Mewes, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/2021
* USD 556,000.00

This Faculty Early CAREER award proposes theoretical research to investigate the
static and dynamic magnetization properties in spin transport electronic
(spintronic) devices. Spintronics aims to use the electron spin in addition to
its electric charge to develop highly functional and energy efficient devices.
In this context a better fundamental understanding of the involved static and
dynamic magnetic properties within the confined device setting is of paramount
importance for a widespread adoption of spintronic technologies. The complicated
interplay of different material parameters and their modifications are essential
for the performance of new spintronic devices for their scalability and
efficiency. In this project a unique combination of different modeling
capabilities will allow a detailed analysis of the functionality of proposed new
spintronic devices for energy efficiency in electronics. The main goal of the
research project is to enable the theoretical prediction and the computational
design of new spintronic materials and devices. In this project the principal
investigator will seamlessly integrate educational activities at all levels of
education through research experiences for local high school students,
undergraduate students and training of graduate students. Based on experience
the principal investigator plans to establish "Girls in Physics" events at the
University of Alabama with the goal to spark the interest of young female high
school students in Alabama in a possible career in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A theoretical understanding
of the static and dynamic magnetization properties for a widespread adoption of
spintronic technologies requires basic knowledge of fundamental mechanisms
responsible for magnetization relaxation, anisotropy and spin polarization and
their interdependencies within a confined device setting. The proposed research
plans to combine first principles and tight-binding calculations for material
design with dynamical simulations to predict the functionality of new spintronic
devices. The unique combination of different modeling capabilities to allow a
complete analysis of the functionality of proposed devices will enable the
theoretical prediction and the computational design of new spintronic materials
and devices. In addition, the proposed research will lead to a better
fundamental understanding of the complicated interdependencies of the involved
material parameters within a confined device setting.