* 1452748
* Lava-Substrate Interactions: Numerical and Experimental Investigations
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Mary Elise Rumpf, Rumpf                   Mary           E
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 03/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Elise Rumpf has been granted a National Science Foundation (NSF) Earth
Sciences postdoctoral fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at
the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory at Columbia University. She will study the
effects of substrate composition, grain size, and roughness on the emplacement
of lava flows. Lava heat loss and motion are influenced by thermal and
mechanical interactions with the underlying substrate, which can affect the
mobility, duration, extent and morphology of an active lava flow. This work will
enhance the current understanding of lava flow emplacement and lava flow hazards
by quantifying substrate influence on lava flow morphology and advance rate.
Results will be used to improve existing models that predict the paths of lava
flows to reduce potential threats to property, agriculture, and local
infrastructure in communities living near active volcanoes. The knowledge gained
through this project will also be applicable to lava flows on other planets and
moons in our Solar System providing key information on past environmental
conditions and planetary thermal evolution. This project will be used to educate
the public about lava flows and their hazards. In addition to mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students through internships and lectures at Columbia
University, Dr. Rumpf will invite the public to view lava pour events and lava-
analog experiments in person or through webcasts.

Lava morphology and emplacement are complex processes influenced by thermal and
mechanical interactions with the underlying substrate. Substrate roughness may
affect the mobility of a lava flow directly, by acting as either a barrier or a
conduit, or more subtly, as flow irregularities may develop at the lava-
substrate boundary. The thermal conductivity of a substrate, dependent on
composition and grain size, can affect lava flow heat loss, and thus influence
the duration a flow is active. This project will focus on improving our
knowledge of these interactions through: 1) Experiments using polyethylene
glycol wax as an analog to lava flows to obtain initial estimates of the effects
of substrate roughness on lava emplacement; 2) Experiments in which molten
basalt will be poured onto a variety of substrates to determine relationships
between flow behavior and heat loss and substrate type; 3) Numerical simulations
replicating experimental results and expanded conditions to predict emplacement
environments found on other planetary bodies; and 4) A survey of the roughness
and topography at volcanic regions on the Earth, the Moon, and Mars to improve
lava flow prediction methods on Earth and advance our understanding of planetary
volcanic evolution.