* 1452375
* EAR-PF: Exploring the evolution of faults and friction through dense repeater event catalogs
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2017
* William Frank, Frank, William B
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 10/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. William Frank has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) to investigate the ever-
changing conditions at seismic faults using rapidly repeating earthquakes as in
in situ probe. The evolving activity rates of rapidly repeating seismic events
that can emit tens of events in several minutes provide a unique and direct
window to seismically active faults and can shed light on what properties, such
as temperature, pressure, or fluid pressure, control how friction evolves
through time. Thanks to recent advances in the systematic search for repeating
earthquakes, Dr. Frank will extend novel detection algorithms to different
geological contexts. After detecting millions of events and consolidating them
into regional catalogs, comparisons between different seismic contexts will help
to better understand the common mechanisms of repeating earthquakes and what
controls how a fault ruptures. In addition to detection techniques, there have
been a number of new methodologies that will benefit from dense catalogs of
collocated events and will help better constrain repeating earthquake mechanics.
Taking advantage of the unique Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program at
MIT, Dr. Frank will also mentor an undergraduate student who will develop the
skills to make use of the high performance computing architectures necessary for
modern seismology and adapt the developed detection algorithms to a dataset as
his/her own personal project.

The matched-filter search is a powerful tool to detect the multiplets, or family
of events, of a single source using a previously identified event as a template.
A systematic detection of template events to use as matched-filters is, however,
necessary to obtain a wide and dense coverage of repeating sources. Both
volcanoes and industrial injection/production sites are known to generate a
significant amount of seismicity, but identified events have yet to be regrouped
into families of repeating multiplets in many regions around the world. Such
seismically active environments will be investigated through dense event
catalogs generated by a continuous and systematic search first for templates and
then for multiplets. In addition to the systematic cataloging of repeating
seismicity in different geological contexts, Dr. Frank will also attempt to
better constrain the spectral characteristics of repeating earthquakes as we
still do not fully understand what makes repeating earthquakes reactivate at
such rapid rates and how they differ from more typical earthquakes. Using recent
spectral estimation methods to take advantage of the collocated nature of
multiplets, he will separate the spectral contributions of the source, the path,
and the site from the recorded seismograms to better constrain the properties of
repeating earthquake sources.