* 1452900
* I-Corps Teams: Novel Lab on Chip QCM and ECIS Sensor with Multiple Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Ioana Voiculescu, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed technology with its various applications will have an important
impact on biomedical community especially in the area of pharmaceutical drugs
testing. The average cost for the development of a drug is approximately $1.2
billion dollars and requires 10-15 years of development. The proposed approach
could help reduce this cost and time. The proposed approach could provide a
cheap and fast assay to test drug candidates in pre-animal studies, which could
reduce the current costs of over $500 Million required to bring a new drug to
market.

This technology is a multiparametric sensor that couples quartz crystal
microbalance (QCM) and electric cell-substrate impedance sensing (ECIS)
techniques. The viability, adhesion, and visocoelastic properties of cell
monolayers can be investigated using QCM resonators, based on variations of
resonant frequency. ECIS monitors cell membrane impedance values, cell
attachment, growth and viability. By combining two sensing methods, the
technology expands the ways cell monolayers can be monitored and facilitates
cross validation and decreases false detection. The team has also developed ways
to culture cells on the sensor surface for extended studies, and has used the
sensor to study how breast cancer cells attached to the surface in comparison to
healthy bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAECs), and how breast cancer cells
reacted to different molecules in real time.