* 1452999
* CAREER: Optimal Management of Chronic Diseases Caused by Infections
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Turgay Ayer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to study the design of optimal population-based disease surveillance
policies and treatment prioritization strategies for chronic infectious diseases
in resource-limited settings. The project particularly focuses on the optimal
control of hepatitis C Virus (HCV), an epidemic affecting nearly 2 percent of
the entire US population, but also applies to many other chronic diseases.
Untreated HCV infection is the leading cause of cirrhosis and hepatocellular
carcinoma, the fastest-growing cause of cancer-related deaths in the US. If
successful, results from this research may improve hepatocellular carcinoma
surveillance and HCV treatment prioritization decisions in practice and can
inform prevention and treatment decisions at the national level in terms of
guideline development. Under this project, in collaboration with several medical
researchers, a PhD student will be rigorously trained to apply systems modeling
methodologies to the healthcare area. In addition, several high school and
undergraduate students will be engaged into these research activities. The
results of the project will be widely disseminated to both engineering and
medical communities through paper publications and conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many health policy questions, such as
optimal disease surveillance and treatment prioritization decisions for chronic
infectious diseases, cannot be answered through the traditional research methods
in medicine, such as randomized control trials and observational studies. This
study will use data-driven mathematical models to underpin some of such complex
health policy decisions. The resulting stochastic optimization models are non-
standard, large scale, and computationally challenging. Therefore, this study
will either create new approaches or extending the existing methodology to
account for the critical features of the disease epidemiology, resource
limitations, and management strategies. An important component of the research
is careful parameterization and calibration of the models using some of the
largest datasets in the nation. While this project mainly focuses on
hepatocellular carcinoma and HCV, the themes of this study can be generalized
and applied to several other disease management problems.