* 1452530
* CAREER: Psychological and Neurodevelopmental Mechanisms of Social Influence on Adolescent Decision-Making
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2022
* Leah Somerville, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 750,000.00

During adolescence, individuals begin to make increasingly independent decisions
that involve weighing the potential risks and benefits of their actions.
Although the decisions adolescents and adults make are similar in many
situations, there are certain contexts that lead to more risky decisions by
adolescents. This is the case in social contexts: adolescents (but not adults)
tend to make riskier choices in the presence of peers. Although peers' influence
on adolescent risk-taking is documented in real-world crime statistics, health
statistics, and in controlled laboratory experiments, just how peers uniquely
influence adolescents remains poorly understood. The overarching goals of this
research are threefold: a) to refine understanding of adolescent risky behavior
by demonstrating what aspects of decisions are vulnerable to peer influence, b)
to identify how the developing brain contributes to peer influence on adolescent
risk taking, and c) to evaluate how laboratory measures of peer influence relate
to actual risky behavior in daily life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To carry out this
work, dyads of adolescents and dyads of young adults will complete a series of
decision making-tasks designed to quantify components of risky choices. For
instance, mathematical decomposition analyses can isolate how much risk an
individual is willing to tolerate in order to obtain a potential reward.
Participants complete these tasks in experimental configurations that vary in
their degree of social evaluation. Peers are either absent, present and
monitoring the participant's level of riskiness, or present but unable to
monitor the participant's level of riskiness. These peer configurations build on
recent findings by Leah Somerville and others showing that the mere presence of
a peer may be sufficient to evoke riskier choices in adolescents. Comparisons of
risky choices in these three contexts will disentangle the sources of peer
influence that depend on the peer awareness of risky choices, compared to
sources of peer influence that are evoked merely by the presence of a peer. In
addition, confidential surveys will measure risk-taking in everyday life. They
will be used to bridge the laboratory and the real world through analyses that
ask what characteristics of the dyads, and what characteristics of individual's
riskiness relate to their laboratory-based choices. Functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) is used to measure how the still-developing brain
uniquely processes information about social evaluation, and how these processes
interact with decision-making processes. This project stands to build
foundational knowledge about how neurodevelopment during adolescence shapes the
development of complex social behavior. More broadly, this work can be extended
to help predict the particular 'ingredients' of a situation that lead
adolescents to take unhealthy risks. Further, this project generates key data to
address legal-ethical issues of youth culpability for crimes committed with
peers.