* 1452349
* CAREER: Transport Phenomena in Quantum Systems and Random Media
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Olivier Pinaud, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2021
* USD 419,933.00

This CAREER award supports the research and education program of the Principal
Investigator in the general area of "transport phenomena." Transport phenomena
are ubiquitous in nature, whether at the large scale of our macroscopic world or
at the very small scale of microscopic particles. They describe interactions and
exchanges between systems, and how quantities of interest are transported from
one location to another. This project focuses on two important instances of
these phenomena: the transport of light or sound waves in complex environments,
and the transport of particles in devices at the nanometer scale. These two
topics have many applications in various fundamental domains such as
telecommunications, non-destructive testing, medical imaging, and
nanoelectronics. Very often, transport phenomena are multiscale, in the sense
that the underlying physics involves various spatial or temporal scales of very
different orders of magnitude. As a consequence, the description and the
computer simulation of transport processes are extremely difficult, and this is
where mathematical analysis plays a central role. By identifying a set of
important parameters, the original models can be simplified into reduced models,
more amenable to analysis and computations. This notion of asymptotic analysis
is the common thread of the two topics of the project. The project will advance
new mathematical models and techniques, as well as new computational methods for
transport phenomena in complex media and in quantum systems. The research will
impact, in particular, the field of target or defect localization in disordered
media, as well as the modeling of semiconductors. The project integrates
research with an educational plan that is designed to reach various generations,
from high school to doctoral students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses two topics related to transport phenomena. The first one concerns
quantum hydrodynamical transport models for nanodevices, which offer a reduced
yet accurate macroscopic description of the dynamics at the quantum scale. The
main objectives are to build a complete mathematical theory for recent formal
models, to develop numerical methods for their simulations, and to validate the
models for future applications. A key ingredient in the theory is the "quantum
moment problem," which is a generalization to density operators of the classical
moment problem for measures. The second topic concerns inverse problems in
random media. The main goal is to develop transformative transport-based methods
for imaging in strongly diffusive environments for which no efficient techniques
are available as of today. Such methods are based upon understanding the
transfer of information from the microscopic scale to the macroscopic scale. The
stress will be put on random media with long-range correlations, such as the
turbulent atmosphere, which offer an ultimate benchmark for the methods proposed
in the project. The problem of fast intensity imaging algorithms using
optimization techniques will also be addressed.