* 1452057
* CAREER: Biosensor Development for Probing Nanoscale Topology in Neurotransmission
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Michelle Knowles, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

1452057 - Knowles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensors that measure biological molecules
are essential for medical diagnostics and drug discovery. These sensors often
rely on the measurement of membrane proteins, which are targets for drug
discovery. On the other hand, biomimetic systems provide simple platforms for
incorporating membrane proteins into biosensing applications. In these
applications, membrane proteins are able to sense their local environment, such
as the chemical composition and membrane shape, and these factors affect protein
function. Until now little attention has been given to the nanoscale structure
of these sensors and how nanometer-sized features affect proteins. The main
focus of this research is to design biosensors that can be used to identify how
cells and biomolecules are affected by nanostructured materials. Specifically,
proteins involved with the transmission of neuronal signals and the secretion of
hormones will be characterized. The integration of research with education will
take place through outreach to 8th-12th grade students in a summer engineering
camp, training of local educators during a summer research program, and the
design of novel courses at the interface of biochemistry and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The engineering of materials that interface
with biological systems increasingly requires an understanding of cellular and
molecular responses to nanoscale topology. The focus of this CAREER Award is to
design two biosensors that will be used to probe the relationship between
nanostructured materials and protein function. The first sensor will mimic the
intracellular plasma membrane with tunable regions of membrane curvature and
chemical composition. The second will provide a template to introduce membrane
curvature into live cells, where the molecular response to curvature can be
assessed. Both sensors will be used to characterize the relationship between
membrane shape and neurotransmission, a biological process that gives rise to
extreme changes in membrane topology. Neurotransmission relies on the proper
recruitment and function of SNARE proteins to facilitate the fusion of the
tethered vesicle membrane with the plasma membrane. SNARE-mediated membrane
fusion is essential for membrane repair, growth cone formation, axon extension,
and synapse formation. Our work aspires to contribute to the field of
neuroregeneration by identifying nanoscale features that drive membrane fusion.
By using super-resolution fluorescence microscopy techniques, single particle
tracking, and combined confocal fluorescence-atomic force microscopy, principles
that govern protein sorting on nanostructured membranes will be identified.
These principles will be useful in the future design of biosensors and materials
that interface with cells. The integration of this research with education will
take place through outreach to 8th-12th grade students in a summer engineering
camp, training of local educators during a summer research program, and the
design of novel courses at the interface of biochemistry and engineering.