* 1452672
* CAREER: Digital Badges for STEM Education: Designing Networked Learning Environments That Promote High School Students' STEM Identities and Learning Trajectories
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Katie Davis, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Wu He
* 05/31/2021
* USD 894,984.00

The digital revolution has transformed how young people discover and pursue
their interests; how they communicate with and learn from other people; and how
they encounter and learn about the world around them. How can we identify best
practices for incorporating new media technologies into learning environments in
a way that resonates with youth, including their interests, goals, and the ways
they use technology in their everyday lives? How do we resolve the need to
document and recognize informal STEM learning and connect it to formal education
contexts? What strategies can be developed for inspiring and tracking student
progress towards the learning goals outlined in the Next Generation Science
Standards (NGSS)? These questions are the underlying motivation for this CAREER
program of research. Digital badges represent a specific kind of networked
technology and have been touted as an alternative credentialing system for
recognizing and rewarding learning across domains, both inside and outside of
formal education contexts. While there is considerable enthusiasm and
speculation around the use of digital badges, the extent to which they succeed
at empowering learners and connecting their learning across contexts remains
largely untested. This project seeks to fill this gap in
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach taken for this program of study is
a three phased design-based research effort that will be focused on four
objectives: (1) identifying design principles and support structures needed to
develop and implement a digital badge system that recognizes informal STEM
learning; (2) documenting the opportunities and challenges associated with
building a digital badge ecosystem that connects informal learning contexts to
formal education and employment opportunities; (3) determining whether and how
digital badges support learners' STEM identities; and (4) determining whether
and how digital badges help learners to connect their informal STEM learning to
formal education and employment opportunities. In Phase 1, an existing prototype
created in prior work at Seattle's Pacific Science Center will be developed into
a fully functional digital badge system. In Phase 2, the PI will also work
collaboratively with higher education stakeholders to establish formal
mechanisms for recognizing Pacific Science Center badges in higher education
contexts. In Phase 3, the badge ecosystem will be expanded and students' use of
and engagement with badges will be tracked as they apply to and enter
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves high school students
participating in the Discovery Corps program at the Pacific Science Center,
undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Washington, and
stakeholders in the K-12 and higher education community in Seattle. Educational
activities integrated with this program of research will support: (1) mentoring
University of Washington students throughout the project to develop their skills
as practice-oriented researchers; (2) incorporating the research processes and
findings from the project into university courses aimed at developing students'
understanding of the opportunities and challenges associated with using new
media technologies to support learning; and (3) using the research findings to
develop educational outreach initiatives to support other informal STEM learning
institutions in their use of digital badges.