* 1453934
* CAREER: Optimization and Sampling in Stochastic Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Enlu Zhou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 01/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project
is to develop new methods for optimizing and predicting performance of complex
systems that are described by stochastic simulation models. Such systems arise
in various areas such as finance, engineering design, systems biology, and
manufacturing, and are often characterized by complexities, nonlinearities, and
uncertainties in their dynamics. The major challenges in the optimization and
prediction of the system performance are the expensive evaluation of system
models, lack of structure in the performance measure, huge search space, and the
need to address the balance between efficiency and accuracy. This research aims
to make strides towards these challenges by developing new theory and
methodologies. The proposed methods will be applied to modeling of a class of
biological systems from experiment data and studying modes of behaviors of these
systems, helping to reveal functional mechanisms and design principles of
biological systems. This project also supports the PI's educational objective to
integrate research with course development and in-classroom teaching, engage
more females and underrepresented minorities in engineering, and expose high-
school students and middle-school girls to the field of industrial engineering
and operations research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will provide a set of new algorithms that possess both superior
practical performance and rigorous convergence guarantees for the following two
problems: (i) simulation optimization; and (ii) characterization of the response
space of a system model. For simulation optimization, an algorithmic framework
will be developed by integrating the central idea of model-based methods from
deterministic nonlinear optimization with classical gradient-based search in a
seamless way. To efficiently explore the response space, a new approach is
proposed to sample from the response space and the parameter space iteratively,
which takes advantage of the simple structure of the parameter space to
circumvent the nonlinearity of the model while using the information on the
response space to expedite the search in the parameter space.