* 1453536
* CAREER: Genetic Architecture and Proximate Mechanisms Underlying Indirect Genetic Effects on Cooperative Antipredator Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2023
* Bronwyn Bleakley, Stonehill College
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2023
* USD 900,161.00

A central problem in modern biology is understanding how an individual's traits,
whether physical features, disease or behavior, result from the combined action
of genes, the physical environment and the social environment in which an
individual interacts. Describing genetic influences on behavior is particularly
challenging if genes in social partners interact to generate behavior. Little is
known about the extent of such genetic influences, whether their effects vary
across populations or the physiological mechanisms that allow the genes in one
individual to influence another individual's behavior. Trinidadian guppies are
an excellent model system to study these effects on behavior because guppies
perform a suite of cooperative antipredator behavior that is strongly influenced
by social partners and which varies greatly across populations depending on
predation risk. This project uses statistical genetics to describe the relative
importance of an individual's own genes and those of its social partners for
generating cooperation among guppies. This project will also link variation in
physiology, gene expression, and sensory anatomy to variation in cooperation
across populations. Undergraduates from under-represented groups will be
provided long-term comprehensive research and mentorship experiences. An active
learning curriculum for evolution classes will be developed. This work will
advance our scientific understanding of the genetics of complex traits,
including social behavior, while preparing diverse students to be scientists,
educators, and mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How interacting phenotypes, such as
cooperation, evolve depends on both the genetic architecture of the behavior and
the structure of the social environment. This project will describe the complete
genetic architecture of indirect genetic effects (IGEs) on guppy antipredator
behavior, especially as it might vary with changes in social selection imposed
by cooperation under differential predation risk. A quantitative genetic
breeding design paired with behavioral experiments will measure the influence
imposed by and responsiveness to social partners and genetic covariances between
those traits for high and low predation populations. Variation in these traits
will be correlated with differences in gene expression for hormone receptors and
cognate hormone secretion, pheromone excretion, and somatosensory anatomy.
Differences in social environments will be characterized by measuring the
proportions of individuals in each population that are influential on and/or
responsive to social their partners. Lastly, the combination of influential and
responsive partners will be varied to measure how well different combinations
cooperate, quantifying differences in social selection across populations. This
work will provide some of the first experimental links between proximate
mechanisms, variation in IGEs, and social selection. Data will be archived and
made publically available through Dryad Digital Repository and GenBank, as
appropriate.