* 1453378
* CAREER: Synthesizing Highly Efficient Hardware Accelerators for Irregular Programs: A Synergistic Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2022
* Zhiru Zhang, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/28/2022
* USD 453,036.00

This CAREER research project aims to significantly improve the design
productivity and quality of heterogeneous computer architectures, which
extensively integrate specialized hardware accelerators to continue to provide
the computing improvements essential to all aspects of our society. Achieving
this goal requires the development of a new class of truly integrated design
automation methodologies and tools to enable productive modeling, exploration,
and generation of hardware accelerators from high-level programs, especially for
the irregular programs that are commonplace in emerging application domains such
as computer vision, machine learning, physical simulation, and social network
analytics. The project also has a broad yet thematically focused plan for
educational outreach, which aims to cultivate the next generation of engineers
and scientists who can bridge the chasm between the software and hardware design
paradigms. The PI will lead hands-on design sessions for underrepresented
minority high school students and organize engineering seminars with engaging
demonstrations for first-year undergraduates to increase their interest and
participation in computer engineering. In addition, the PI will actively
integrate the research outcomes into undergraduate and graduate curriculum
development, and leverage industrial collaborations to effectively disseminate
the research results on heterogeneous computing to a broader
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diminished benefits of technology
scaling have led to a growing interest in heterogeneous accelerator-rich system
architectures to improve performance under tight power and energy efficiency
constraints. Irregular programs are gaining prominence in many important
application domains; but these programs are much more difficult to parallelize
on conventional data-parallel accelerators such as GPUs, as they typically
exhibit less-structured data access patterns and difficult-to-predict dynamic
parallelism. This project aims to develop a synergistic design automation
framework where a set of novel programming abstractions, architectural
templates, synthesis optimization algorithms, and hardware prototypes all play
concerted roles to overcome the many challenges raised by the irregular
programs. Specifically, the key idea is to automatically generate softly
synthesized accelerators that are capable of decoupling data access from
computation for tolerating memory latency and performing run-time optimizations
for exploiting the irregular parallelism.