* 1453571
* Variation in human hair morphology within and among human populations
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Mark Shriver, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2019
* USD 82,400.00

Human scalp hair varies considerably in form and color, within and among human
populations. This study will analyze recently collected hair samples
representing a wide range of human populations, enabling an unprecedented
microscopic investigation of variability in human scalp hair features and laying
the groundwork for future research that links hair form and color with their
underlying genetics. The project will advance science and benefit society by
providing additional measures of hair variation that can be used in forensic
contexts to address questions of ancestry and personal identification, and by
providing new information on how the forces of evolution have influenced hair
morphology in our species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will apply
recent technological advances in optical microscopy, transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), and three dimensional scanning electron microscopy (3D SEM) to
define and measure the dimensions of external hair forms and internal
structures. Specific attention will be focused on identification of patterns of
variation in curl patterns, cross sectional dimensions, cuticle thickness, and
orientation of cortical structures within and along the length of the hair
shaft. The nature and significance of the observed patterns of variation will be
rigorously tested using appropriate statistical methods. Because the hair
samples are associated with genotyped DNA samples, future studies correlating
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and morphological variation will be
possible. These investigations are expected to shed light on the range of
diversity in human hair forms, illuminate instances of convergent evolution in
hair form, and suggest specific avenues for further exploration of the relative
roles of natural selection, gene flow, and genetic drift in the evolution of
human scalp hair form. By understanding the morphological hair features in
detail the investigators will be able to plan efficient and focused phenotyping
programs for both gene discovery and forensic efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly supported by the National Institute of Justice and the
Biological Anthropology Program at NSF.