* 1453041
* LTREB: Instability, contingency, and global change in a terrestrial food chain
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Rolf Peterson, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 02/29/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Wolves and moose on Isle Royale National Park have fluctuated in abundance over
the past 50 or more years, epitomizing the natural dynamics of the nation's most
endangered, charismatic, and controversial wildlife. This project continues the
longest study of predators and their prey in the world to develop a new
quantitative framework to determine whether these fluctuations result from
predictable laws of nature or from unexpected events that leave lasting
legacies. The results will have broad implications for conserving many of the
nation's wildlife and ecosystems. A forthcoming decision about the management of
Isle Royale wolves is expected to set precedence for many protected areas with
respect to management of key predators. This project will provide the data
needed to make an appropriate decision and to understand the resulting
consequences. The investigators have experience testifying before Congress, as
well as to local and state agencies, to inform responsible resource management.
Wise management decisions have become the focus of broad public concern as well,
and results from this project will be communicated to the public through diverse
media including webpages, blogs and other social media, printed media, volunteer
programs, internships, public presentations, and films. Data collected as part
of this project are broadly disseminated and widely used. Significant numbers of
students and the public will continue to participate in the project, learning
about the scientific process and wildlife conservation.

The project will evaluate the extent to which population fluctuations can be
explained by series of random events characterized by legacy effects that are
comparable in length to the waiting time between such events and the disparate
nature of individual events in the series. The field methods involve estimation
and analysis of parameters related to the demography, genetics, and life history
of the wolf and moose populations. New statistical models will be constructed
based on first principles of predator-prey theory and on comparisons between
laws-of-nature models and statistical models accounting only for the influence
of a few major historically contingent events such as novel disease outbreaks,
severe winters, or a genetic rescue event. The analytical framework will
comprise a synthesis of several important phenomena in ecology: reddened
spectra, weak density dependence, tipping points, legacy effects, synergistic
and antagonistic interactions, and ecological surprises. Results will address
the long-standing ecological controversy of whether ecological phenomena are
best understood as a series of contingent effects or as the result of laws of
nature. The analytical framework produced will explain why ecological
'surprises' are common and why populations exhibit weak density dependence over
long periods of time.