* 1453104
* CAREER:  Scaling Source Separation to Big Audio Data
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Paris Smaragdis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2020
* USD 549,863.00

The world we live in is composed out of mixed signals. It is practically
impossible to easily obtain a clean recording of speech, music, environmental,
mechanical, underwater, or biomedical sounds. This, in turn, complicates any
further processing due to the presence of unwanted elements (e.g. background
noise in speech recognition). We traditionally address this issue by using
source separation and denoising methods that allow us to extract only a desired
signal from a mixture. Unfortunately such methods do not scale at ?big data?
levels, which means that most of the audio data we gather today remains at a
state unsuitable for automatic content analysis or further processing. This
project addresses the use of source separation methods when confronted with very
large data sets. It considers use of modern data analysis methods to efficiently
process large amounts of data, and also the effects of training on large signal
corpora in order to improve source separation performance. The ultimate goals
are to improve source separation performance by leveraging large signal
collections, and to enable large-scale signal analysis by making modern source
separation algorithms more efficient.

In order to enable processing at such large scales, this project takes advantage
of recent developments in manifold structure analysis, deflation methods for
spectral decompositions, hashing strategies, and quantization. Using a quantized
manifold representation, large signal data sets can be approximated using a
compact and efficiently accessible structure. Such representations can then be
used as priors to a source separation algorithm and help guide it to extract
signals that match them. Applying such models on large data to perform source
separation is further accelerated by making use of a deflation method. Instead
of performing the textbook (and computationally intensive) model matching
process, this project uses a greedy approach to quickly extract target
components while bypassing many unnecessary calculations. Finally, given the
latest research on unifying multiple models of source separation, this project
considers the application of such concepts to multiple data analysis models at
once (such as HMM models, continuous dynamical systems, etc.), thereby becoming
relevant to a wide range of signals and mixing situations.