* 1453247
* CAREER: Form and Function of Bacterial Amyloid Fibers
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Lynette Cegelski, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,187,327.00

The propensity for bacteria to associate with surfaces in nearly all ecosystems
far exceeds the tendency to persist in suspension, living freely in a planktonic
state. Bacteria secrete proteins, polysaccharides, and other components to
assemble a spider-web like matrix that surrounds cells to promote the formation
of protective communities termed biofilms. The protective physical matrix
enables bacteria to colonize and even thrive in an astonishing range of
environments, in niches ranging from the harsh acidic microbial mats in
Yellowstone to ship hulls and industrial oil pipelines. Improved biofilm models
are crucial to understanding how they function. Across biology, chemistry, and
materials research, measuring parameters of chemical, physical, and mechanical
properties is key to understanding how complex assemblies function. In this
project, experiments are designed to achieve breakthrough discoveries needed to
transform biofilm descriptors from vague terms like "glue" and "slime" to
scientific and quantitative descriptions based on chemical composition and
molecular architecture by using high resolution techniques. The self-assembly of
these macromolecular architectures by bacteria also inspire us to use or build
such mechanically robust molecular frameworks for new
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will engage in broad
dissemination of scientific research and educational outreach activities. She
will mentor undergraduate and graduate students, including many from groups
under-represented in STEM; design coursework changes to introduce more
quantitative concepts into biochemistry courses; and lead comprehensive outreach
activities, engaging students, teachers, and the general public. Major specific
activities include: (i) developing a biochemical biofilm laboratory module for
the high-school science curriculum with assistance from a high-school teacher
who joins the PI's laboratory each summer, (ii) integrating exploratory-based
lab modules in undergraduate laboratory courses to encourage true engagement and
the hands-on "a-ha" moments that enhance learning; (iii) assisting in the
mentoring of incoming first-generation and under-represented undergraduate
students in preparation for university coursework in STEM; and (iv) sharing
engineering protocols for a custom-built active-control feedback system to
stabilize NMR pulse power levels over long acquisition times, enhancing the
stability of NMR experiments and also of general value in spectrometer
monitoring. Overall, the commitment to educational and scientific outreach in
this project integrates research with teaching, mentoring, and K-12 outreach
activities to inspire and empower others to impact and improve the
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, amyloid fibers produced by E.
coli, known as curli, will be studied. Curli mediate bacterial adhesion and
contribute to biofilm formation. This project will provide unprecedented detail
into the atomic structure and function of native curli fibers and will map their
interactions with amyloid dyes and their cognate biofilm polysaccharide partners
by integrating unique solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) strategies to
measure atomic-level distances together with super-resolution microscopy to
examine the larger-scale spatial arrangement of curli and other components in
the biofilm. This project is jointly funded by Molecular Biophysics and Cellular
Dynamics and Function Clusters in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.