* 1453563
* CAREER: Optimal Bayesian Methods for Classification
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Lori Dalton, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2018
* USD 157,638.00

Model-free classification has too often produced unreliable and irreproducible
predictions that impede progress in high-throughput genomic studies. In 2011,
the Director of the FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Janet Woodcock,
estimated that as much as 75% of published biomarker associations are not
replicable. The root cause is an inattention to the properties and limitations
of estimates of the misclassification rate, which have been shown in numerous
studies to perform poorly in the high-dimensional small-sample setting typically
encountered in genomics. To address the problem of predictive and replicable
scientific discovery in biomedicine and beyond, this CAREER research project
develops Bayesian computational and statistical methods for small-sample
classification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research objectives are
threefold. First, the work involves developing methods of transforming
scientific knowledge, for instance biological knowledge in the form of gene
regulatory pathways, into Bayesian models to enhance classifier design and
analysis. Integrating a prior with observable data is key to improving
prediction accuracy and error estimation in small-sample
settings.&lt;br/&gt;Second, the investigators study rates of convergence for
both classification and error estimation and develop approximations and bounds
on the expected number of samples necessary for satisfactory performance.
Finally, this project develops Bayesian methods for optimal feature set
selection and performance analysis. Feature selection is a requisite step in
disease biomarker discovery due to the high-dimensionality of data captured by
modern measurement technologies. These timely advances in small-sample
classification applied to genomics greatly impact health and wellness in
society, with direct applications in materials discovery and other areas in
science, engineering and statistics. Furthermore, a key component of the
outreach agenda of this project is in training and educating students at both
the undergraduate and graduate levels, particularly through the development of a
book and course on pattern recognition that incorporate research results and
practical applications from this project.