* 1453652
* CAREER: Bridging Self-Organized and Algorithmic Approaches to Multi-Robot Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Dylan Shell, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 550,000.00

This project consists of research to address the limitations of traditional ways
of programming groups of robots in order to make it easier to program them to
solve problems in teams. The work is helping realize a future where robots
address important applications such as those with life-saving, ecological, and
national strategic elements (e.g., manufacturing, roboticized agriculture,
planetary exploration). To do this, the research is establishing new connections
between methods developed for thinking about very large data sets, mathematical
models invented by physicists for small-scale phenomena, and today's robot
swarms. One particular task being explored is the feasibility of managing carbon
sequestration with minimal human intervention; if successfully scaled up this
could have a huge positive impact ecologically, improving quality-of-life
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last couple of decades, two disparate
perspectives have come to dominate thinking about multi-robot systems, each
perspective or paradigm having its own philosophy, tools, models, and even
publication venues. The idea being explored by this research is that the
existing separation of the paradigms is vestigial, arising out of early AI
questions about representation, and that for progress to be made it is essential
that methods and tools accommodate systems that mix the characteristics of both
paradigms. The work is improving scalability, performance, robustness, and model
predictability for multi-robot systems by bridging and consolidating the
paradigms along two thrusts. The first introduces and establishes a new position
in the space between the paradigms with a new class of distributed algorithms
that extend techniques for sublinear time approximation to communication
settings with message-passing. The second thrust develops and applies theory
that spans the established boundaries by applying renormalization group
transformation methods to characterize multi-scale system behavior.