* 1453339
* CAREER: Aberrant Rewiring of Neurons after Injury - Intracellular Interactions in Vivo
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Nozomi Nishimura, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Neurons in the brain interact with other cell types. One type, microglia, are
star-shaped cells that survey the connections between neurons with their arm-
like branches. It is important to understand these interactions because changes
in neural connections underlie learning and memory formation. The Principal
Investigator hypothesizes that microglia might regulate such changes in neural
connectivity. This project will investigate whether microglia are directly
involved in disconnecting neurons, and whether these actions are disrupted by
injury. In response to injury, microglia lose their branches, and the Principal
Investigator hypothesizes that this prevents them from properly regulating
neural connections. The work will use a specially-designed microscope that
images cells within the living brain. To make the cells visible, the microglia
will be engineered to look green under the microscope, and, using a strategy
developed in this project, each neuron will be labeled with a unique color. With
this approach, it will be possible to visualize how microglia interact with
neurons under normal conditions and after injury. Analyzing such images is
complicated and requires neurobiologists who are trained to use high-level
mathematics. This project will develop software and teaching tools to make the
mathematics behind image analysis understandable to scientists who were not
trained as engineers. The Principal Investigator will create an inquiry-based
module about these ideas called "Beyond the Image," which will introduce high
school students to image analysis and digital processing. The module will be
made available to teachers everywhere through websites such as the Cornell
Cooperative Extension School's 4-H STEM site.

Because neural branches are small and densely packed, the proposed imaging of
microglial modulation of neural connections is challenging. A technical
innovation will be to infect neurons using a combination of virus strains that
each generate a different color of fluorescent protein. Each neuron will be
labeled with its own unique color code, enabling its branches to be
distinguished. An advantage of using viruses is that both the type and location
of labeled cells can be varied to optimize color-coding. Rather than wait for
neurons to disconnect by chance, a laser will be used to precisely cut a branch
off of a neuron. Time-lapse imaging will capture the reactions of microglia and
neurons to the now useless, severed branch. The prediction is that microglia
will reach out with processes to engulf and remove defunct connections. However,
with injury, the microglia might erroneously allow aberrant connections to
linger or might inappropriately damage normal connections.