* 1453582
* CAREER: Querying Beyond Keyboards: Gesture-driven Querying of Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Arnab Nandi, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2021
* USD 514,463.00

Computing devices that use non-traditional methods (e.g., gestures) to interact
with data are rapidly becoming more popular, for both casual and power users.
Applications and user interfaces for such cases pose a fundamentally different
set of expectations that traditional databases are not well-suited for: users
have come to expect response-times that are predictable and nearly
instantaneous. Interactions such as accelerated scroll pose drastically
different workloads to underlying databases and may overwhelm them. Without
keyboards, several database query operations are nontrivial: gestural inputs
have no clear way to be mapped to traditional queries. The traditional query-
result model is insufficient to deal with nuances of gestural interaction, such
as rapidly changing inputs and sensitivity of interfaces. The traditional
database query paradigm needs fundamental rethinking to support gestural
interaction. The PI will work on the missing key components of the database
stack for interactive and gestural workloads, collectively entitled "GestureDB".
The proposed research will make data interaction accessible to an entirely new
category of devices and users. Gestural interaction is rapidly gaining
popularity where data access is key but there is limited keyboard access, e.g.
users with disabilities and environments such as factory floors and
laboratories. GestureDB's interaction-focused design is also expected to have a
transformative impact in data-driven fields such as bioinformatics and "big
data" analytics. Further, the interactive nature of GestureDB will make it an
excellent platform for creatively engaging with both students and the general
public.

With GestureDB, the PI will first build a new query model featuring the concept
of a "query intent", and an expressive "gestural query language," allowing users
to use gestures as the sole mode of data interaction. Second, he will work on
methods for "intent interpretation," allowing the system to better recognize the
user's query intent during the gesture. Third, the PI will investigate methods
for "feedback generation," allowing the system to provide feedback during the
gesture articulation. All components will be designed while keeping
interactivity in mind, in order to maintain a low-latency loop and ensure a
fluid user experience. While decades of research in databases have gone into
making databases more performant, the focus has typically been on large-scale
pipelines, and not end users. Research in human-computer interaction and
visualization has recently been investigating data management concepts for user
interfaces. GestureDB bridges this gap, and takes a new approach towards
enabling interactive, gestural querying of data. Ideas presented in this
proposal are not restricted to gestural interaction: several can be adapted to
solve classically hard problems in traditional database querying as well.
Enabling gestural interaction will transform the default, traditional modes of
ad-hoc querying of databases. The proposed solutions can open up several new
avenues of research in query interfaces, query intent interpretation and
feedback generation, and will also inspire research at all levels of the
underlying database stack. The mechanisms proposed will enable building of
highly interactive applications, and have a significant impact in rethinking
future database systems.

For further information see the project web site at:
http://interact.osu.edu/gesturedb