* 1453408
* CAREER:  Integrating Evolutionary and Mechanistic Investigation of Variation in Cooperation and Life History
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Emily DuVal, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 07/31/2022
* USD 756,675.00

Cooperation is a key part of many complex animal societies, but even within
close-knit groups some individuals cooperate more than others. We now know
individuals may benefit from cooperation in several ways, but mechanisms
underlying decisions to cooperate and variation in the amount of cooperation
remain incompletely understood. The lance-tailed manakin provides an excellent
opportunity to investigate why individuals vary in cooperative behavior, and how
cooperative and non-cooperative behaviors coexist. Males of this tropical bird
cooperate with non-relatives in coordinated courtship displays, but only
dominant alphas mate. Some males serve long terms (6+ years) as non-breeding
betas, while others become alphas without ever being betas. Both highly
cooperative and non-cooperative males breed once alpha, but males cooperating
for the average number of years have low alpha success. This project will assess
the role of territory quality, genetic variability, phenotypic plasticity and
bet-hedging strategies on beta male behavior. Undergraduate and graduate
students and postdoctoral trainees will all be involved in lab and field work in
the U.S. and Panama. This work integrates research and education by (1)
implementing an international field course for undergraduates that combines
involvement in long-term research with student-designed projects; (2) hosting
three undergraduates for REU projects in Panama; (3) developing outreach
exercises for 4th-6th graders; (4) publishing educational resources and
establishing an associated webcam; and (5) establishing an educational display
on the field site, visited by 8000-10,000 tourists/yr.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates mechanisms underlying behavioral
variation in cooperation in the lance-tailed manakin. It assesses the role of
ecological constraints, experimentally quantifying effects of territory quality
on beta behavior, and tests three complementary hypotheses explaining the
occurrence of disruptive selection: genetic variability, phenotypic plasticity,
and bet-hedging in unpredictable environments. The project quantifies additive
genetic variance in cooperation using animal models on behavioral histories of
pedigreed males. Effects of individual phenotype on life history and cooperation
are investigated by measuring the relationships of condition, stress
responsiveness, and telomeres (repeated nucleotides on chromosome ends,
implicated as bioindicators of physiological state). Measures of lifetime siring
success will yield insights about whether cooperators reduce variance in
lifetime reproductive output. The project will train one postdoctoral
researcher, at least one graduate student, and 15 postgraduates in field,
laboratory, and analytical techniques. This project provides insight into both
the function of cooperation by delayed direct benefits and the forces underlying
disruptive selection on behavioral phenotypes. All data from the study will be
archived at the Florida State University, and metadata associated with
publications will be archived on Dryad.org. Databases will furthermore be
accessible through a data repository held at the Smithsonian developed as part
of the Manakin Research Coordination Network.