* 1453580
* CAREER: A Data-Driven Network Inference Framework for Context-Conditioned Protein Interaction Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Yanjun Qi, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 496,556.00

Biological systems can be studied as graphs, where nodes represent entities
(e.g., proteins) and edges represent interactions (e.g., physical binding,
functional dependency). The identification of important protein interaction
networks enables new insights into principles of life, evolution change, disease
study, and drug development. The network wiring and function of a protein
interaction graph is determined by context: genetics, environment, and small
molecules such as drugs. However, almost all protein interaction networks, to
date, have been examined under a single static condition, due to limitations of
biotechnologies for graph data collection. Therefore, the research objective of
this proposal is to design novel and efficient machine-learning algorithms to
identify context-specific protein interaction graphs. Identifying context-
specific protein networks has biomedical applications of social importance, such
as studying cellular developments across multiple cell stages or investigating
cellular changes with different drug treatments in the context of leukemia. Both
applications will be explored as evaluation components of the project through
collaborating with the Center for Public Health Genomics and the Emily Couric
Cancer Center at UVA School of Medicine. The proposed research is expected to
impact other domains as well, for instance, social-network discovery and
condition-specific network inference for brain connectivity. The proposed career
plan will result in educational and outreach initiatives that build on the
interdisciplinary nature of the research. These plans include: (a) designing new
course projects that work on real-life network-inference problems and data; (b)
developing novel instructional techniques to train graduate students
professional skills such as "how to teach'' or "how to do research" using state-
of-the-art structural learning problems as sample projects; (c) involving
undergraduates in network learning research through UVA undergraduate capstone
projects; (d) increasing awareness of graph-learning research among K-12
students through presentations at the UVA Introduction to Engineering (ITE)
Program involving high school students; and (e) enhancing interactions with the
UVA Medical School Community, especially through public release and tutorials of
computational tools created from this project.

The past decade has seen a revolution in genomic technologies that enable the
simultaneous measurement of thousands of molecular entities (e.g., genes or
proteins). The flood of genome-wide data generated by next-generation sequencing
technologies has provided an unprecedented coverage of large-scale, context-
conditioned signatures of relevant gene products that have great potential to
infer network connectivity and function in each context. The proposal will
develop a suite of novel machine-learning methods for inference of context-
specific networks from multi-context molecular signature datasets that are high
dimensional, heterogeneous and noisy. Aiming to overcome these data challenges,
the proposed research includes the following three related tasks: (i) develop
new and scalable structural learning algorithms to estimate multiple different
but related sparse Gaussian Graphical Models (sGGMs) from data samples
aggregated across multiple distinct conditions, (ii) develop novel learning
strategies for modeling and detecting modules (i.e., multi-protein groups)
within the framework of multitasking sGGMs, (iii) extend the above structural
learning models to non-Gaussian cases, semi-supervised settings considering
partial-observed networks and supervised disease diagnosis settings.

Additional information about the project, including the publications, open-
source implementations of algorithms, data sets and educational materials will
be shared through the project website:
http://www.cs.virginia.edu/yanjun/context_graph/