* 1453894
* CAREER: Novel Green's function methods for predicting experimentally relevant quantities for solids and molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2022
* Dominika Zgid, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 11/30/2022
* USD 636,362.00

Dominika Zgid, of the University of Michigan, is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop new computational tools to study large molecules and solids
in which the correlated motion of electrons is very important. In modern science
and technology, materials chemistry plays an big role in the production of
advanced optoelectronic materials, semiconductors and superconductors, solar
cell and battery materials. To enable the discovery of new materials and to
answer experimental questions, theory has to predict experimentally relevant,
measurable quantities. In the last fifty years, the majority of quantum
chemistry research was focused on the development of methodological advances for
molecular systems. Currently molecular problems can be described very
accurately. However, for large strongly correlated molecules and solids, quantum
chemistry still lacks computational tools that describe electronic correlation
accurately in a systematically improvable manner and deliver experimentally
useful predictions. The development of novel ab-initio theoretical methods that
are at the interface of quantum chemistry and condensed matter physics and are
capable of delivering useful experimental predictions for solids is the major
aim of this research. This interdisciplinary project involves training and
mentoring of graduate students and postdocs by allowing them to understand their
research in the broadest possible sense. The research prepares them for a wide
range of careers. Dr. Zgid is also actively engaged in public outreach for
minorities in Science, Technology, Education and Mathematics (STEM) by
organizing workshops for middle school girls. &lt;br/&gt;The Green's function
language provides a natural link to experiment, since spectra can be readily
calculated without the cumbersome excited state formalism present in wave
function or density theories. Green's function methods are controlled, reliable,
and systematically improvable and may easily be generalized by employing
embedding methods to work for solids or large molecules. In order to calculate
excitation spectra, this project implements the Bethe-Salpeter equation with a
second order Green's function method and self-energy embedding approaches. The
formalism is calibrated on small molecules and subsequently extended to solids
by using embedding methods. Since the realism and predictive power of quantum
mechanical simulations depend on the accuracy of modelling all electrons,
significant attention is given to the investigation of effective Hamiltonian
approaches that aim to make Green's function embedding methods quantitative for
realistic molecular and crystalline systems. Finally, since the Green's function
is a large object that can be calculated in parallel, the investigation focuses
on efficient ways of expressing Green's functions in computer implementations. A
major outcome of the project is software containing efficient, reliable and
systematically improvable Green's function embedding methods for solids that is
released to the public. Additionally, Dr. Zgid's research group is preparing a
series of lecture notes for graduate students explaining Green's functions in
order to reduce the language barrier frequently experienced by quantum chemists
when working with the Green's function formalism. The proposed interdisciplinary
research involves training and mentoring of graduate students and postdocs
allowing them to understand their research in the broadest possible sense and
prepares them for wide range of careers. Additionally, Dr. Zgid also takes part
in the "Science for tomorrow" program for middle school students from
underserved communities in Michigan.