* 1453642
* CAREER: Genetic and Developmental Dissection of Rapidly Evolving Morphology
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2024
* John Masly, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 912,998.00

How does variation among interacting groups of genes generate the remarkable
diversity we observe among organisms? This research addresses several
fundamental questions about the molecular mechanisms that produce unique
characteristics among closely related species, and how these mechanisms have
changed over time to produce variation in these traits. Dr. Masly and colleagues
have developed several powerful resources in different fruit fly species that
will allow them to identify the genes that underlie variation in the sizes and
shapes of reproductive traits, and to understand how these genes function
differently during the development of these traits to ultimately give rise to
the distinctive characteristics of different species. The results of this work
promise to inform our understanding of how genes control tissue growth and will
provide insights into broader biological processes including the generation of
biodiversity. These research activities also make several substantial
contributions to education and community outreach. In particular, they provide
transformative educational opportunities in science and technology for Native
American students enrolled at two-year Tribal Colleges, and also for students
enrolled at Dr. Masly's institution. The goal of these educational activities is
to provide students with multidisciplinary training in genetics, development,
evolution, and the use of cutting-edge imaging technologies. This will bolster
undergraduate training in the molecular biosciences within the state of Oklahoma
and provide its burgeoning biotechnology industry with a well-trained workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanisms that generate
biodiversity, and how these mechanisms evolve at the molecular level, are major
goals of biology. A particularly striking example of biodiversity is the
remarkable variation in the morphology of reproductive structures observed among
closely related species of animals. It is thought that phenotypic change
generally occurs by co-option or loss of entire gene regulatory networks (GRNs)
or by variation of gene expression levels within GRNs. However, genetic mapping
studies suggest that changes in GRN architecture itself may contribute to the
extraordinarily rapid evolution of complex structures. The research objective is
to dissect the genetic and developmental bases of species-specific reproductive
morphology to understand how structural evolution occurs at the earliest stages
of species divergence. This will be accomplished by taking advantage of a unique
set of recombinant genetic lines and several novel transgenic reagents in 'non-
model' Drosophila species. Dr. Masly's group will use these tools to identify
and functionally characterize the genes that specify species variation in
reproductive structure morphology and understand how variation among these loci
directs developmental differences in real time. The educational objective is to
use this research as a vehicle to engage undergraduate students in integrative
biological research, with the ultimate goal of transforming the research
experience and culture at Dr. Masly's institution and at Native American Tribal
Colleges within Oklahoma. This will be accomplished by incorporating the
research activities as the focus of a new inquiry-driven undergraduate course,
and an intensive summer research program that provides Native students with
access to STEM resources and training.