* 1453549
* CAREER: Creating Robust, Adaptable Computational Intelligence by Recreating Key Properties of Animal Brains
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Jeff Clune, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 507,465.00

Natural animals display awe-inspiring adaptability and robustness (e.g. three-
legged dogs that can still run and catch frisbees). One reason neuroscientists
believe animals are so capable is because their brains are structurally
organized in that they exhibit neural regularity, modularity, and hierarchy.
This project will test whether those neural properties also improve the
robustness, adaptability, and overall intelligence of evolved computational
agents, specifically robots. Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) evolve, rather than
engineer, computational agents to produce qualities seen in nature, such as
robustness and adaptability. While EAs often outperform human engineers, the
robot bodies and brains they design pale in comparison to those of natural
animals. Recent advances by the PI (Professor Clune) and others enable the
evolution of neural networks (computational brains) that exhibit regularity,
modularity, and hierarchy.

Professor Clune and his students will test whether regularity, modularity, and
hierarchy, separately and in combination, improve (1) robustness to noise (2)
robustness to damage (3) adaptability to new environments (4) learning, and (5)
overall intelligence, measured as the ability to solve challenges of varying
complexities. Based on his previous work and preliminary results, Clune
anticipates that neural regularity, modularity, and hierarchy could increase all
of these desirable behavioral qualities. Such knowledge will accelerate
humanity's ability to deploy effective, autonomous robots, which will provide
tremendous benefits to society (e.g. search and rescue, putting out fires, and
elderly care). The research is woven into a tightly integrated educational plan
that generates broader impacts via a robotics club in Laramie, a research-
oriented course in evolutionary robotics, public education via videos and the
press, and broadening participation in graduate training.