* 1453213
* CAREER:Broadening Participation in STEM: Intersectional and Institutional Influences on Underrepresented Minorities' College and Career Pathways in Longitudinal Perspective
* EDU,EES
* 02/15/2015,05/31/2022
* Sarah Ovink, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 05/31/2022
* USD 462,359.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty
who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research,
excellent education, and the integration of education and research within the
context of the mission of their organizations. In a post-recession context of
rising income inequality, the importance of a college degree to the attainment
of financial stability remains critical. This project looks at ways to address
this continuing problem for underrepresented minority (URM) undergraduate
students in STEM disciplines at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University (VT). The research is significant since college achievement,
persistence and career attainment in STEM remain unequal by gender,
race/ethnicity, and family income, both within and across group categories.
Therefore, this research will examine continuing intersectional inequalities and
explore what can be done to improve institutional policies and practices that
might be promoting such conditions at VT. This research aligns well with the
university President's Inclusion and Diversity Executive Council?s agenda,
recently reorganized to advance a bold agenda for providing advocacy for
inclusion programs and services throughout the university
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator's (PI) research will
capitalize on the inclusion agenda through two overarching goals. The first goal
is to identify and examine individual and institutional influences that lead to
variance in college persistence, graduation and career outcomes by gender,
race/ethnicity, and family income. The second goal is multi-tiered and aims to
increase the number and diversity of professionals conducting STEM research
through training and mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students. This goal
also increases the use of mixed-methodology by graduate and undergraduate
students relative to postsecondary research; career trajectories; and the
retention, graduation, and successful career attainment among targeted URM. This
study is potentially transformative in that existing studies focus more on
monolithic explanations for male or female pathways rather than intersectional
inequalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI builds this project on an
intersectional framework combining theories of structure and sociological gender
theory to examine how the confluence of individual beliefs (meanings and
utility) and institutional practices (policies and programs) in the college
context affect student achievement, persistence, and college and degree
attainment across categories of difference. The PI will use longitudinal in-
depth interviews and secondary survey data to examine these individual and
institutional factors. The in-depth interviews will be conducted in five waves
with 500 URM undergraduate students. Additional focus group interviews will be
conducted by dyads of peer interviewers. Surveys will be specific to VT and
include multi-year common datasets as well as those administered to freshman,
seniors, and other class levels on student enrollment, persistence, graduation
rates, and financial aid. Data from the interviews and surveys will be analyzed
to determine what steps VT might take to increase the participation of URM
undergraduate students in STEM careers. The findings will also be disseminated
nationally and internationally to fill gaps in the literature about how
addressing intersectional inequalities might substantially improve URM
participation in STEM.