* 1453757
* CAREER: Increasing Resiliency and Sustainability of Reinforced Concrete against Aging and Seismic Hazards through Novel Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Bora Gencturk, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will investigate
the combined effects of environmental aging and earthquakes on concrete bridges.
The main cause of aging-induced deterioration in concrete bridges is corrosion
of reinforcing bars, which may result in a significant reduction in load
capacity and endanger the safety of the structure. An in-depth computational-
experimental research program will be conducted to understand the main
corrosion-related degradation mechanisms in reinforced concrete and potential
impacts of earthquakes on the deteriorated bridge structure. Novel engineering
materials of high-performance fiber-reinforced concrete and superelastic steel
alloys will be employed to increase resiliency of the bridge members. The
outcomes of this project are expected to result in direct benefits to the
society by extending the lifetimes of bridge structures and by reducing the
repair and maintenance costs. It is expected that the evaluation, prediction,
and design tools developed in this project will serve as a basis for future
research and implementation, in not only bridges but also in other reinforced
concrete structures such as ports. The research and education will be integrated
by creating a community with university researchers and with high school
teachers and their students. The Investigator plans to engage college students
from underrepresented groups in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-
performance fiber-reinforced concrete exhibits high crack tightness, increased
tensile ductility, low permeability, and higher damage resistance compared with
traditional concrete. Novel Cu-Al-Mn superelastic alloy reinforcing bars can
recover large strains upon unloading. In addition, they are easily machinable
and have a cost advantage over conventional superelastic alloy bars. Through use
of these new materials, the objective of this project is to improve the seismic
performance and durability of bridge structural elements. New knowledge will be
generated on the deterioration processes of concrete structures, the thermo-
mechanical behavior of new superelastic alloys, and the seismic response of
deteriorated bridges.