* 1453860
* CAREER: Embracing Complexity: A Fractal Calculus Approach to the Modeling and Optimization of Medical Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2021
* Paul Bogdan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 04/30/2021
* USD 427,406.00

This cross-disciplinary research proposes a patient-specific cost-saving
approach to the design and optimization of healthcare cyber-physical systems
(HCPS). The HCPS computes the patient's physiological state based on sensors,
communicates this information via a network from home to hospital for
quantifying risk indices, signals the need for critical medical intervention in
real time, and controls vital health signals (e.g., cardiac rhythm, blood
glucose). The research proposed under the HCPS paradigm will treat the human
body as a complex system. It will entail the development of mathematical models
that capture the time-dependence and fractal behavior of physiological processes
and the design of quality-of-life (QoL) control strategies for medical devices.
The research will advance the understanding of the correlations between
physiological processes, drug treatment, stress level and lifestyle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the complex interdependence, variability and
individual characteristics of physiological processes have not been taken into
account in the design of medical devices and artificial organs. The existing
mathematical approaches rely on reductionist and Markovian assumptions. This
research project will rethink the theoretical foundations for the design of
healthcare cyber-physical systems by capturing the interdependencies and fractal
characteristics of physiological processes within a highly dynamic network. To
establish the theoretical foundations of HCPS, a three-step approach will be
followed: (i) construct a multi-scale non-equilibrium statistical physics
inspired framework for patient modeling that captures the time dependence, non-
Gaussian behavior, interdependencies and multi-fractal behavior of physiological
processes; (ii) develop adaptive patient-specific and physiology-aware (multi-
fractal) close-loop control algorithms for dynamic complex networks; (iii)
design algorithms and methodologies for the HCPS networked components that
account for biological and technological constraints. This research will
significantly contribute to early chronic disease detection and treatment.
Models and implementable algorithms, which can both predict physiological
dynamics and assess the risk of acute and chronic diseases, will be valuable
instruments for patient-centered healthcare. This in-depth mathematical analysis
of physiological complexity facilitates a transformative multimodal and multi-
scale approach to CPS design with healthcare
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project not only addresses the current
scientific and technological gap in CPS, but can also foster new research
directions in related fields such as the study of interdependent networks with
implications for understanding homeostasis and diseases and the study and
control of complex systems. The cyber-physical systems designed under this newly
proposed paradigm will have vital social and economic implications, including
the improvement of QoL and the reduction of lost productivity rates due to
chronic diseases. The project will offer interdisciplinary training for
graduate, undergraduate and K-12 students. The PI will integrate the research
results within his courses at University of Southern California and make them
widely available through the project website. Moreover, the PI will enhance
civic engagement by involving college and K-12 students in community outreach
activities that will raise awareness of the important role of health monitoring.