* 1453325
* CAREER:  Metabolic Engineering to Potentiate Immunity and Discover Novel Antivirulence Therapies
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Mark Brynildsen, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

CBET - 1453325 &lt;br/&gt;Brynildsen, Mark P.&lt;br/&gt;Princeton University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antibiotic resistance is a growing public health threat
that is worsened by a declining antibiotic pipeline. Strains resistant to 'last
line of defense' antibiotics have appeared and the danger of our antibiotic
arsenal becoming obsolete is quite real. Since conventional antibiotic discovery
has failed to keep pace with the rise of resistance, novel methodologies are
required to address this looming crisis. Antivirulence therapies comprise a
novel class of anti-infectives that target host-pathogen interactions required
for infection. Since antibiotics exert selective pressure regardless of their
location (e.g., inside humans, livestock, sewage, soil) and antivirulence
therapies exert selective pressure only at infection sites within the host,
antivirulence therapies are projected to be less prone to resistance development
than are antibiotics. Further, due to their pathogen-specific nature, they are
also predicted to be less harmful to commensal bacteria than are antibiotics.
Nitric oxide (NO) is an antimicrobial generated by immune cells, and its
importance to inhibiting pathogenesis is highlighted by the many bacteria that
require NO defense systems to establish or sustain an infection. Disabling
pathogen NO defenses constitutes a promising antivirulence strategy; however,
inhibitors of the known elements of these systems are either toxic to humans or
suffer from poor transport into bacterial cells. The overall goal of this
project is to develop a detailed, quantitative understanding of NO stress in
multiple bacterial pathogens in order to identify novel antivirulence strategies
that target NO defense systems. The challenge of potentiating NO toxicity in
pathogens will be approached as a metabolic engineering problem, which is a
paradigm shift from other antivirulence research, and this work will fill
fundamental knowledge gaps in understanding of bacterial NO stress under rarely
studied, but physiologically important conditions. Results from the proposed
research are expected to lead to antivirulence therapies that address the public
health crisis of antibiotic resistance, application of metabolic engineering
approaches to diverse NO-based phenomena (e.g., symbiosis), and stimulation of
interest in bioengineering in a diverse group of individuals (4th-12th graders,
community college and undergraduate students, under-represented minority
students, and the general public). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the biological
outcome of NO exposure is dictated by a complex kinetic competition, the
challenge of potentiating NO toxicity can be reduced to a metabolic engineering
problem: How can NO flux be directed away from detoxification systems and toward
damaging reactions? In this proposal, metabolic engineering techniques will be
applied to identify and understand weaknesses within bacterial NO defenses under
physiological conditions (e.g., microaerobic, acidic pH). First, quantitative,
experimentally-validated kinetic models of NO stress in three bacterial species
(one model organism, two pathogens) under physiological conditions will be
developed. Second, novel participants in NO defense under those conditions will
be identified through the use of genome-scale mutant libraries, competition
assays, and next-generation DNA sequencing. Since mechanistic insight can
illuminate emergent strategies to increase NO toxicity (e.g., synergistic
effects), the mechanisms by which novel participants alter NO defenses will be
identified with the use of an ensemble modeling approach. To complement these
research activities and inspire individuals to pursue careers in bioengineering,
one of the NO models will form the basis of a host-pathogen web-game; elements
of the proposed research will be performed by community college, high school,
and undergraduate students; and results from the research will be incorporated
into an innovative suite of activities in a metabolic engineering elective.
Further, community college and high school students will present their work at
public forums to educate and inspire 4th-12th graders, under-represented
minorities, and the general public. Successful achievement of these goals will
provide targets for the development of antivirulence therapies, improve
understanding of both bacterial pathogenesis and NO stress under physiological
conditions, and motivate students and the general public to pursue careers in
bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the interdisciplinary nature of the
project, this CAREER award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering
Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology
Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.