* 1453881
* CAREER: Multi-Physics Modeling for Probabilistic Design and Engineering of Sustainable Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Michael Lepech, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 05/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will create new,
science-based, computer models to accurately predict the deterioration of
reinforced concrete infrastructure. Physical infrastructure forms a foundation
for our quality of life and enables national development and progress. However,
the design of bridges, dams, and other structures that are safe, efficient, and
long lasting, while also socially, environmentally, and economically
sustainable, has not proven to be straightforward. Our deteriorating
infrastructure continues to require larger maintenance budgets, while consuming
vast material resources and energy. The new models created through this research
will result in the design of infrastructure systems that reduce economic cost,
environmental emissions, and negative societal impacts over their decades-long
life cycles. An important innovation of these models is their ability to
consider uncertainty. Uncertain future events may include evolving use patterns
of infrastructure, a changing climate, or the introduction of new, more
sustainable, construction technologies. By rethinking the design and management
of our national infrastructure, results from this research will benefit the
United States economy, environment, and society. The research involves a number
of disciplines including civil engineering, material science, electrochemistry,
and industrial ecology. This multi-disciplinary approach will be leveraged to
increase participation of underrepresented groups in research and education at
the undergraduate, graduate, and practicing professional
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future reinforced concrete design standards should
couple physics-based models of materials and structures with probabilistic
reliability-based methods in order to design safe and efficient structures. To
advance the field of sustainable infrastructure design, this research engages in
development of (i) multi-physics, multi-scale numerical models for deterioration
of reinforced concrete structures exposed to harsh environments, (ii)
probabilistic life cycle assessment models that capture the full life cycle
impacts of reinforced concrete materials, and (iii) reliability-based design
approaches for infrastructure systems that meet economic, environmental, and
social sustainability limit states. Deterioration models will computationally
link physiochemical processes of ion transport, reinforcement corrosion
initiation, and corrosion propagation at smaller scales with finite element
models of degraded reinforced concrete structures at larger scales. When
orthogonally integrated with probabilistic life cycle impact measures, the
evolution of future economic, social, and environmental impacts of reinforced
concrete infrastructure can be computed, along with its likelihood of meeting
long-term, sustainability-focused, impact reduction targets. Ultimately, this
research provides a pathway for integrating sustainability-focused design goals
into modern structural engineering design methods.