* 1453263
* CAREER: Environmental Seismology and Geomechanics
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Victor Tsai, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

There are many Earth processes besides earthquakes that cause ground movement.
In particular, turbulent river motions, and sediment transported by these
motions, sea ice-ocean wave interactions, subglacial water flow, and
hydrothermal activity all cause ground motion that can be observed with
sensitive seismic instrumentation. This project makes use of such unique seismic
observations to quantitatively better understand these Earth processes, many of
which are extremely complex and poorly observed yet important both geophysically
and societally. These processes also share similar basic mechanics involving the
interactions of fluids with solids, and this project will result in new insights
into how fluid and solid mechanics combine in nature to produce the diverse
phenomena described. This interdisciplinary work helps improve flood warnings,
sea ice predictions, sea level rise predictions, and an understanding of induced
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the project is to improve
our ability to make use of seismic observations of environmental sources other
than earthquakes. Improvements in applying wave propagation tools in complex
environments and improvements in the interdisciplinary mechanics that governs
how these sources couple seismically are the main avenues by which this goal
will be attained. The new mechanics focused on here involves a better-integrated
understanding of fluid-solid interactions and how these interactions combine to
produce seismically observable ground motions. This is accomplished partly by
analytic approximations to couple forces from turbulent eddies with nearby
solids. Further semi-analytic approximations are used for wave propagation in
complex media. With the primary goals accomplished, the new observations will
help constrain aspects of the mechanics of these complex systems that have been
difficult to observe with other techniques. This is anticipated to lead to new
conceptual ideas about these systems that in turn are expected to lead to new
quantitative understanding of the geophysical processes underlying the observed
phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;