* 1453733
* CAREER: Roles of Organ Boundaries in Arabidopsis Abscission
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Sarah Liljegren, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2022
* USD 747,541.00

Plants must be able to release or drop various organs, such as leaves, flowers,
fruits and seeds, at specific developmental stages or in response to
environmental signals. This process is called abscission and relies on
specialized cells within abscission zones. Over the past decade, research using
the model plant Arabidopsis has revealed multiple components that regulate the
programmed loss of cell-to-cell adhesion in organ abscission zones. However,
little is currently known about the mechanisms that determine where abscission
zones are located or what genes are necessary for their development. In
Arabidopsis flowers, abscission zones form at boundary regions between the
floral organs and underlying stem. The focus of this research is to investigate
whether a subset of the genes known to control the position and development of
organ boundaries subsequently direct the formation of organ abscission zones.
Advances made in understanding the basis of abscission zone development may lead
to novel technologies to modify organ abscission in crop plants. The ability to
induce organ abscission would enhance fruit thinning and facilitate mechanical
harvest, while inhibition of abscission would prevent premature flower or fruit
drop and improve postharvest quality. The educational activities of this project
will provide advanced training in genetics for University of Mississippi
undergraduates and research opportunities for individuals preparing for graduate
education in STEM fields. Increased genetic literacy is vital for preparing
future health-care professionals and citizens alike to understand the rapid
advances underway in medical diagnostics, gene therapy and personalized
medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although key signaling pathways that activate
and inhibit organ abscission have been outlined in Arabidopsis, the progression
of events underlying abscission zone differentiation remains poorly understood.
Accumulating evidence suggests that abscission zone placement is influenced by
the formation of lateral organ as well as inter-organ boundaries. The goal of
the proposed research is to evaluate how the gene networks that pattern organ
boundaries in leaves, flowers and fruit contribute to abscission zone
positioning and specification. Mutants that perturb the definition of the sepal-
receptacle boundary and displace organ abscission zones will be used as tools to
investigate the hypothesized roles of selected organ boundary genes. Phenotypes
of mutants with organ boundary and abscission zone defects will be assessed
using scanning electron microscopy, histological analysis and molecular markers
of organ boundary and abscission zone cells. An expected outcome of these
studies is the identification of candidate transcriptional regulators of
abscission zone-specific signaling molecules. Genetics education for University
of Mississippi undergraduates will be enhanced by introducing an Honors Genetics
course, engaging Honors students in the PI's organ boundary experiments and
designing new Genetics laboratory modules. To provide training opportunities to
individuals with diverse educational backgrounds, the PI?s laboratory will host
multiple post-baccalaureate and undergraduate research interns during the
funding period. The PI has an established track record of mentoring young
scientists, many of whom are women and/or individuals from ethnic backgrounds
underrepresented in science.