* 1453081
* CAREER: Development of Reactive Electrochemical Membranes for Sustainable Water Treatment Applications: An Integrated Research and Education Plan
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Brian Chaplin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2021
* USD 530,000.00

1453081&lt;br/&gt;Chaplin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Development of Reactive
Electrochemical Membranes for Sustainable Water Treatment Applications: An
Integrated Research and Education Plan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the context
of sustainability, water will be critical in the 21st Century. There are
numerous aspects to water sustainability with one of the technology areas being
the development of membranes for many different uses. As examples, these
membranes may be useful in water and wastewater treatment and/or desalination.
Therefore, the overarching goal of this CAREER proposal is to promote water
sustainability through developing a new class of reactive electrochemical
membranes for water treatment. This will be accomplished through a comprehensive
research plan focused on membrane technology development, work to develop an
integrated education plan that translates this research into several teaching
modules, and professional development activities targeted at a diverse student
population. This work seeks to lay the groundwork for a new generation of
reactive electrode materials that will be useful across different water
treatment applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan includes the
development of novel membrane materials; a mechanistic understanding of the
processes associated with contaminant removal at reactive electrochemical
membranes; and new tools to assess and optimize reactive electrochemical
membranes performance (i.e., in situ flow-module and scanning electrochemical
microscopy). The specific research objectives are to 1) develop a mechanistic
understanding of the electrochemical reactions that occur on the reactive
electrochemical membranes surface in diverse water matrices; 2) understand how
these reactions act to destroy/remove water contaminants, inactivate pathogens,
and prevent biofilm formation; and 3) construct robust, reliable, and low
maintenance reactive electrochemical membranes that can be used in water
treatment. The PI also will develop, 1) new teaching modules focused on emerging
water treatment technologies; 2) educational manuscripts related to
environmental electrochemistry; and 3) innovative strategies for teaching and
knowledge dissemination that involve video labs and the use of social media to
create on-demand learning. This project will also introduce students from
underrepresented groups to engineering research; and improve the general
public's scientific literacy via dissemination of educational modules through
social media and involvement with Engineers without Borders.