* 1453675
* CAREER: Interactions of Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields with Biological Tissue: New Tools to Address Challenges and Exploit Opportunities
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Riccardo Lattanzi, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract



Nontechnical:

Although numerous ex vivo or in situ animal measurements have been made over
time, experimental access to in vivo electrical property distributions of human
tissue have remained extremely limited, and indeed fundamental questions
regarding the origin and distribution of these properties have tantalized
scientists for decades. The research objective of this CAREER proposal is to
develop, validate and disseminate a new method for reliable, non-invasive cross-
sectional mapping of tissue electrical properties, based on measurements
obtained with magnetic resonance (MR) imaging systems. This will provide insight
on the distribution of electromagnetic (EM) fields in tissue, which in this
project will be used to improve the diagnostic power of MR imaging, but could
also enable marked improvement in speed and accuracy over current probe-based EM
field mapping approaches used to satisfy safety regulatory requirements for
wireless devices. Furthermore, in vivo electrical properties maps could be
employed as biomarkers for cancer (and other pathologies), as well as to improve
the effectiveness of existing therapeutic modalities, such as radiofrequency
(RF) ablation, RF hyperthermia and electrochemotherapy. The Principal
Investigator (PI) also expects that knowledge of electrical properties will
provide an important new window into tissue structure and function, and will
represent a rich new area for basic and applied research. A high priority of
this proposal is the integration of educational and research activities. The PI
will develop new courses that offer hands-on training activities, and will
mentor and motivate students in research. Students at various levels and grades
will learn how to make broad connections across disciplines, embracing concepts
from electrodynamics, physics, biomedical engineering and medicine. The PI will
publicly release a variety of software and tutorials, which is expected to
generate new research projects and have an impact in education and training at
other institutions.

Technical: This project aims at extending general understanding of the
interactions of EM fields with biological tissue, in order to dramatically
improve high-field MR imaging performance. Maxwell's equations dictate the
relationship between the electrical conductivity and permittivity of a body and
the curvature of electromagnetic fields applied to that body. "Local Maxwell
Tomography" (LMT) is a recently introduced technique that uses MR-based
measurements of local field curvature to derive unknown electrical property
distributions, effectively inverting Maxwell's equations. This project will
establish a new generalized LMT technique that allows for high spatial
resolution maps and accounts for boundaries of electrical properties for
practical in vivo utilization. This will be employed for a wide range of
applications, as: i) develop techniques to allow for the first time local RF
power deposition monitoring and prediction in MR imaging; ii) engineer tailored
RF pulses that enable practical control of MR signal profile and local RF power
distribution; iii) create novel RF coil types and design concepts, using
electrodynamic simulations of the theoretically optimal performance as a
guideline. In vivo experiments will focus on collecting high-resolution in vivo
information on electrical properties of brain tissue types. This information,
currently not available, is expected to be of interest to researchers in a
variety of fields (e.g, transcranial magnetic stimulation). As a lead-in to
future studies, the PI will begin to investigate the biological basis of
observed electromagnetic contrast. Since, depending upon the measurement
frequency, permittivity and conductivity are believed to represent some
combination of tissue cellularity, cell membrane integrity, and water content,
the degree of correlation between conductivity images with spin-density MR
images will be assessed to begin to tease out some of the components of this
mixture.