* 1453493
* CAREER: Proof in Secondary Classrooms: Decomposing a Central Mathematical Practice
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2015,02/28/2023
* Michelle Cirillo, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 02/28/2023
* USD 967,653.00

This project, funded as part of the CAREER program, would add to the knowledge
base on the teaching and learning of proof in the context of the most prevalent
course/topic in which proof is taught in the K-12 curriculum, geometry. Given
the centrality of the role of proof, and the persistent difficulties in teaching
proof in the K-12 and undergraduate curriculum, the topic is of vital
importance. The work is novel, focusing on an area of proof that is
understudied, the introduction of students to the topic of proof. While building
on prior work in proof, the project will tackle an important area of beginning
to teach proof, which may lead to broader innovations at both the K-12 and
undergraduate level. The project will produce a resource, a set of lessons,
which can be used widely and are likely to be broadly disseminated based on the
PI's previous NSF-supported work, which has been broadly disseminated to
practitioner audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to
develop an intervention to support the teaching and learning of proof in the
context of geometry. This study takes as its premise that if we introduce proof,
by first teaching students particular sub-goals of proof, such as how to draw a
conclusion from a given statement and a definition, then students will be more
successful with constructing proofs on their own. The 5-year design and
development study builds on the researcher's prior work from a Knowles Science
Teaching Fellowship (KSTF) grant to study how teachers introduce proof to
students. This study will build on the prior work to refine a framework for
introducing proof developed in the KSTF study. Using this framework the
researcher will work with five high school geometry teachers to develop lessons
via Lesson Study methods to introduce sub-goals of proof. The PI will study the
impact of the use of these lessons on students' ability to perform proofs, and
compare to students of ten teachers who will not have participated in the
intervention.