* 1453771
* CAREER: Adaptive Tactile Picture Books for Blind Children during Emergent Literacy
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2022
* Tom Yeh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2022
* USD 581,999.00

This research is motivated by the importance of a child's early experiences with
picture books during emergent literacy, which is the period when a child
gradually learns to read. Picture books connect visual literacy, cultural
literacy, and print literacy, which is crucial for a child's literacy
development. But only a limited number of children's books have tactile pictures
accessible to blind children, and these typically cannot be modified to suit a
child's particular needs. With this in mind, the PI will investigate 3D printing
as the technical mechanism to physically realize a variation of an adaptive
tactile picture that is optimized for a specific child and to "make" just one
unique copy of it, something which is not possible with conventional printing
approaches geared toward mass production of a uniform design. Achieving this
vision will change the way tactile pictures are made available to visually
impaired children; a parent or a teacher will be able to download a digital 3D
model of a tactile picture book from a website, adapt the model for the child,
3D print the model, and read the resulting "one-of-a-kind" book together with
the child. Research products will include a website for sharing 3D tactile
pictures and open source tools for creating them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, which integrates science, design, and engineering, the PI will exploit
3D printing to overcome the lack of adaptation in conventional one-size-fits-all
tactile pictures. Specific Aim 1 will establish a new experimental framework,
based on large-scale dissemination to families and video-based behavioral
observations of children, for scientifically studying 3D-printed tactile
pictures. Specific Aim 2 will uncover the principles to elicit preferences and
abilities from a visually impaired child, and the adaptive transformations
necessary to optimize the design of a tactile picture specifically for that
child. Specific Aim 3 will introduce technical innovations to optimize the 3D
printing of tactile pictures, to simplify 3D modeling software to empower more
people to model tactile pictures, and to automate certain repetitive and
laborious steps using computer vision. To achieve these goals, the PI will
partner with the Anchor Center for Blind Children, the National Center on Severe
and Sensory Disabilities, the Colorado Talking Book Library, and the National
Braille Press, all of which are organizations with a shared interest in
promoting emergent literacy development of visually impaired children. Project
outcomes will advance our understanding of tactile pictures geared toward
visually impaired children, and of the tactilization process for storybook
pictures.