* 1453056
* CAREER: Transition to Turbulence and Mixing for Rayleigh Taylor Instability with Acceleration Reversal
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2021
* Arindam Banerjee, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2021
* USD 582,952.00

1453056 Banerjee

The focus of this proposal is to use both computational and experimental
components to elucidate mixing in variable density turbulence (i.e., when two
fluids of different density mix because of turbulence). The bulk of prior
research in this area has focused on the easier case of transport of mass
without effects on the flow field, and on canonical flows (e.g., channel flows,
jet flows, boundary layers). The proposed research aims to overcome the
difficulties associated with experimental studies of non-canonical flows (these
flows are the ones commonly found in industry and in nature), and to measure
turbulence quantities in unprecedented details in new settings. Such work can
open up developments in other areas of fluid dynamics, including multiphase
flow, heat transfer and combustion and shock-driven flows. The proposed
educational activities include the involvement of a local community college in
the PI's research, the development of an educational video series that would be
available through iTunes, and the inclusion of 8th to 12th graders in summer
camps for research.

The goal of the proposed research is to investigate the Rayleigh-Taylor
instability in variable density flows using both experiments and simulations.
This instability occurs when two fluids of different density are in contact, and
the denser fluid is accelerated by the lighter fluid. The PI has built a rather
unique experimental facility that would enable him to complete the experimental
part of the proposed work. It is a device that allows the control of
acceleration and deceleration of the fluid in a rotating system. The
experimental system even allows the switch from acceleration to deceleration and
then further reversals of acceleration. The PI proposes the use of planar laser-
induced fluorescence, PLIF, and stereo-Particle Image Velocimetry to obtain high
order statistics for the flow and scalar fields. In order to complement the
experiments with state-of-the-art simulations, the PI has established a
collaboration with LANL to conduct direct numerical simulations (DNS) of the
flow.