* 1453472
* CAREER: Geometric Frontiers in Algorithm Design
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Anastasios Sidiropoulos, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 10/31/2017
* USD 299,328.00

Complex data sets arise in a plethora of application domains from measurements
of various physical processes, history of financial transactions, logs of user
activity in a network, and so on. The analysis of such data sets is therefore a
task of increasing importance for science and engineering. Even though in many
applications there is an abundance of such raw inputs, extracting meaningful
information can often be a major computational challenge. In most cases, this
difficulty is due to the lack of a useful representation of the data.

Over the recent years, geometric methods have become an indispensable tool for
overcoming this difficulty. The reason behind this development is the fact that
a data set endowed with pairwise similarities can be naturally interpreted as a
geometric space. Such data sets include DNA sequences, statistical
distributions, collections of news articles, and so on. Under this
interpretation, several important data analytic questions can be understood as
geometric computational problems. For example, the problem of classification can
be expressed as geometric partitioning. Similarly, the problem of fitting a
model to set of measurements can be thought of as interpolation in some
appropriate geometric space.

In these contexts, the main algorithmic challenges occur in high-dimensional, or
more generally, complex metric spaces. This project aims at resolving some of
the main problems inherent in the analysis of such geometric data sets, and thus
enabling improved solutions for a variety of computational tasks. The project
also seeks to use diverse mathematical tools in the setting of geometric data
analysis, forging new connections between mathematics and computer science.

The proposed research will be part of the PI's curriculum development,
undergraduate and graduate teaching, and educational and outreach activities. It
will also provide the set of research problems that will be used for mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students.