* 1453483
* CAREER: Cyclodextrin-Promoted Energy Transfer: From Fundamental Molecular Interactions to Complex System Performance
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Mindy Levine, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 02/29/2020
* USD 718,667.00

Dr. Mindy Levine of the University of Rhode Island studies how molecules
interact with each other when they are in close proximity, but are not
physically contacted, and investigates how such interactions affect the transfer
of energy from one molecule to another. This knowledge is fundamentally
important and is useful for the design and optimization of systems for sensitive
detection of analytes (e.g., sensing of metabolites in biological fluids) or
environmental remediation (e.g., extraction of toxic substances in water from
oil spills). Additional broader impacts of this project include: 1) training of
graduate and undergraduate students in interdisciplinary research; 2) education
of high school girls in Rhode Island about the importance of science through the
outreach programs on the "Sugar Science Day"; 3) education of the general public
by sharing the videos of "Sugar Science Day" at YouTube; and 4) research
opportunities for high school girls through paid science
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, Dr. Levine's
research group studies fluorescence energy transfer from a variety of aromatic
energy donors to small molecule fluorophore acceptors, when both the donor and
acceptor are held in close proximity by cyclodextrins or cyclodextrin
derivatives in solution. Isothermal calorimetry, 2-D NMR analyses, and X-ray
crystallography are employed to determine the binding affinities and geometries
of the donors and acceptors in the ternary complexes. To enable the development
of applications requiring solid-state immobilization of cyclodextrins, the
researchers further investigate the effect of surface immobilization of
cyclodextrins on binding affinities and fluorescence energy transfer. This
research also aims to generate a cyclodextrin-based system for the extraction
and detection of polyaromatic hydrocarbons from complex oils.