* 1453219
* CAREER: A Systems Approach to Study Horizontal Acquisition of Regulatory DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Harris Wang, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2020
* USD 700,000.00

Non-technical Description Horizontal gene transfer is the process by which genes
are disseminated between different microbes in nature. This process is central
to the ability of microbes to rapidly evolve new traits and has been linked to
the spread of drug resistance and pathogenesis in humans, livestock, and
agriculture. However, basic determinants that govern how genes spread in natural
environments are not well characterized. This work utilizes a systems and
synthetic biology approach to experimentally probe the underlying rules that
determine the horizontal dissemination of genes between diverse bacteria
species. A foundational idea is that gene regulation is an important driver in
gene transfer. Results from this work will shed new light on a fundamental
property of microbial evolution and address critical knowledge gaps for
understanding the propagation of genetic material in natural and man-made
environments. This endeavor will also lead to the characterization of genetic
parts that will be useful for engineering a variety of microbes relevant in
areas of biotechnology, biomaterials, and biofuels. These new insights can lead
to improved strategies to contain the spread of problematic genetic materials
that may lead to diseases in humans, livestock and crops, as well as those that
alter the natural ecosystem in undesirable ways. This research will also provide
creative educational and training opportunities for students from high school
and regional undergraduate institutions with a diverse student population.

Technical Description Recent sequencing efforts have highlighted the
significance of horizontal gene transfer (HGT) in shaping microbial evolution.
However, systems-level principles that govern the transfer and assimilation of
foreign DNA into new hosts remain largely unexplored. An important corollary is
that foreign regulatory elements that determine the level of transcription and
translation for downstream protein-coding sequences may play a key role in HGT.
Poorly expressed or translated foreign genes will not be beneficial to the
receiving microbe and will be lost, while deregulated genes with abnormally high
levels of expression are also selected against as they cause unnecessary
resource burdens on the host. Therefore, the "Goldilocks" window of regulatory
compatibility between donor and recipient microbes may be a significant and thus
far underappreciated determinant in HGT. This NSF CAREER project aims to develop
a systems and synthetic biology research program to answer key questions in this
area. The proposal aims to determine whether compatibility of cis-regulatory
elements in the donor DNA and the recipient's regulatory machinery is a key
determinant of HGT and genomic acquisition of new DNA. This proposal aims to
develop high-throughput methods using DNA library synthesis and sequencing to
measure transcriptional and translational activity of tens of thousands of
horizontally acquired regulatory elements. This proposal also aims to understand
the regulatory barriers of HGT in diverse bacterial systems and identify
strategies by which promiscuous mobile DNA such as conjugative plasmids and
transposons are able to overcome such barriers to function in different species.