* 1453921
* CAREER: Modeling, Analysis, and Control of Low-Inertia Microgrids
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2021
* Sairaj Dhople, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The electrical power system has been widely recognized as one of the most
important engineering achievements. High power quality and availability are
maintained in the bulk power system mainly by enforcing hierarchical operational
practices, central decision making, and redundancy. However, this status quo is
being challenged by changing generation, consumption, and operational
landscapes. In particular, there is increased emphasis on renewable generation
and the impetus to improve resiliency to extenuating weather impacts. The
challenge is to develop innovative architectural and operational paradigms. A
compelling framework to address these goals is provided by low-inertia
microgrids. Low-inertia microgrids are a collection of heterogeneous energy
sources with limited mechanical inertia that includes photovoltaic (PV) arrays,
fuel cells, and energy-storage devices that are interfaced to an AC electric
distribution network. The project seeks to highlight fundamental cross-cutting
challenges relevant across different research domains in low-inertia AC
electrical systems. Broad transformative impacts will follow from integration of
the proposed research with an educational dissemination plan, involvement of
undergraduates in research, and outreach to the local community and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to outline fundamental
modeling, analysis, and control challenges in low-inertia microgrids. It seeks
to unify circuit- and system-theoretic methods to engineer energy technologies
that emphasize increased renewable integration, sustainable capacity expansion,
and improved electricity access. The research agenda focuses on the twin
objectives of optimally engineering low-inertia microgrids while contributing to
the foundational science that links power systems, complex networks, and
nonlinear dynamical systems. The research outcomes will facilitate a seamless
transition to future power systems that are adaptable to local needs, resilient
to extenuating impacts, and distributed in control and operation.