* 1453397
* CAREER: Differentiating mechanisms of ecological divergence in sympatric microbial populations using an integrated population genomics approach
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Peter Bergholz, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 810,512.00

A centerpiece of evolutionary ecology research is to understand how new
adaptations arise and spread in populations leading to speciation. The
adaptation of microbes is important to understand, because microbes are: a) the
primary drivers of global biogeochemical cycles, b) the means of production for
many applications in biotechnology, and c) the causes of most infectious
diseases. Microbes are frequently moved around by the action of animals, plants,
wind and water, and may be deposited in unfavorable habitats. As a consequence,
microbes adapt to new environments through to a combination of fast mutation
rates and acquisition of new genes directly from their environment. There is a
pressing need to better understand these processes by which microbes generate
and maintain adaptive genetic variation, because such information is needed to
forecast the responses of microbial species to rapid changes in land management
or climate. This project studies how adaptive genetic variation permits a common
bacteria important in biotechnology and the food supply, Escherichia coli, to
survive after deposition in unfavorable habitats. Data on this process can tell
us about how adaptive variation in populations contributes to the formation of
new species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to use the process
of passive dispersal to diverse habitats as a natural experiment in order to
differentiate between three models of ecological divergence in microbial
populations. Studies of the landscape level structure in microbial populations
will be complemented with genome-wide association studies. These experiments
will link genomic polymorphisms to variation in phenotype, gene expression
regulation, and source environment characteristics. These analyses will be
coupled with laboratory challenges to quantify the adaptive value of genomic
polymorphisms. Machine learning analytical techniques will be used to determine
which of three models of ecological divergence best explains the data. An
education program will teach undergraduate students about the ecological
processes contributing to microevolution and speciation in microbes. The program
will combine an agent-based model and data from experiments to teach students to
interpret genomic adaptations in light of ecological processes acting on
microbes in natural environments.