* 1453519
* CAREER: Exploring the Immunological Priming in Basal Metazoan (Anthozoan)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Mauricio Rodriguez-Lanetty, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 574,995.00

Coral reefs are among the most biologically diverse and economically important
ecosystems on the planet. However, they are at risk of demise from ongoing and
impending environmental stressors and disease-causing agents. There is a need to
understand the mechanisms of resistance to pathogenic stressors by corals if we
are to influence the persistence of coral reefs under current challenges. Here a
research program will elucidate the specificity, memory and molecular basis of
the defense response of corals upon repetitive encounters with pathogens.
Understanding how the immune system of these organisms responds to pathogens may
offer insights into the resilience of these ecosystems, and potentially may
inform remediation of them. One clear implication would be the development of
immunization protocols to improve tolerance and survival of corals and their
relatives. The proposed research will increase and potentially transform our
understanding of the dynamic immunological response of these basal animals,
which remains grossly understudied despite the ecological and economic
importance of coral reefs. Furthermore, the project will build science capacity
through the training and education of the next generation of American and
international young scientists. The lead investigator will develop research and
educational projects to support K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students
within the integrated scope of the project. A strong emphasis will be placed on
developing outreach programs for Hispanic high school students and other
minority students from the Miami metropolitan area with the goal of generating
interest in science education and facilitating growth in the recruitment and
participation of these underrepresented groups in undergraduate fields of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. An important aspect of this
educational project is the synergy between the research laboratory of an early-
career scientist, a well-established Hispanic Serving Institution (Florida
International University) and the local public school system in Miami-Dade
County, all joined in the mission to stimulate interest in science careers
through exposure to inspired teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral diseases are
of great concern since they have emerged over recent decades as a significant
threat to coral reef ecosystems. In order to understand and influence the
persistence of coral reefs under current challenges, it is imperative to
understand the mechanisms of immunological resistance to pathogens in corals and
their relatives (Cnidaria, Anthozoa). The Principal Investigator will elucidate
the role of immune priming in the response of anthozoans upon repetitive
encounters to infectious agents. The approach uses the sea anemone model
Exaiptasia pallida to determine whether the immune system of this organism
exhibits specific memory in response to infectious agents, as indicated by
accelerated defensive responses upon subsequent exposures to pathogens, a
phenomenon that remains largely unknown in basal metazoans. This research also
investigates the lasting effect of induced protective response upon multiple
repetitive pathogenic encounters. Furthermore, transcriptomic profiles and
histological approaches will be used to facilitate the discovery of the
molecular and cellular mechanisms underpinning the phenomenon of immune priming.