* 1453752
* CAREER: High Pressure Studies of Novel Quantum Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* James Hamlin, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 599,411.00

*** Non- Technical Abstract ***&lt;br/&gt;When matter is tuned from one phase to
another (e.g. magnetic to non-magnetic, or insulating to metallic) unexpected
phases often emerge near the transition. Studies of systems exhibiting such
transitions (known as "quantum phase transitions") not only have the potential
to advance our understanding of matter on a basic level, but also to provide
insights that may allow us to tailor these emergent quantum phases for practical
applications. One example of such an emergent phase is superconductivity.
Superconductors exhibit completely lossless transmission of electricity, and
advances in superconducting materials have the potential for broad impacts with
applications including low-loss power lines, high efficiency energy storage
units, electrical generators and motors, sensitive magnetic field detectors,
high frequency filters, magnetically levitated trains, and computers. The goal
of this project is to use applied high pressure to discover new emergent phases
of matter and to advance our ability to understand and control these phases.
Applied pressure provides a powerful means of rapidly tuning a single material
through a variety of phases. Through an integrated outreach program, K-12
students from groups under-represented in STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics) will learn that science can be exciting and that
they can have fun learning physics principles. This positive experience will
encourage some of these students to pursue STEM educations and careers.
Undergraduate and graduate students will learn to become better scientific
communicators through their outreach participation and will receive
interdisciplinary technical training in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***
Technical Abstract ***&lt;br/&gt;The study of phase transitions that are driven
by quantum, rather than thermal, fluctuations represent one of the frontiers of
condensed matter physics. Such systems show a strong propensity to exhibit
intriguing and poorly understood phenomena associated with the interplay between
competing quantum ground states. By affording comparison with theory over a
continuous range of conditions, experiments designed to drive materials through
quantum phase transitions using hydrostatic pressure render a potent
contribution to advancing our understanding of the exotic phases of matter that
sometimes emerge near such transitions. The goal of this project is to carry out
high pressure experiments designed to advance our understanding of the
properties of matter in the vicinity of quantum phase transitions. A particular
emphasis is placed on the emergence of novel superconducting states. The
approach can be broadly summarized as follows: (1) Synthesize high-quality,
single-crystalline specimens of materials that are either known to or likely to
exhibit quantum phase transitions, (2) Probe the properties of these materials
under multi-extreme conditions of high-pressure, high magnetic fields, and low
temperatures, and (3) Further refine certain high pressure techniques so that
they are simple enough to perform as a routine part of sample characterization.