* 1453473
* CAREER: The genetics underlying adaptive diversification of mimicry patterns in bumble bees
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Heather Hines, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/28/2021
* USD 817,000.00

New advances in genomics allow for the discovery of the genes responsible for
specific traits of organisms and for complex patterns of trait variation that
have evolved in species across their geographic range. To better understand the
evolutionary mechanisms that determine trait variation and that promote rapid
adaptation to environmental change, studies are needed that can link traits to
the genes that encode them, especially in species that show extraordinary trait
variation. Bumble bees (Bombus) are especially suited for such research: the 250
species worldwide have evolved to exhibit >600 color patterns, in which similar
color patterns evolve in different species when they live in the same
geographical location. This project will explore how these different color
patterns form in Bumble Bee species across North America by identifying the
pigments that are responsible for color patterns and then identifying the genes
responsible for those pigments and the observed geographic patterns of color
variation. This research will provide general insights into how color variation
arises in nature, and will also help to address a long standing question in
evolutionary biology regarding the repeatability of evolution. Are the same
genes in different species responsible for the same color patterns or are
different genes able to produce the same color patterns? This research will
directly address this question and in answering it help us understand whether
evolution is truly repeatable or whether it just looks repeatable and that there
are many evolutionary paths to get to the same outcome.

This CAREER project builds foundational knowledge on the genetic and
evolutionary processes enabling the mimetic radiation of bumble bees. The
project will address the mimetic process by characterizing the geographic
distribution of color patterns in North America bumble bees and how they are
impacted by climate. It will reveal how these bees are pigmented and the factors
that influence their coloration, providing a foundation for further genetic
work. Pigment discovery will extend to a diversity of insects through
undergraduate research and classroom modules on insect pigment chemistry. As a
primary aim, gene mapping and gene expression approaches will be used to
identify genes driving red/black and yellow/black bumble bee color variation.
Black and yellow pattern morphs of the subgenus Bombus will demonstrate how
adaptive gene variants are transferred across species, populations, and sexes.
The discovery of the genes behind black and red mimetic convergence in western
U.S. bumble bees will inform on the genetic complexity underlying bumble bee
mimicry. Identifying these genes will enable a broader comparative approach to
examine how adaptive genes have been targeted and transferred across this
replicate-rich radiation.