* 1453543
* CAREER: Reverse Data Management: Reverse-Engineering Data Transformations to Understand, Diagnose, and Manipulate Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Alexandra Meliou, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 576,092.00

Today, data is critical in almost every aspect of society, including healthcare,
education, economy, and science. Applications in these domains have benefited
from the rapid growth and increased availability of data through online
repositories, marketplaces, and other sharing platforms. However, because data
is easily shared and reused, it has become less curated and less reliable. Data
is often misused because its validity and origin are unclear, and mistakes
easily propagate as data is often used to derive other data. This project will
design and develop new technologies to assist data-reliant applications in
overcoming these challenges, by extending data management capabilities to
support operations that reverse-engineer data transformations. Understanding and
reasoning with data derivations will lead to better understanding of surprising
observations, more accurate and efficient diagnoses of problems, and better
tools for making data-driven decisions and planning. This work will broadly
impact society through the development of new data analysis capabilities, which
will, in turn, improve data quality and positively affect data-driven processes.
Overall, these improvements will increase the positive impact that data and
computing systems have on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
establish the theoretical foundations and will address practical challenges to
support reverse data management capabilities in database systems. Reverse data
management focuses on reverse transformations that manipulate input data on
behalf of desired outcomes in the output data (as opposed to traditional data
management that typically focuses on forward-moving data flows, such as
querying, aggregation, and indexing). The research goal of this project is to
augment database systems with user-facing reverse data management functionality.
This project will target three reverse data management needs of modern
applications: (1) assisting users with understanding data and verifying data-
based computation results, (2) diagnosing problems by tracing the root causes of
data errors, and (3) identifying changes in data and processes that lead to
improved, more desirable results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information
see the project web site at: http://rdm.cs.umass.edu