* 1453576
* CAREER: Rational design of a biomimetic nanomaterial library to probe mechanisms behind virus-induced immunopathology
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Evan Scott, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 01/31/2021
* USD 503,844.00

PI: Scott, Evan A.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1453576&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viruses are intricate nanoscale structures that
have evolved diverse strategies of influencing the immune system to evade
detection and prolong residence within their hosts. The resulting virus-related
pathophysiology is accompanied by well-intended inflammatory immune responses
aimed at rectifying a disrupted homeostasis. The morphology, surface chemistry,
and cellular targets of viruses directs this inflammation, which in many
instances becomes dysregulated, resulting in a range of pathologies that can be
more harmful than the original viral infection itself. Understanding the
specific inflammatory triggers that can induce a particular immunological
response is therefore essential to the identification and treatment of virus-
induced pathologies as well as impact a broad range of inflammation-driven
disease states including atherosclerosis and even seasonal allergies.
Unfortunately, the specific mechanisms that are responsible for such harmful
immune dysregulations are often prohibitively complex and difficult to isolate.
Recent advances in biomedical engineering (BME) and nanotechnology now permit
unprecedented control over the physical and chemical properties of synthetic
nanostructures, which can be designed to mimic the mechanisms of infection
utilized by nanoscale pathogens such as viruses. The research objective of this
proposal is therefore to engineer virus-mimicking nanostructures that will serve
as tools to investigate specific hypotheses of how viruses can generate
dysregulated immune responses. As engineering approaches to immunological
questions become more commonplace, future students and researchers interested in
highly specialized areas of immunology and virology must be encouraged to pursue
careers in the field of BME. The educational objective of this proposal
therefore implements a multi-pronged high school BME program that exposes
students, as well as their parents, to the diverse opportunities made accessible
by a career in BME. This proposal aims to expand BME into new specialized fields
of biological science by directly demonstrating the benefits of engineering-
based techniques and principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key need in the study of
viral immunopathology is a customizable, in situ method to probe how specific
viral structures, surface chemistries, and biodistributions contribute to virus-
induced dysregulation of the immune system. The PI will rationally design a
library of virus-mimicking polymeric nanocarriers (NCs) to investigate the basic
biochemical and cellular mechanisms that trigger the model immunodysregulatory
disorder hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). HLH can be controllably
induced in several mouse models following infection by the lymphocytic
choriomeningitic virus (LCMV). Since the polymers are inert and do not elicit
inflammatory responses, the NCs can be considered "blank slates" in which a
diverse range of molecules and immunostimulants will be incorporated for
controlled transport to and activation of specific immune cells. The essential
inflammatory mechanisms that induce HLH are poorly understood, and so this
system will be simplified by dividing the various inflammatory components within
LCMV, such as its glycoprotein envelope or RNA, into separate NCs that mimic the
biodistribution and mechanisms of intracellular degradation of the virus. NCs
are assembled from block copolymers, and can be engineered into vesicular and
filamentous nanostructures, which respectively target diverse and restricted
subsets of inflammatory immune cells. Vesicles will probe hypothesized
biochemical mechanisms responsible for HLH by inducing controlled systemic
cytokine expression and effector T cell activation. The filaments will
investigate the specific cellular role of plasmacytoid dendritic cells, which
are an inflammatory immune cell population essential to immune responses against
LCMV. Through the use of controlled synthetically induced infections, the key
LCMV-related inflammatory mechanisms or combinations thereof responsible for HLH
will be identified. This work will demonstrate the use of rationally designed
nanomaterials to enhance the understanding of how specific inflammatory triggers
contribute to immunopathology. Furthermore, data gathered in these studies will
provide insight into essential design criteria required for eliciting specific
and controlled immunological responses.