* 1453424
* CAREER: Reducing barriers for comparative methods
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Brian O'Meara, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 738,297.00

A major question in evolutionary biology is how and why species have changed
over time. From observing species in the present, for example, we know that
competition can drive species to become different. Rather than remaining two
species with similar sizes, those competing species can change, with one
becoming larger or smaller than the other. Similar processes of change likely
occurred in the past. There are other questions about past processes: how did
the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs affect mammal evolution, how have human
diseases evolved as humans settled more in cities, and so forth. Evolutionary
biologists address these questions by writing a model to describe the process
and then estimating aspects of the model: how strongly do species repel each
other, what was the rate increase in mammals, how has virulence changed through
time. However, for many of these questions, developing the models has been
intractable, leaving these questions largely unanswerable. This project will
develop tools to make creating these models much easier. It does so by using
computers to simulate evolution under a particular model and tries adjusting the
model parameters to best predict observed data, an approach known as approximate
Bayesian computation. This will be enhanced by hackathons, intense meetings
where scientists and developers gather to create or extend software, and which
also serve to increase the programming skills and tools of biologists. An
additional outcome of this project is the creation of an open course to teach
cutting edge methods for understanding the past using family trees of current
and extinct species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines new approaches
for approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) for comparative methods as a way to
implement new models with meetings to have new and experienced coders work
together on projects (hackathons) as well as a new open phylogenetics course.
The ABC approach will be written in R, given R's widespread usage in the
comparative methods user community, and uses a discrete time model that allows
biologists to code a model for movement in one generation and then uses this
model on a phylogenetic tree. Prototype code is already available (package
TreEvo) and will be developed under an open source model. Together, the research
and teaching will speed up methods development, broaden the pool (in number and
diversity) of people who can create new approaches to answer their questions,
and strengthen phylogenetic training in general.