* 1453756
* CAREER: Role of slow and fast gamma rhythms during sleep
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Laura Colgin, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2021
* USD 876,356.00

This project investigates the relation between brain rhythms during sleep and
memory. The question of whether sleep serves a critical function in learning and
memory remains strongly debated. There are two stages of sleep, rapid eye
movement sleep (REM) and slow-wave sleep (SWS), and these different sleep stages
may play unique roles in memory functions. This project tests the novel
hypothesis that different types of brain waves, slow and fast gamma rhythms,
occur during SWS and REM, respectively, and differentially regulate memory
processing during these states. The project employs a state-of-the art approach
that involves recording electrical signals from the brains of live animals and
decoding the messages transmitted by these signals during wakeful learning and
subsequent sleep. The studies are expected to reveal major insights about how
memories may be strengthened during sleep. The results will also make progress
toward successful decoding of conscious and unconscious brain activity. This is
expected to promote the development of devices that advance human intelligence
through brain signal translation. This project will also provide scientific
training to students at various levels, from junior high to graduate school, and
impart knowledge about brain signals to the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test whether distinct fast (~80 Hz) and
slow (~40 Hz) gamma rhythms serve unique memory functions in the entorhinal-
hippocampal network during different stages of sleep. The work has two
objectives: 1) Test the hypothesis that slow gamma facilitates hippocampal
output to the entorhinal cortex during SWS as part of the memory consolidation
process, and 2) Test the hypothesis that fast gamma coordinates entorhinal input
to the hippocampus during REM as a different step in the memory consolidation
process. The proposal employs an innovative multi-technique approach combining
single cell recordings, neuronal ensemble coding, network rhythms, and animal
behavior. The proposed work has the potential to transform theories of memory
processing during sleep. An influential theory of memory consolidation posits
that memories are transferred from the hippocampus to the neocortex during
sleep. Yet, it is unknown whether neurons in the entorhinal cortex, the gateway
between the hippocampus and neocortex, respond to inputs from the hippocampus
during sleep. If, instead, the hippocampus responds to inputs from the
entorhinal cortex during sleep, conventional theories of memory consolidation
during sleep would have to be revised.