* 1453044
* CAREER: A Cellular and Molecular Analysis of a Specific Retinal Lineage that Generates Cone Photoreceptors and Horizontal Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2023
* Mark Emerson, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 08/31/2023
* USD 751,532.00

An embryo develops from a single cell and this cell generates new cells with
increasingly specific functions. For each tissue, there are progenitor cells
that then generate more new cells that make up that tissue. Cells that allow us
to see color, cone photoreceptors, are formed from progenitor cells in the
developing eye. This project will focus on how the progenitor cells form these
photoreceptors. The information that directs this process is found in DNA.
Experiments will use specific DNA sequences that are involved in the formation
of cone photoreceptors to track the progenitor cells in real time as they change
into new cells that become cone photoreceptors. This research is expected to
lead to new insights into how unique cells are formed during eye development. In
addition, this project will engage early stage undergraduates to participate in
both this research project and to be leaders of an outreach activity to the New
York Public School system. Middle school students will be introduced to what it
is to be a scientist, which will open the door to the possibility that they can
also become one. This CAREER award will allow the Principal Investigator to
develop a sustainable integrated research and outreach program at a large
minority serving institution in Harlem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has recently
been recognized that there are retinal progenitor cell populations that are
restricted in the cell types that they will generate. The goal of this study is
to investigate one of these populations that preferentially generates cone
photoreceptors and horizontal cells. To accomplish this, multiple approaches
that use cell-type specific transcriptional regulatory elements will be applied.
At the cellular level, these elements will be used to determine the subtypes of
cone and horizontal cells formed from these progenitor cells. In addition, live
imaging will be used to analyze the daughter fates of single cone/horizontal
cell progenitors to define the heterogeneity of the lineage. At the molecular
level, the role of the Notch-Delta signaling pathway in this progenitor lineage
will be examined. Finally, whole transcriptome and epigenome signatures of cells
as they transition through the cone/horizontal cell progenitor lineage will be
determined. At its conclusion, this project is expected to provide a novel
molecular examination of a genetically defined retinal lineage.