* 1453736
* CAREER: Transport Phenomena in Ultracold Neutral Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Scott Baalrud, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 04/30/2021
* USD 550,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award supports a
fundamental theoretical investigation of the transport properties of ultracold
neutral plasmas. Ultracold plasmas are a novel state of matter because the low
temperature causes constituent particles, electrons and ions, to be strongly
coupled. This medium has fundamentally different properties than traditional
plasmas, analogous to the ways in which liquids differ from gases. Strongly
coupled plasmas arise in several disciplines influencing energy, security and
fundamental physics research. Examples include dense plasmas found in inertial
confinement fusion experiments, intense laser-material interaction studies,
sonoluminescing microbubbles, as well as astrophysical objects such as white
dwarfs and giant planet interiors. Ultracold plasmas provide a unique window to
view this physics because they can be accurately measured using lasers. This
enables detailed tests of theoretical models. In addition to the theoretical
research, a complimentary outreach program will introduce the public to plasma
physics through an interactive "What is Plasma" demonstration. This will be an
integral part of a larger exhibit on the history of space science at the
University of Iowa (UI) to be displayed by the UI Natural History Museum, and
later as a traveling exhibit in the UI Mobile Museum.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Ultracold plasmas are formed by laser-induced ionization of trapped
ultracold atoms, resulting in a charge-neutral mixture of cold ions and
electrons. Advances provided by this project are statistical mechanical theory
and molecular dynamics simulations capable of accounting for both components of
the plasma. Theory and simulations in this relatively new field have focused on
one-component models, treating the plasma as a single fluid. The new advances
address two-component physics that will become increasingly important as
experiments strive for lower temperatures. The particular processes that will be
emphasized are equation of state, mutual diffusion, viscosity and energy
relaxation rates. The project will focus on understanding how various
microphysics processes affect macroscopic transport, including the opposite sign
of electron and ion charge, the nonequilibrium nature of electrons and ions, and
the dynamic dielectric response of the plasma. The results will provide insights
into the fundamental physics of strongly coupled plasmas, contributing to
several frontier research fields.