* 1453086
* CAREER: Semantics, Abstractions, and Tools for a Pragmatic Verified LLVM Compiler
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Santosh Nagarakatte, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2020
* USD 561,000.00

Title: : CAREER: Semantics, Abstractions, and Tools for a Pragmatic Verified
LLVM Compiler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compilers are crucial components of the
computing ecosystem. They can transform source programs written in multiple
languages (e.g, C/C++/Java) into multiple target architectures (e.g, x86/ARM).
Compiler bugs, however, break properties enforced at the level of source
programs and can lead to unintended application behavior and disasters in
safety-critical domains. This project aims to develop pragmatic and lightweight
formal techniques for making mainstream compilers robust, in a manner that can
be easily adopted by compiler developers. The intellectual merit of this project
is the development of real-world compiler verification environments drawing
influence from multiple areas like programming languages, architecture, and
concurrency. The project's broader significance and importance are: (1)
improving the quality of a large number of software projects by improving the
robustness of the compiler, (2) inculcating formal reasoning for building large
systems (compilers in particular) that are correct by construction, and (3)
educating high school students, undergraduates, and graduate students for
developing software with lightweight formal methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to build new techniques and tools that can check the correctness of
optimizations with the help of the developer. The project achieves this by (1)
designing mathematically-precise semantics for various components of the
mainstream LLVM compiler, (2) designing domain specific languages for writing
and specifying LLVM optimizations, which not only check optimizations for
correctness but also generate efficient C++ implementations, (3) designing
techniques to build precise translation validators, which compare the source and
the target code with assistance from the compiler developer. Technology
developed by this research will not only improve the reliability of compilers
but also the reliability of other large software systems which depend on correct
compilation.