* 1453098
* CAREER: Biomolecular Engineering Approach to Controlling Cell Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Josephine Allen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2021
* USD 501,703.00

PI: Allen, Josephine&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1453098&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing strategies to control cellular functions
is critical in the field of tissue engineering. This is often achieved through
the activation of receptor proteins on the surface of the cells, which triggers
a cascade of events leading to a desired cellular response. Of interest are the
cellular responses that contribute to the formation of a blood vessels network.
Controlling blood vessel formation is paramount to the success of many
engineered tissue substitutes, and continues to be a challenge and a barrier to
progress within the field. Current strategies include the use of receptor
specific growth factors, which are difficult to control, can be unstable,
require high doses, and may bind to unintentional targets. There is a need to
promote blood vessel formation using alternative strategies. In this proposal,
the PI seeks to develop a new strategy to control cellular processes through the
use of highly tunable small molecules termed, aptamers. If successful, the
proposed studies will advance our understanding of the fundamental science
involved in controlling cellular behavior, and have a significant impact on the
field of tissue engineering. Education and outreach activities have been
integrated with the proposed research and involve providing hands-on research
experience to students in local middle and high school, the creation of online
educator resources which will be available to K-12 teachers nationwide, as well
as outreach to underrepresented minority undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Growth factors are used extensively in the field
of tissue engineering to bind and activate cell surface receptors, with the
ultimate goal to control receptor mediated process. This is particularly true
for cell processes involved in angiogenesis, with the most successful approach
involving the use of vascular endothelial growth factor. However, this strategy
is limited due to instability of growth factors, the high doses required for
efficacy, off target effects, and the lack of control of vessel development at
distant sites. To address these shortcomings the investigator proposes the use
of a highly tunable aptamer based platform as a strategy to engineer tissue
constructs that can promote and support the formation of a vascular network. The
challenge is to engineer aptamer structures to create a supramolecular aptamer
assembly (SAA) that can be used to not only bind but activate target receptors
and thereby control receptor mediated processes. The objective is to reveal the
structural constraints that govern SAA-receptor binding and agonist behavior.
Towards this goal the scientific aims set forth by this proposal are 1)
characterization of supramolecular aptamer assembly (SAA) structures and target
receptor interactions; and 2) correlate supramolecular aptamer assembly (SAA)
structure with overall function to induce and promote angiogenesis. To
successfully complete these aims, techniques established in the PI's lab will be
employed for aptamer synthesis, receptor screening, and molecular evaluations of
receptor interactions, including protein and gene expression changes. Structural
biology and biophysical techniques will be employed to assess the structural
constraints involved in aptamer-receptor interactions. Lastly, a three-
dimensional model of angiogenesis will be used to quantitatively assess SAA
induced angiogenesis. Completion of the tasks set forth will lay the foundation
for a targeted and robust aptamer mediated neovascularization approach.