* 1453459
* CAREER: Regulation and Function of Imprinted Gene Expression in Seeds
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2021
* Mary Gehring, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 11/30/2021
* USD 1,800,225.00

Plant seeds are an important part of the human diet, and they also play a vital
role in plant reproduction. However, the precise molecular details of how seeds
develop and grow are not well understood. The goal of this project is to advance
our understanding of seed development, which in turn could have a beneficial
outcome for production of seeds as a nutritious food source. The project will
also provide interdisciplinary education and training in genetics, genomics,
bioinformatics, and molecular biology for high school teachers, undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows. High school science teachers will
spend two summers in the laboratory, participating directly in research
activities and developing inquiry-based learning modules related to plant
biology research, which they will bring back to their classrooms. This
partnership will establish long-term connections to teachers to increase their
students' ability to analyze quantitative information and generate knowledge
from scientific exploration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seed development in flowering
plants is regulated, in part, by genes that are imprinted. Gene imprinting is an
epigenetic phenomenon whereby alleles of genes are differentially expressed
depending on whether they are inherited from the male or female parent. To
understand and manipulate seed biology to beneficial effect requires deciphering
the regulation and function of imprinted gene expression. Recent studies have
created catalogues of imprinted genes in diverse plant species, and have yielded
important insights about the extent of imprinting and the types of genes subject
to imprinted expression. However, it remains unclear whether all imprinting is
functional, or whether some instances of imprinting are bystander events due to
genome-wide epigenetic reprogramming processes. The major aims of this research
project are to comprehensively evaluate the function of imprinted genes in seed
development, to test whether pure epigenetic variation is sufficient to induce
imprinting variation, and to understand the gene networks that regulate
imprinting by taking advantage of natural variation in imprinting phenotypes.
This research will have substantial outcomes in further determining the
functional consequences of imprinting and in understanding epigenetic mechanisms
that regulate imprinted expression, increasing our understanding of seed biology
and role of natural variation in these processes. Finally, tools to precisely
engineer the DNA methylome in a sequence specific manner will be developed,
allowing a direct test of whether specific DNA methylation patterns are
necessary and sufficient for imprinted expression. These tools have the
potential to be functional in other plant and animal species.