* 1453799
* CAREER Molecular Basis of Synapse Specific Long-Term Memory Storage
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Sathyanarayanan Puthanveettil, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2020
* USD 612,005.00

One of the fundamental questions in neuroscience concerns memory-- how it works
and why it goes wrong. Decades of research have identified that, at the cellular
level, formation of new synaptic connections and remodeling of pre-existing
synaptic connections are critical for memory formation. However, very little is
known about how long-term memories are stored at specific synapses in the brain.
To address this fundamental and unresolved problem, the investigators will take
advantage of the large, identified neurons of the well-studied gill-withdrawal
reflex circuitry of the sea snail Aplysia. The key components of this neural
circuitry can easily be identified, isolated, and cultured to generate neural
circuits in a dish that are amenable to investigation at the single-cell and
subcellular level. Integrating synapse-specific physiological measurements with
state-of-the-art live-cell imaging and tools for single-cell genomics analysis,
the investigators will study the role of axonal transport in generating and
maintaining synapse-specific long-term memory. The results from this work will
yield novel insights into the molecular mechanisms that underlie the synapse-
specific nature of long-term memories. As part of this project, high school and
undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds will receive mentoring and be
actively involved in various aspects of this study. Furthermore, a neuroscience
inquiry-based lesson that involves the training of middle and high school
students and middle school teachers will be developed and implemented.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project investigates the molecular and
cellular mechanisms underlying synapse-specific long-term memory storage. First,
the project will assess whether and how gene products such as proteins and mRNAs
are transported from the cell-body of neurons to specific synapses. Because the
molecular motor protein kinesin mediates the transport of gene products from the
cell-body, kinesin movement to synapses during memory formation and maintenance
will be studied using advanced quantitative live-cell imaging microscopy.
Second, mRNAs transported to specific synaptic compartments by kinesin will be
identified using single-cell genomics tools. Third, whether and how the synapse
communicates back to the cell-body during memory formation will be studied by
characterizing the molecular motor protein dynein that moves from the synapse to
the cell body. Taken together, these studies will bring novel molecular and
mechanistic insights into understanding long-term memory storage and help
identify specific mRNAs localized to specific synaptic compartments for storing
long-term memories.