* 1453527
* CAREER: De Novo Assembly of Large Genomic Data
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2022
* Paul Medvedev, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2022
* USD 549,010.00

Sequencing is an experimental wet-lab technique to obtain information about the
genome of an organism. The computational problem of genome assembly is to
reconstruct the full sequence of the genome from sequencing data. Genome
assembly faces several major challenges, including scalability, accuracy, and
adaptability to new technology. In order to tackle these challenges, this
project will develop new algorithms for assembly and explore their theoretical
foundations. The developed algorithms and theory will make assembly tools more
scalable and accurate and will enable assembly of data from emerging
technologies. They will enable previously impractical assembly projects and
allow biologists to perform assembly without needing expensive hardware. Genome
assembly is becoming an increasingly important step in tackling some of our
major societal challenges. For example, the study of plant genomes gives
insights into sources of renewable energy, and helps identify the genome
characteristics that can confer parasite resistance to plants. In epidemiology,
the variability between the genomes of different pathogens strains or species
can help pinpoint the geographic origin of a disease. Improving the quality of
the human genome assembly will also help achieve the goals of the BRAIN
Initiative Grand Challenge, by improving our ability to detect variations
driving genetic disorders such as Alzheimer's, schizophrenia, autism and
epilepsy. This project will make strides to tackling these major societal
challenges by improving our ability to assemble the corresponding genomes. Due
to its increasing prominence, it will be important to educate the public,
students, and other researchers about genome assembly. A series of expository
articles will be published in a general audience journal to educate the public
about the role of genome assembly in societal issues, such as medical treatment
and privacy. Bioinformatics education will be strengthened through K-12 and
industry outreach, development and broad dissemination of teaching modules, and
development of a new graduate course at Penn State. This project increases
diversity through recruitment of underrepresented groups and engagement of
undergraduate students. All educational and research outcomes will be made
available freely to the public, and the software will be developed open
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome assembly faces several major challenges,
including scalability, accuracy, and adaptability to new technology. A deeper
understanding of the theoretical principles underlying assembly has the
potential to impact all the major challenges facing assembly. The main research
goal of this proposal is to develop the theory, algorithms, and software to
tackle these challenges. The proposal will develop new algorithms and tools for
assembly and explore their theoretical foundations. The subgoals are to develop
a scalable assembler, to develop a modular assembly framework, to create
predictive models for guiding experimental design, to characterize the
relationship between string and de Bruijn graphs, and to characterize the
structure of sequencing overlap graphs. The developed tools will be applied to
biological data. Techniques from the theory of hash functions, I/O and parallel
optimization, graph theory and statistics will be used. The wide range of
phenotypic diversity observed across the phylogenetic spectrum is largely
attributed to the differences between each species' genome. In the study of many
species, assembling a reference genome offers tremendous biological insight and
is a crucial step toward understanding their genetic, functional, and
evolutionary aspects. The methods and theory developed as part of this proposal
will make assembly tools more scalable and accurate and will enable assembly of
data from emerging technologies. They will enable previously impractical
assembly projects and allow biologists to perform assembly without needing
expensive hardware.