* 1453661
* CAREER:  Development of Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Kinetic Equations in High Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Yingda Cheng, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Kinetic equations arise as fundamental models in many applications such as
rarefied gas dynamics, plasma physics, nuclear engineering, semiconductor device
design, traffic networking, and swarming. Due to the high-dimensionality of such
models, conventional numerical partial differential equation (PDE) solvers will
incur prohibitive computational cost, limiting their applications to real-world
problems. This research project aims at addressing this issue by developing
discontinuous Galerkin (DG) methods by the sparse grid approach. The resulting
schemes enjoy the excellent properties that the traditional DG methods offer,
while still being able to achieve high-order accuracy with a significant
reduction in the required degrees of freedom. The research will have direct
impact on the efficient and robust computations of kinetic equations and on
other application areas involving high-dimensional PDEs. The research plan is
complemented by educational and outreach activities involving the training of
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates, and fostering
collaborations among female researchers in computational mathematics.

The research plan consists of several coherent projects, ranging from algorithm
design, analysis, and implementation to application. In particular, the
investigator plans to perform detailed studies of sparse tensor product
polynomial spaces and to construct DG methods on sparse grids for model
equations. The methods will be further developed for kinetic equations with
attention to numerical challenges specific to Vlasov and Boltzmann equations.
The PI will also develop similar numerical schemes for PDEs arising from areas
such as optimal control and mathematical finance. Theoretical issues including
stability, conservation, and error estimates, and computational issues including
efficient linear solvers, adaptivity, and parallel implementations will be
explored. The educational goals of this project are to develop a pipeline for
the recruitment, retention, and early research exposure of undergraduate
students, to continue integrated training and mentoring of graduate students and
postdocs, and to promote collaborations and build a network of support for early
career female researchers. Undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs will
be directly involved in every aspect of the proposed research. Summer research
and career development workshops at Michigan State University will be
established to promote research collaborations and build a community of support
for early career female researchers.