* 1453579
* CAREER:Determine the mechanical properties of molecular motors in vesicle transports
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Takeshi Sakamoto, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 12/31/2021
* USD 692,792.00

An essential cellular process indispensable for life is the transport of
molecules such as vesicles, mRNA, and protein complexes. Class V myosin proteins
are molecular motors that transport such molecules along actin filaments in
cells. An important property of the motor proteins is their ability to walk
processively, which means that they move along their protein tracks without
dissociating from the track. While other myosin V isoforms are well studied, the
mechanism underlying myosin Vc motility, an important vertebrate motor, is not
well understood. This project studies a novel molecular movement in live cells
by which non-processive molecular motors like myosin Vc may demonstrate
processive activities by clustering and working together. The project offers an
interdisciplinary training opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students
(including members of underrepresented groups) who will conduct state-of-the-art
microscopy, as well as biochemistry and molecular biology experiments combined
with computational modeling. Students will have opportunities to present their
work at national and international conferences. In addition, the PI reaches out
to the high-school students and teachers in the Detroit Public Schools, through
the Light Microscope Summer program with the aim to disseminate his research to
the public at large in order to educate the next generation of interdisciplinary
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cargo transport is an essential cellular
process indispensable for life across phylogeny. The processivity, which is the
key physical factor to determine the directed intracellular transport efficiency
of molecular motors, has been extensively studied at the single molecule level.
However, the possibility that non-processive molecular motors demonstrate
processive activities by forming multimers remains largely unaddressed. Using
single-molecule and protein-engineering techniques, the project studies the
novel and unique mechanistic movement of myosin Vc multimers. This work has the
potential to uncover a new paradigm regarding directed molecular movement, that
is, non-processive molecular motors like myosin Vc may demonstrate processive
activities by clustering and working together in order to provide directional
molecular transport in cells. The results of this project may have wider
applicability by providing basic elements for the design of nanomotors with
controllable transport properties.