* 1453048
* CAREER: Dissecting the Small Peptide Signal in Regulating Vascular Stem Cell Proliferation and Xylem Differentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Huanzhong Wang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 786,120.00

Cells with the potential to change into all tissue types need to be maintained
during the development of any organism. In plants, these cells can generate the
conducting tissues for water and nutrients. The woody part of the conducting
tissue provides physical strength for plants and forms the majority of biomass
on Earth. This project studies how these cells balance the functions of self-
renewal and change to produce plant conducting tissues. Results from this
research will provide important insights into the critical biological processes
involved in woody tissue development. Knowledge gained from this research will
also advance the genetic improvement of feedstock plants for biofuel production.
This project integrates research and education by engaging underrepresented
students and outreach to K-12 education. The Principal Investigator will
actively recruit underrepresented minority students into this research. These
students will gain hands-on training in molecular techniques and will be
involved in all aspects of the research project. The Windham School District is
a system of greatest need as measured by No Child Left Behind standards, with
minorities representing 64% of the student body. The Principal Investigator will
provide training and research opportunities for science teachers and students at
Windham High School. These activities complement the University's Academic plan
and the focus areas of "Next Generation Connecticut."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant
vascular tissues play essential roles in plant growth and development, and have
allowed plant species to successfully adapt to a wide variety of environments
since they evolved 450 million year ago. Despite the importance of vascular
tissues to plant development and biomass accumulation, the vascular meristem is
the least studied of the three plant meristems. The small peptide Tracheary
element Differentiation Factor (TDIF) binds to its receptor (TDR) and regulates
vascular stem cell functions, but the molecular mechanism of TDIF-TDR on
regulating xylem differentiation and vascular patterning are still elusive. In
this project, a novel NAC domain transcription factor XVP (Xylem differentiation
and Vascular Patterning) has been found to regulate stem cell proliferation,
xylem differentiation and vascular patterning. The objectives of this project
are: (1) To determine the functional mechanism of XVP in vascular meristem
development using genetics, molecular biology, and biochemical techniques. (2)
To elucidate the function of XVP in regulating stem cell proliferation by
identifying XVP direct target genes. (3) To define the interaction between XVP
and the transcriptional network in regulating xylem differentiation using
biochemical and genetic approaches.