* 1453607
* CAREER: Enabling Low-Cost, Maintenance-Free, Long-Term Embedded Sensing Without Batteries
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2023
* Jacob Sorber, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2023
* USD 522,586.00

Unlimited, stable, and reliable power is an assumption upon which most
traditional computing systems and abstractions are designed. This project
explores new techniques and tools for developing sophisticated sensing
applications that do not rely on batteries and are powered by a variety of
environmental energy sources. Replacing batteries with capacitors has many
advantages for system designers. Capacitors have smaller size, lower cost, and
the potential for deployments lasting decades longer than batteries - which wear
out after two to five years. But even with energy harvesting advances, current
capacitor-based devices are difficult to program, test, and deploy due to
fluctuating energy supplies, limited energy storage, and frequent loss of power.
This project will explore and prototype hardware techniques, software systems,
programming languages, and tools that will enable application designers to
quickly prototype sophisticated applications, focusing on application goals
instead of avoiding and recovering from power failures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a research agenda to: 1) design
and develop a novel computing platform specifically for transiently-powered
sensing devices; 2) prototype techniques for managing harvested energy in
hardware in order to simplify software design; 3) develop a new programming
model that allows programmers to represent applications in a simple disruption-
tolerant form; 4) develop runtime techniques that schedule computing tasks in
order to work effectively towards achieving application goals in spite of
unpredictable power outages; 5) create novel tools that help developers predict
how their transiently-powered applications will perform when deployed; and 6)
evaluate these contributions in the context of real pilot deployments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, which includes broad k-12 outreach, will
provide experiences conducting innovative research and working with biologists
and other domain scientists for graduate and undergraduate students around the
development of devices that provide useful data for decades in spite of frequent
power failures while providing.