* 1453726
* CAREER: Elucidating acentrosomal microtubule organization by integrating cell biology, single molecule imaging and computational modeling
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2022
* Ram Dixit, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 01/31/2022
* USD 1,165,999.00

Control of cell shape is a fundamental property of life, essential to the form
and function of all organisms. Cell shape is governed primarily by an internal
scaffolding structure called the cytoskeleton. Unlike human-made scaffolding
structures, the cytoskeleton is highly dynamic and is able to change its
configuration in response to developmental and environmental signals, allowing
cells to adapt to changing conditions. This project uses the cortical
microtubule cytoskeleton of plants as a model to understand how microtubule
polymers form highly ordered arrays in the absence of a centralized organizing
mechanism. By integrating approaches scaling from single molecules to whole
cells, this research will reveal principles by which biochemical activities at
the molecular scale result in complex microtubule arrays at the cellular scale,
principles expected to be applicable to other such arrays. Since the plant
cortical microtubule array directs cell wall assembly, this work might also lead
to new strategies to engineer plant biomass for improved food and cellulosic
biofuel production. The work from this project will be integrated into education
and outreach through inquiry-based activities at multiple levels across the K-20
education spectrum. Specifically, the PI will incorporate this work into a
course for Architecture students to inspire new human-made structures based on
cellular design principles and a new professional development workshop on
Biological Self-Organization to provide high-school teachers with a mathematical
biology resource to help them meet the Next Generation Science Standards. He
will also integrate work from this project into a problem-based Teen Science
Café program, which attracts between 1,000-1,500 students from grades 6-12
annually and is a great opportunity to teach the scientific inquiry process and
about dynamic cellular events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will study how
noncentrosomal microtubules form highly ordered arrays without the benefit of an
organizing center. This problem is fundamentally important because
noncentrosomal microtubule arrays are vital for the structure and function of
evolutionarily diverse organisms such as fission yeast, humans and plants. To
elucidate the underlying mechanisms, the PI will use the cortical microtubule
cytoskeleton of Arabidopsis thaliana plants as an experimentally tractable model
system. The PI hypothesizes that the net balance of multiple microtubule-
associated proteins dynamically controls array structure by regulating the
trajectory, length and dynamics of cortical microtubules. To test this
hypothesis, a combination of live imaging, in vitro experiments at single
molecule resolution and computational modeling will be used to: 1) determine the
function of EB1 and associated proteins in regulating the behavior of cortical
microtubules, 2) investigate the role of microtubule bundling in array
organization, 3) determine how distinct molecular activities interact in space
and time to dynamically pattern cortical microtubules, and 4) elucidate the
mechanisms that define and change cortical microtubule array orientation in
response to developmental and environmental signals. Together, this research
will advance our understanding of how distinct cortical microtubule arrays are
built to create different cell shapes and how arrays are remodeled in response
to signals to modify plant growth. The work from this project will be integrated
into multiple education and outreach activities to introduce new biological
concepts and techniques into classrooms and to get students interested in
pursuing a STEM career. The PI will incorporate this work into a course for
Architecture students to inspire new architectural designs based on principles
underlying cellular architecture. The PI will also lead a professional
development workshop on Biological Self-Organization for high-school teachers,
which will combine hands-on activities and computer modeling to provide a
mathematical biology resource to take back to classroom. He will also integrate
work from this project into a problem-based Teen Science Café program for
students from grades 6-12 to teach the scientific inquiry process and about
dynamic cellular events.