* 1453615
* CAREER: Maximizing Renewable Energy Integration: Optimal Management of Uncertainty with Responsive Demand
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Catherine Anderson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The electric power system is a highly complex, interacting system that manages
to balance demand and supply on very short time-scales, despite inherent
variability and uncertainty on both sides of this balance. While use of a
significant level of renewable energy is crucial to addressing issues of climate
change, addition of these unreliable sources exacerbates the complexity of
system operations. Effective use of consumer-side resources in power system
operations and markets will allow the maximum use of variable renewable
resources, leading to beneficial economic and environmental outcomes for society
as a whole. In order to address the inclusion of demand-side resources
effectively in the future grid, the response reliability of this resource must
be both understood and included in power system operations and decision-making.
The goal of this research is the development of an efficient and effective
framework for integrated use of demand-side and renewable resources in the
evolving power system. The project will also develop interactive activities to
facilitate introduction of systems thinking into k-12 classrooms, in support of
the Next Generation Science Standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary challenge
of adding additional uncertain resources to the power systems lies in the
increase in dimensionality and complexity of the existing optimization models
used for system planning and dispatch. The outcomes of this project are
transformative because they provide a robust and truly representative framework
integrating uncertain resources on both the demand and supply side, at the
fundamental operational time frames of the power system and markets. These goals
will be achieved through three primary aims 1) Build the tools to accurately
describe intermittent renewable resources, such as wind and solar, to better
characterize the uncertainties and interactions for tractable representation in
stochastic optimization methods, 2) Characterize responsive demand resources
across multiple time scales including characteristics, constraints and
uncertainties of various classes, and 3) Develop the multi-period stochastic
optimization framework that includes DR into a scalable security constrained
unit commitment model by including dispatchable DR resources as stochastic
constraints, with additional constraints on frequency and duration of response,
and to ensure that the solutions generated are available in reasonable time
frames to benefit power system operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will support the evolution to the Smart Grid through provision of
analytical tools to manage increasing complexity, and to understand the
synergies of new technologies. The educational contribution of this project has
components designed to enhance participation of women and under-represented
minorities in the field, and build excitement about computational applications
in energy systems among graduate students. In addition, this project will reach
nearly 100 science classrooms in the Northeast US through collaborative
development and delivery of teacher professional development and classroom
materials supporting systems thinking and modeling, a new cross-cutting theme in
the Next Generation Science Standards.