* 1453491
* CAREER: Coordinated Power Management in Colocation Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2015
* Shaolei Ren, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2015
* USD 130,344.00

CAREER: Coordinated Power Management in Colocation Data
Centers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on optimizing power management
in colocation data centers, which provide facility support to multiple tenants
that manage their own servers in shared space. As an integral segment of data
center industry supporting the exploding information technology demand, multi-
tenant colocation data centers have been massively expanding in both number and
scale. The significant concerns are both growing operational costs and
environmental issues. Nonetheless, the existing energy-efficiency efforts have
been dominantly focused on owner-operated data centers, like Google, whose
operators have full and coordinated control over both computing resources and
facilities, and hence they are not applicable for colocation data centers in
which individual tenants manage their own servers and power consumption in a
non-coordinated manner. Consequently, colocation data centers are far behind
state-of-the-art owner-operated data centers in energy efficiency and
sustainability, which, if left unaddressed, is a major hurdle for sustainable
growth in digital economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve energy sustainability
in colocation data centers, this project proposes novel market-based approaches
to coordinate individual tenants' power management, in concert with optimizing
colocation operator's own server management and non-IT control (e.g., cooling
system). This project investigates three complementary research thrusts: (i)
Holistically optimizing colocation operator's facility management and economic
incentives offered to tenants for energy saving, to limit the usage of carbon-
intensive electricity; (ii) Enabling colocation data center demand response to
minimize colocation operator's operating cost, increase the adoption of
renewable energy, and enhance the power grid reliability; and (iii)
Experimentation and validation based on combined software simulation, system
prototyping, and real-world implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the
collaborative efforts from both industry and academia to enable sustainable
computing, this project uniquely extends the exploration of power management
from owner-operated data centers to multi-tenant colocation data centers. This
project can catalyze a shift in future data center management and transform the
way that the digital economy evolves, bearing great economic, environmental and
societal impacts. This project also contains a significant educational component
and provides broad opportunities to attract a diverse population of students to
engage in computer science.