* 1453430
* CAREER: Enabling Distributed and In-Situ Analysis for Multidimensional Structured Data
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Trilce Estrada-Piedra, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 412,969.00

Advances in modern science have led to explosions of data across all science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Extracting
meaningful knowledge from this large pool of information has become both
complicated and costly. In fields like genomics and astronomy, where very large
volumes of data are produced daily, it is necessary to store repositories
throughout multiple, geographically distinct locations. This type of data
allocation results in expensive computations and incomplete analyses. For health
informatics and finances, data is typically isolated between research centers
due to privacy, security, or cost issues. Again, the inability to have a global
view of the data yields inaccurate outcomes at computation time. The classic
centralized approach to analyzing data no longer produces optimal results; it
has become a major bottleneck, hindering the advantages Big Data has to offer.
Current solutions for distributed analysis still lack generality, scalability,
or accuracy.

This project aims to ameliorate problems in the management of distributed data
while enabling scalable and accurate analyses. The project provides a
comprehensive approach to handle data-to-knowledge extraction, representation,
and learning at scale. Products of this research include: (1) an algorithmic
suite of semantic projections and scalable learning methods for efficient data
dimensionality reduction, pattern recognition, anomaly detection, and
clustering, and (2) an open source middleware for coupling distributed data
acquisition processes with in-situ analytics and crowd sourcing. These products
will be made available through a GitHub repository at
https://github.com/distributedreasoningatunm. Moreover, the crowd sourcing
extension doubles as an educational platform, which aims to attract interest in
the STEM fields.