* 1453548
* CAREER: Sustaining Scientific Infrastructure:  Researching Transition from Grants to Peer Production
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2021
* James Howison, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 535,349.00

Software is becoming increasingly critical to the activities of science, yet
securing long term support for this infrastructure is becoming more challenging.
Given constrained budgets, the options for effectively and efficiently
supporting sustainable software infrastructure are of growing importance. This
project examines the transition of research infrastructure from grant-based
funding to long term sustainable models, by examining scientific software
projects as they transition to an open source peer production model. The project
tracks software packages as they attempt to transition, and develops a
theoretical framework for understanding this process and for explaining their
success or failure. The outcome of this research will inform science policy by
shaping how the community funds software infrastructure projects in their
initial phases, and how to encourage the transition to long-term models
thereafter.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Inspired by the success of open source
software, funding agencies are encouraging transitions to forms of organization
that organizational researchers call 'peer production.' Yet peer production
research has shown that simply making code available under an open source
license is insufficient to build a motivated and productive community.
Successful transition includes changes in team structure (from local to
distributed), collaboration technologies (from controlled to open), governance
(from hierarchical to shared), and management of participants (from predictable
to unpredictable commitment). This project examines successful and unsuccessful
transitions from initial grant funding to peer production in scientific software
development. Detailed case study histories are developed, by interviewing
project participants, funders, and users of scientific software, and by
analyzing project archives and software repositories. The research includes six
transitioning projects: yt, Enzo, Eclipse PTP, IRODs, Apache OODT and Airavata.
In addition, a panel of projects funded by the NSF Software Infrastructure for
Sustained Innovation program (which requires plans for sustainability) will be
tracked over time to study successful transitions, unsuccessful attempts, and
cases where transition was judged inappropriate. The research is combined with
an integrated education plan designed to build organizational skills in the
scientific community to enable successful transitions to peer production.