* 1453452
* CAREER: Teaching Modern Biodiversity Science from Fieldwork to Phylogeny: Diversity, Systematics, &amp; Evolution of Ecologically Promiscuous Aquatic Beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2023
* Andrew Short, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/28/2023
* USD 711,008.00

Animals living in freshwater and terrestrial habitats are presented with
dramatically different physiological and morphological challenges, including how
they breathe, move, feed, and reproduce. While animals, particularly insects,
have shifted between these habitat extremes many times over their evolutionary
history, little is known of how these major aquatic-terrestrial transitions
occur or how they affect the diversity and distribution of species. This
research will focus on an insect group that contains species with a wide range
of habitats from open waters to terrestrial leaf litter. By reconstructing the
evolutionary history of this lineage, the researchers will examine when, where,
and how it has evolved across the aquatic-terrestrial boundary, and use the
group as a model to understand how other organisms may have undergone major
habitat shifts. Understanding how insects undergo major ecological transitions
and what implications these transitions have can improve our understanding of
how animals respond to changing climates and altered environments. The broader
impacts of this research include the training of two PhD students in the
biodiversity sciences. A new undergraduate course in biodiversity monitoring and
assessment will be developed to teach the theory, methods, and practice of
measuring species richness and turnover over geographic distances. This course
will include fieldwork in Suriname and Guyana in conjunction with host country
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use water scavenger
beetles (Coleoptera: Hydrophilidae), a lineage that encompasses many independent
transitions between aquatic and terrestrial niches, as a model to examine
habitat shifts at multiple evolutionary scales: clades, species, and
populations. Researchers will (1) infer a 500-species molecular phylogeny to
identify the number, timing, and placement of habitat shifts and test for
associated changes in diversification rate between habitat types, (2) examine
the fine-scale morphological evolution associated with changing habitats through
a species-level taxonomic revision of the Chasmogenus-group, including the
description of approximately 50 new species, coupled with a morphological-
molecular phylogeny, and (3) disentangle habitat-associated from lineage-
specific effects on co-distributed populations by using RAD-seq methods to
examine the genetic structure of 12 species with diverse ecological niches
across three independent clades. Taken together, these approaches will provide
new insights into how aquatic-terrestrial shifts have altered past evolutionary
trajectories from the recent to hundreds of millions of years before present,
and inform how organisms may respond to changing habitats in the future.