* 1453073
* CAREER: Signal Processing Through the Lens of Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Waheed Bajwa, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2021
* USD 550,000.00

This project addresses many of the challenges that pertain to the following
trends in data gathering and information processing. First, recent technological
advances are pushing our society toward generation of massive quantities of
data. Second, this massive data generation and collection is having an
unintended consequence: the fraction of dirty data, defined as incomplete,
grossly erroneous or mislabeled data, within these data sets is increasing.
Third, there is an increasing shift toward relying on interconnected sets of
geographically-distributed data for inference and decision making. Collectively,
these three trends portend an inevitable transition to a data-driven world rife
with big, dirty, and distributed data. Information processing in this new age of
big, dirty, distributed data demands novel mathematical data models and robust
computational and statistical tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project lies in the ways it addresses the challenges of information
processing for big, dirty, distributed data. First, it deals with the challenge
of processing for big, dirty data by developing theoretical and algorithmic
foundations of a novel geometric signal/data model that results in improved
inference from big data, even in the presence of dirty data, because of the
model?s ability to faithfully capture the ?ambient geometry? of big data.
Second, it develops and analyzes novel collaborative processing algorithms that
build on top of the developed model for improved inference from big, dirty data
distributed across the world. The research agenda of this project impacts nearly
every discipline that relies on advances in information processing for improved
inference and decision making. In addition, it impacts the society and the US
healthcare system through its applications to early cancer detection, activity
recognition in chaotic trauma bays, and collaborative digital pathology. The
education agenda of this project impacts the society and the US economy through
K-12 and college level outreach activities within New Jersey, modernization of
the Rutgers signal processing curriculum, and training of undergraduate and
graduate students for careers in data science.