* 1453966
* CAREER: Sustainable Solutions for Li-ion Batteries through Cycle-Life Improvements in Nanostructured, 'Green' Cathodes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Arunkumar Subramanian, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 10/31/2016
* USD 504,858.00

PI Name: Subramanian, Arunkumar&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID:
1453966&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electric vehicles are one alternative for reducing
fossil fuel consumption and greenhouse gas production for sustainable
transportation needs. Electric vehicles require rechargeable batteries that
balance the electrical energy storage and power delivery needs, and these
batteries must have a life span sufficient to reduce cost and achieve true
carbon footprint reduction. Furthermore, batteries should be manufactured from
sustainable materials to minimize environmental impact. Towards these ends, this
research seeks to advance the sustainability of lithium-ion (Li-ion) battery
technology through life-span improvements of electrodes made from sustainable
materials based on lithium-manganese oxide mixtures. A unique aspect of the
research plan is to study battery materials made from single "nanowires" to
better understand the fundamental processes that reduce lithium-ion battery
lifespan. If successful, this research will advance energy storage technology
for future clean energy needs, particularly in the transportation sector. The
education and outreach programs associated with this award will extend the
impact of the research outcomes into the broader, STEM educational ecosystem in
the Richmond, Virginia region. Educational activities include K-12 outreach
programs delivered through the ?NanoFellows Institute and Summer Regional
Governor's School initiatives at the Math Science Innovation Center (MSiC), and
through the Richmond Area Program for Minorities in Engineering (RAPME). These
initiatives will introduce students to exciting opportunities that exist for
delivering societal impact as future scientists and engineers to the area of
sustainable energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall technical goal of this
CAREER award is to gain a fundamental understanding of intrinsic storage
capacity in Li-ion batteries through a focused analysis on single intercalation
nanowire cathodes made from sustainable lithium/manganese oxide composites.
Towards this end, the first research objective is to measure the lithium storage
capacity of a single alpha-phase manganese dioxide (MnO2) nanowire cathode with
a resolution better than 0.03 Li atoms per host molecule. Single MnO2 nanowires
will be subjected to different electrochemical cycling depths in order to reveal
the correlation between crystal changes and capacity retention. The second
objective test the hypothesis that the intrinsic capacity fading in these
intercalation cathodes will be improved by minimizing the structural and
electronic conductivity changes, which occur within their host crystal during
reversible ionic intercalation. This will be achieved by the use of controlled
lithia-doping and further ammonia treatment to stabilize the 2x2 tunnel
structure of the host crystal through alleviation of Jahn-Teller distortions.
Experimentally, lithium/manganese dioxide nanowire cells will be integrated with
nanoelectromechanical resonators to quantify the lithium capacity of the
nanowire through its electrochemically-induced mass changes. Four
electrochemically-correlated measurements will be performed on this single
nanowire at specific charge-discharge cycle numbers that are spread over its
cycle-life: (1) TEM imaging to characterize the microstructure, (2) electronic
conductivity measurements, (3) contact-mode AFM to study nanomechanical
softening, and (4) charge capacity measurement using in-situ electron
microscopy-based dynamic resonance measurements. Since capacity fading with
progressive cycling is a key failure mode that is common to diverse electrode
material systems as well as to different ionic intercalation systems, the new
scientific knowledge and other advanced experimental capabilities, which will
emerge from this effort, have the potential to go beyond the lithium-MnO2 system
and to transform the electrode design strategies for future electrochemical
energy storage systems.