* 1453822
* CAREER: Transforming College Students' Statistical Thinking: Data, Technology &amp; Modeling
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Jennifer Noll, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 03/31/2018
* USD 606,576.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty
who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research,
excellent education, and the integration of education and research within the
context of the mission of their organizations. Statistics and data analysis
plays an increasingly important role in modern society. Without the ability to
work with data (e.g. organize, represent, summarize and model) it is impossible
to adequately understand and begin to solve major social issues and it is
difficult to make important decisions regarding personal health, finances, and
political choices. This CAREER project seeks to develop frameworks for
understanding how students learn to represent, model, and organize data as part
of their understanding of statistics and data analysis. In addition, it will
result in tools for undergraduate statistics instruction to better support
statistics teaching and learning for undergraduates. This work will inform
educational strategies in the statistics classroom for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project features a research-based
investigation of new curricular approaches to undergraduate statistics teaching
and learning with extensive use of software for learning about data
organization, representation, modeling and simulation. This project should
enhance and complement an existing research-based curriculum, CATALST (Change
Agents for Teaching and Learning Statistics) that incorporates technology for
students' learning. This project intends to investigate conjectures made within
the statistics education community about the advantages of using technology to
teach statistical inference from a modeling and simulation approach as well as
using technology for data detective work (organizing, representing and
summarizing data). The collection of rich data gathered in classrooms that
explores the ways students use technology to construct models and run
simulations to answer statistical questions or to use technology to organize,
represent and interpret data sets will allow the principal investigator to
construct models of students' statistical learning and understanding. The data
to be collected includes classroom observations and video, student interviews,
and assessments of student learning. The principal investigator has integrated
research and education as part of this CAREER award by investigating classes she
teaches and by integrating mentoring of graduate students as statistics
education researchers throughout the project.