* 1453089
* CAREER: Two phenotypes, one genome: genomic conflict as a research framework for professional development of science educators
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Robert Cox, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2020
* USD 900,000.00

Genomic conflict occurs when different organisms must be produced from the same
set of genes, akin to building different structures from the same set of
blueprints. A common example is the production of males and females from the
shared genome of a species. Conflict arises because genes that are
evolutionarily favored in males are disfavored in females, and vice versa. If
these conflicts are difficult to resolve, then they will have profound impacts
on the evolution of most species. However, the basic question of how to produce
two different organisms from the same set of genes transcends evolutionary
biology because it involves every step along the way from the expression of
genes to the hormones that regulate the development of each sex. This research
will provide fundamental insights into the relationship between the genome and
the phenotype, along with significant training of K-12 teachers in cutting-edge
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three goals: (1) use new
sequencing technology to measure the amount of genomic conflict in a wild
population of a lizard in which males and females are so different that they are
often mistaken for separate species, (2) test whether this conflict is mitigated
by a recently discovered phenomenon in which females appear to adaptively bias
the sex of their offspring, and (3) combine breeding experiments with the latest
methods for simultaneously measuring the expression of thousands of individual
genes to test whether sex differences in hormone levels can reduce genome-wide
conflict. This research will support a new professional development program for
high school science teachers from underserved schools, who will work alongside
project personnel and a national network of collaborators in science and
education.