* 1453906
* CAREER: Impact of Effluent Organic Matter on Photochemical Processes in Surface Waters
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Fernando Rosario-Ortiz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 05/31/2020
* USD 518,000.00

1453906 Rosario-Ortiz

CAREER: Impact of Effluent Organic Matter on Photochemical Processes in Surface
Waters

The field of Environmental Photochemistry is currently one of the major focus
areas within environmental engineering science. Specifically within this field,
the PI is aiming to understand the impact of wastewater effluent organic matter
on photochemical processes within wastewater-dominated surface waters, focusing
on the formation of reactive intermediates (e.g., reactive oxygen species and
excited triplet states) and their ultimate reactivity in aqueous media. To this
end, the research objective of this CAREER proposal is to develop a long-term
successful academic program focusing on the environmental photochemistry of
effluent organic matter. The educational objectives of this CAREER proposal are
to improve the retention of Latino students and to implement inquiry-based
learning in undergraduate education at the University of Colorado, Boulder (CU
Boulder), in addition to mentoring graduate students.

In the research plan, the PI will explore emerging areas of interest in the
study of wastewater effluent organic matter photochemistry, focusing on the
following topics; (i) Quantify the photochemical production of reactive
intermediates, including hydrogen peroxide, and excited triplet states, from
effluent organic matter and sub-components; (ii) Quantify the antioxidant
capacity of effluent organic matter and its impact on the inhibition of
oxidation of organic compounds, and; (iii) Evaluate the dynamics of effluent
organic matter photochemistry in surface waters (e.g., photo-bleaching) and the
impacts on reactive intermediate formation. The results from this project will
be applicable to different areas of environmental engineering, including the
photochemical degradation of trace organic contaminants and pathogen
inactivation in wastewater-dominated surface waters. The results from this
project will offer important fundamental information with respect to effluent
organic matter photochemistry, which will in turn improve our understanding of
the efficacy of photochemical processes in wastewater-dominated surface waters.
Given the importance of wastewater effluents in urban water cycles, and the
interest in photochemical processes as effective alternatives to more costly
engineering treatment alternatives for the oxidation of organic contaminants and
pathogen inactivation, a better understanding of effluent organic matter
photochemistry is needed.