* 1453080
* CAREER: User-Centered Multiparty Access Control for Collective Content Management
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2023
* Anna Squicciarini, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 07/31/2023
* USD 549,950.00

This CAREER project will develop models and techniques to facilitate controlled
information sharing of users' data in domains where the data is associated with
and co-managed by multiple users, such as bio-repositories, remote teleworking,
and social computing. Specific research objectives are: 1) Building on the PI's
prior work, develop a foundational model describing access control in terms of
the decision making process of a single content manager or content owner, laying
the groundwork for the second objective; 2) Develop new models to support
synchronous, asynchronous, and combined joint specification of access control
policies for shared content for multiple users and site administrators, and 3)
Apply those solution concepts to two specific applications, group work and a
biobank, and conduct user studies to test goodness of fit, suitability and
feasibility of the resulting access setting
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes an innovative user-centric
approach to ensure that the rigorous models developed result in enforceable
mechanisms that can be used on a variety of existing platforms in and multiple
domains. To accomplish this, the proposed work draws from multiple disciplines,
including access control, game theory for security and privacy, and decision
support systems. For example, an individual in a group photo may prefer not to
have the photo shared even though others do, but would accept it being shared
only with friends; a social network operator wants to maximize use of the system
through sharing information while keeping users happy so they remain active. The
preferences thus constitute a multi-objective optimization problem. We use a
game-theoretic approach to modeling this problem, allowing negotiation to
determine access settings. This research will provide users with the ability to
express preferred access control settings for shared multi-owned data, jointly
influencing with that input the final access settings, while taking into account
organizational constraints and existing laws.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further, we
leverage the economic concept of first-mover advantage to create models suitable
in scenarios where synchronous coordination among users is not practical. In
particular, the models start with extensions and applications of Stackelberg
games, and account for the unique constraints occurring with security decisions
and uncertainty due to human-bounded rationality. As part of this task, we also
develop a method for domain administrators to determine what set of access
policy options should be offered to users. Through this administrator-centered
model, we enable administrators to identify the set of options that satisfy
users' predicted access control decisions and meet their administrator's own
internal objectives. We also study hybrid models that build on strengths of
synchronous and asynchronous multi-party approaches. The models and mechanisms
developed will apply to a wide range of domains, including social computing,
remote collaborative content co-authoring, personalized medicine, and genetic
data sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated education plan will focus on
curriculum enhancement and expanded undergraduate research experiences. We
establish a graduate visiting program to give students experience with different
disciplines, recognizing the multidisciplinary challenges in information
security. The ultimate goal is to produce diverse graduates with the
multidisciplinary skills required to design and evaluate IT security solutions.