* 1453750
* CAREER:  Roles for Indole-3-butyric Acid in Plant Development
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Lucia Strader, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 03/31/2021
* USD 867,845.00

The plant hormone auxin regulates plant growth and development to control crop
yield. Indole-3-butyric acid, or IBA, is an inactive auxin precursor whose
transport throughout the plant and conversion to the active hormone is critical
to auxin function. Despite the great importance of IBA to plant growth, the
mechanisms controlling IBA input into the level of available auxin are not well
understood. This proposal aims to increase our understanding of how IBA-derived
auxin impacts plant growth; this understanding will provide new tools to alter
plant growth and development for use in crop improvement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal outlines experiments to elucidate
developmental roles for indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) transport and IBA-derived
auxin in the model plants Arabidopsis thaliana and Physcomitrella patens. Auxin
is essential to plants, controlling cell division and cell expansion to
orchestrate many developmental events and environmental responses. IBA is a
biologically inactive molecule that is converted into the active auxin IAA
(indole-3-acetic acid) by peroxisomal &amp;#946;-oxidation. IBA-derived auxin
drives a wide range of seedling developmental processes, including cotyledon and
root hair cell expansion, apical hook curvature, high-temperature-induced
hypocotyl elongation, lateral root production, and root meristem maintenance.
Similar to the active auxin IAA, the auxin precursor IBA is transported by
carrier-mediated mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed experiments focus
on understanding roles for IBA transport and IBA-derived auxin in plant
development with four specific aims: 1) To determine the tissue-specificity of
IBA-to-IAA conversion. 2) To identify components of IBA transport. 3) To
characterize TRANSPORTER OF IBA (TOB) family regulation of IBA transport and
plant development. 4) To compare the roles of IBA-derived auxin and IBA
transport in the nonvascular plant Physcomitrella patens. The proposed studies
will advance our understanding of auxin regulation of plant
development.&lt;br/&gt;This research will also support the creation of an
inquiry-based laboratory to increase opportunities for undergraduate research at
Washington U. This course addresses a critical need for a cell biology lab
course in the curriculum; the primary objectives of this course are to increase
student ability to form and test hypotheses and to raise student awareness of
the diverse biological systems available for basic research. Aim 4 of this
proposal will be directly integrated into the course and students will present
their work at the WU Research Symposium at the end of the semester. In addition,
this research will support the Missouri Local Auxin Meeting, co-organized by the
PI to strengthen and expand the local auxin community, and additional K-12
outreach activities.