* 1453022
* CAREER: Neural Dynamics, Olfactory Coding and Behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Baranidharan Raman, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 714,860.00

This project focuses on how neural activity in relatively simple invertebrates
encodes information about an odorant?s identity and intensity, in a manner that
is robust to variations in the intensities and background contexts in which
sensory stimuli can be encountered. Electrophysiological, computational and
behavioral approaches are combined in this effort to determine the basic
principles of olfactory information processing. The identified biological
olfaction principles will also lead to development of novel signal-processing
algorithms for artificial olfaction, i.e. for electronic noses used in many non-
invasive chemical-sensing applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goals
of the project are to determine how response dynamics at the single neuron and
population levels maintain/alter olfactory invariance and examine correlations
between physiology and odor-driven behavior. An integrative approach will take
advantage of the rich repertoire of genetic tools available in the fruit fly
(Drosophila melanogaster) to study single neuron dynamics, and combine it with
multi-unit electrophysiological approaches that are well established in locusts
(Schistocerca americana) to examine neural circuit dynamics. The biological data
will be used to develop experimentally constrained models of olfactory signal
processing to gain mechanistic insights and facilitate development of bio-
inspired algorithms for an electronic nose. This research will reveal how
dynamic patterns of neural activity allow the olfactory system to represent
odorants in a background- and concentration-invariant manner. Examination of the
interactions between an external stimulus and intrinsic neural dynamics is also
expected to inform a better general understanding of dynamical neuronal
networks. Data and analytical approaches obtained from the proposed work will be
used to develop new neural engineering modules for undergraduate and graduate
courses and thereby enhance the existing biomedical engineering curriculum.
Furthermore, a K-12 teachers professional development workshop: ?Where biology
meets engineering? will be created to provide middle- and high-school teachers
with content and tools to offer their students a meaningful exposure to the
interdisciplinary nature of science education.