* 1453218
* CAREER: Glass-Based Fexible Integrated Photonic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Juejun Hu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 01/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract Title: Glass-based flexible integrated photonic devices

Abstract:

Conventional integrated photonic devices are fabricated almost exclusively on
rigid substrates such as silicon wafers. The proposed program aims to develop
the fundamental optical physics and device processing know-how that enable
photonic integration on unconventional flexible plastic substrates. By imparting
mechanical flexibility to photonic structures, the research will advance
understanding into optical and mechanical interaction mechanisms in the
nanoscale, and open up emerging application venues including humanlike robotic
skins, prosthetic limbs, minimally invasive surgical tools, and touch panels for
flexible consumer electronics. The scientific research will be tightly
integrated with curriculum development, undergraduate student training, and
development of hands-on modules for optics education. Research outcome from the
project will be incorporated into a new course on amorphous materials the PI
will develop. In addition to augmenting classroom education at MIT, the program
will also promote the free sharing and distribution of knowledge by developing
online courses through the edX initiative. The participating undergraduate and
graduate researchers will benefit from the interdisciplinary research as well as
cross-cutting collaborations to extend their technical experiences. The program
will also develop hands-on modules for K-12 students and the general public to
promote public awareness of optical sciences and nanotechnology through working
with the MIT Edgerton Center and local museums. Flexible photonics is uniquely
poised at the nexus between photonics, mechanics, and materials sciences. While
previously the topic has largely been explored from the three isolated fields,
the proposed research will pioneer an interdisciplinary approach synergistically
combining innovative photonic design, nano-mechanical engineering, and
unconventional material processing to unravel the rich physics underlying
tensorial strain-optical interactions and apply the principle to
multidirectional stress measurement. Glasses, the backbone materials for lenses
and fibers, will be explored as the preferred optical materials for photonic
integration onto unconventional plastic substrates exploiting their low optical
losses and extreme processing versatility, as they can be monolithically
deposited on virtually any technically important substrate and can be shaped
into functional device forms via traditional lithography or soft lithographic
methods including molding, imprint, and ink jet printing. Further, while
traditional planar photonic circuits on flat substrates are 2-D in nature, the
proposed research will utilize the additional geometric degrees of freedom
conferred by mechanical flexibility to create a 3-D photonics platform based on
planar microfabrication, a technology that will enable pinpointing light-matter
interaction locations in a 3-D space inaccessible to conventional "flat"
photonics and thus will have immense application potentials for sensing,
communications, and imaging.