* 1453255
* CAREER: Supramolecular Polycondensation of Polymer Brushes via DNA Hybridization
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Ke Zhang, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/29/2020
* USD 525,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Living organisms are very proficient at utilizing nanoscopic objects, such as
proteins, as building blocks to create materials that they need. Indeed,
protein-protein interactions are the foundation of all cells because they are
highly directional, specific, and reversible; these are characteristics that
synthetic chemists have yet to fully emulate. The goal of this project is to
emulate some of the precision-assembly ability that natural proteins exhibit by
extracting the requirements for such assembly, and recreating them in new forms
accessible to modern polymer and organic chemistry. Towards this goal, the PI's
team will design bottlebrush-like synthetic polymers (where long polymer
molecules have short appendages across them like the bristles in a bottlebrush)
and connect them with short strands of DNA. Because DNA recognition of a
complementary strand is well defined, one can in principle design the
interconnectivity of the brush polymers with one another accurately. With this
approach, it is possible to create a new class of "superpolymers", i.e. polymers
whose building blocks are nanoscale-sized polymeric objects. The PI will explore
the kinds of superpolymers that can be formed, and identify rules governing
their formation. Because of the specificity of DNA recognition, polymer building
blocks with various properties, such as size, electrical conductivity, or
biological interactions, can be linked together in a sequence-specific and
spatially defined manner, to create functional materials previously difficult or
impossible to access. This synthetic technique also has the potential to be
mediated by innate nucleic acids in cells, and therefore has important
implications in medicine. These research activities will intertwine with
educational programs to provide laboratory training to graduate/undergraduate
students (including undergraduates from institutions lacking research
capabilities) and to promote learning and awareness in science-related careers
among high school students and STEM teachers.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Nanoscopic objects such as macromolecules and colloidal nanoparticles can form
ordered structures when there exist attractive forces. Because sphere-like
particles uniformly interact across their surfaces, directional assembly to form
1D or 2D structures represents a significant challenge. In this project, co-
funded by the Polymers and Biomaterials Programs in the Division of Materials
Research, the PI will utilize DNA recognition as a functional group-equivalent
to program the bottom-up assembly of made-to-order polymeric building blocks
that can interact with each other only in defined directions. These limited-
valency building blocks will be used to study topologically regulated
supramolecular polymerizations. The proposed self-assembly strategy involves the
synthesis of triblock brush polymers as "macromonomers", which will be
conjugated with nucleic acids. The hybridization between the nucleic acid
strands allows the monomers to self-assemble head-to-tail, connecting them
either linearly or with branching, to form higher order assemblies. By
systematically studying a library of brush polymers with different side-chain
length, DNA duplex, and reactive block length, mechanistic insights about linear
assembly of the brush building blocks will be obtained. In addition,
superpolymer sequence control will be studied using multiple monomer systems
(e.g. AA+BB), paving the ground for creating multi-component functional
materials. Concepts from polycondensation reactions that define small-molecule
polymerization will be tested against superpolymer synthesis, utilizing mono-
and multi-valency macromonomers, which are expected to provide control over
architecture, average degree of polymerization, and chain-end functionality. The
capabilities gained from this project will open a wide spectrum of designer
materials whose sequential and topological characteristics are well-defined on
the nanoscopic scale, and will bring about new knowledge in polymer science and
create opportunities to study yet unknown properties.