* 1453312
* CAREER:Enabling transport across the blood-brain barrier by engineering thermodynamically favorable pathways
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,01/31/2022
* Shikha Nangia, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 01/31/2022
* USD 635,000.00

CBET-1453312&lt;br/&gt;PI: Shikha Nangia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The blood-brain
barrier serves the critical role of allowing only certain types of molecules to
enter the brain from the blood stream. This important capability protects the
brain from exposure to harmful chemical compounds. However, it also prevents
certain drugs from entering the brain to treat brain disorders or diseases such
as Alzheimer's disease. Since the segment of the US population older than 65 is
expected to increase by 50% by 2030, and the cost of care to treat patients with
these kinds of brain diseases is billions of dollars per year, finding new ways
to help drugs cross the blood-brain barrier would provide significant benefits
to patients and the nation. Nevertheless, understanding how therapeutic drug
molecules move or don't move across the barrier into the brain has remained
elusive. The proposed research will combine existing theories in a new way to
understand how this movement is controlled across the blood-brain barrier, and
will use an extensive computational tool-kit to engineer favorable pathways to
transcend it.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will provide new
molecular-level strategies to deliver drug molecules to the brain, and
characterize the thermodynamics and transport kinetics of the blood-brain
barrier. The focus will be to elucidate the molecular structure of the tight
junction using a combination of molecular docking, analysis tools, and molecular
dynamics. Additionally, the thermodynamics of the transport process properties
of ions, water, and small drug molecules will be computed. The computed
transport rates will be combined with stochastic simulation algorithm
simulations to compute effective transport properties of drug across the tight
junction strands. The education plan integrates findings from the research
objectives with active-learning pedagogies to more effectively teach
undergraduate and graduate thermodynamics courses.