* 1453062
* CAREER: Palladium-Catalyzed C-H Activation/C-C Cross-Coupling of CH4 Hydrates and Plasma using Cyclodextrin Ligand in Multiphase Microsystems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,09/30/2015
* Ryan Hartman, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2015
* USD 117,339.00

1453062 - Hartman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science and engineering innovations over
the last decade have enabled domestic natural gas resources that could sustain
the U.S.'s energy, materials, commodity, pharmaceutical, and fine chemicals
processing infrastructure. Natural gas, water science, and their symbiosis are
keys to sustainability, and novel, economical approaches to the use of natural
gas in organic synthesis at moderate temperatures (&lt;200 degC) remains a
challenge. The physics and the chemistry of water and methane (i.e., the largest
component fraction of natural gas) have relevance in the atmospheric and
planetary sciences. Massive quantities of natural gas are entrapped in
crystalline water throughout the world, from the deep seabed to beneath the
polar ice regions. Natural gas has merit for its use in organic synthesis but
the challenges are in the controlled activation of carbon-hydrogen bonds of
methane at moderate temperatures and their functionalization via carbon-carbon
cross-coupling with aryl heteroatoms. This project involves the synergy of the
five sciences: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) CH4 hydrates/plasma, &lt;br/&gt;2)
cyclodextrin (CD) catalysis, &lt;br/&gt;3) palladium-catalyzed C-H
activation/C-C crosscoupling,&lt;br/&gt;4) microreaction engineering, and
&lt;br/&gt;5) multiphase microfluidics with online analytics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research could reduce the cost of
current synthetic methodologies of Pd-catalyzed methylations of aryl heteroatoms
for fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals by at least an order of magnitude. The
resulting scientific discoveries will broadly impact aqueous natural gas
technology, but they will also advance chemical engineering education. The
project will accomplish two K-12 educational goals beyond affecting the
undergraduate and the graduate-level chemical reaction engineering curricula
that the PI teaches: 1) inspire science and mathematics students to pursue
careers in chemical engineering, and 2) innovate approaches to remotely involve
students with chemical engineering research. The PI has already established a
partnership with the Alabama School of Fine Arts, Birmingham, AL where he is
mentoring a K-12 senior for the second year towards the completion of his
research thesis. The knowledge created will be disseminated through works of art
in both the science and the visual arts they generate. Students enrolled in the
Alabama School of Fine Arts are commonly gifted in the visual arts, and thus
each student the PI advises will express the chemical engineering knowledge they
learn by touring exhibitions at the Birmingham Art Walk, the Alabama School of
Fine Arts, and the posting of artwork photographs on the PI's laboratory
website. The outcomes are anticipated to be innovations that discover the
science of natural gas in aqueous systems, a K-12 educational component that
broadly outreaches beyond the campus boarders, and ultimately the advancement of
natural gas utilization in a broad cross-section of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyclodextrins (alpha-, beta-, and gamma-CD's),
both naturally occurring and synthetically prepared organic inclusion compounds,
are known to stabilize CH4 in liquid water and to catalyzed CH4 hydrate
formation with molecular diffusion often controlling both processes. Molecular-
level understanding acquired via the microreaction engineering of inclusion
compounds and their complexes in C-H activation/C-C cross-coupling could advance
the versatility of natural gas as an economical feedstock for multiphase organic
synthesis. The understanding will be learned by i) innovating microsystems with
online analytics for continuous multiphase C-C cross-couplings of CH4, ii)
discovering the Pd-catalyzed C-C cross-coupling of CH4 stored in hydrates with
aryl heteroatoms at organic-liquid water interfaces using alpha-, beta-, and
gamma-CD's, iii) discovering the Pd-catalyzed C-C cross-coupling of ionized CH4
with aryl heteroatoms at cold plasma-liquid water interfaces, and iv)
elucidating the catalytic cycle(s) that control the C-C cross-couplings. The
project couples the PI's decade of experiences studying inorganic inclusion
compounds in his doctoral research, innovating science and technology that are
enabling the US to secure natural gas in his post-graduate career, researching
microchemical systems for organic synthesis in his postdoctoral research, and
building his academic laboratory on aqueous methane conversion with discoveries
on gas hydrates and hydrophilic organic synthesis.