* 1453304
* CAREER: Machine Learning through the Lens of Economics (And Vice Versa)
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jacob Abernethy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 07/31/2018
* USD 403,469.00

Machine Learning (ML) is the study of leveraging data and computational
resources to obtain prediction and decision-making algorithms that function well
in the presence of uncertainty. The techniques employed to design and study ML
algorithms typically involve concepts and tools from probability, statistics,
and optimization; the language of economics, on the other hand, is conspicuously
absent. It is rare to encounter terms such as marginal price, utility,
equilibrium, risk aversion, and such, in the ML research literature. This gap is
significant and belies the reality that the broad interest in Machine Learning,
and its sudden growth spurt as a research field, can be ascribed to its
potential for generating economic value across many segments of society. This
NSF CAREER projectadvances an already-emerging relationship between Machine
Learning and the fields of microeconomic theory and finance. This will begin
with the development of mathematical tools that enable a semantic correspondence
between learning-theoretic objects and economic abstractions. For example, the
project shows that many algorithms can be viewed as implementing a market
economy, where learning parameters are associated with prices, parameter updates
are viewed as transactions, and under certain conditions learned hypotheses can
be extracted as market-clearing price equilibria. In addition to developing this
link, the project research raises a number of intriguing questions and explores
several surprising and novel applications with benefits to computer science more
broadly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among several such applications stemming from the
new theoretical connections are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Developing new models for
distributed computing for learning and estimation tasks: The economic lens gives
new insights into a robust and effective model for decentralization of data-
focused tasks.&lt;br/&gt;2. Designing new techniques for crowdsourcing and labor
decentralization via collaborative mechanisms involving financial payment
schemes: This builds off of the success of platforms like Amazon's Mechanical
Turk as well as the Netflix Prize and the prediction challenge company
Kaggle.&lt;br/&gt;3. Developing a market-oriented model for data brokerage and
financially-efficient learning: As information is increasingly traded in market
environments, we aim to answer questions such as "what is the marginal value of
a unit of data?"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also develop the Michigan
Prediction Team, a data-science focused program for formulating and solving
prediction and learning challenges that develop from across the University of
Michigan as well as externally. The group primarily targets undergraduates with
graduate student mentors, and Team has a strong interdisciplinary focus.