* 1453863
* CAREER: Relative perception: from organisms to cells to molecules
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Lea Goentoro, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,070,573.00

Integrating mathematical approaches into biology will produce a fundamentally
new way of understanding biology from a quantitative perspective. This proposal
is focused on Weber's Law as a unifying framework to study signaling and
decision making at multiple scales of biological organization. This emerging
design principle in biology uncovers similarities across biological scales,
about how organisms, cells, and potentially molecules that form the cells sense
their respective surroundings. Educating the next generation of
interdisciplinary students will require integrating quantitative skills into
biology teaching early on. The project emphasize the integration of research and
education in order to train the next generation of scientists across several
levels of education, from middle- and high-school students to undergraduate and
graduate students. The undergraduate and graduate students will present their
work at conferences, and they will have opportunities to author publications on
their research. In addition, a Systems Biology course module developed as a
result of the proposed research and teaching efforts will be disseminated
through the web to nearby public school districts and community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will pursue the framework of Weber's
Law as a design principle across biological hierarchies. Understanding cellular
sensitivity to a signaling cue is a fundamental question in biology. Weber's Law
describes the ability of our sensory systems to scale sensitivity
logarithmically to background, mediating their dynamic range. The PI's research
has uncovered evidence that Weber's Law may also govern cellular and molecular
systems. The concept of Weber's Law has the potential to lead to discovery of
new biological mechanisms, challenge the present paradigm of how cells signal,
and raise new questions on the evolution of biological sensory mechanisms. The
research will employ mathematical modeling, microscopy, and genomic engineering
in order to understand how diverse biological systems maintain sensitivity to
external perturbations across a large dynamic range of stimuli.