* 1453853
* CAREER: Energy-Efficient and Energy-Proportional Silicon-Photonic Manycore Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Nikos Hardavellas, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2021
* USD 470,000.00

Increasing energy demands have put computing on an unsustainable technological,
economic and environmental path. Unfortunately, a large fraction of this energy
is wasted, with data transfers being one of the major contributors to energy
consumption. At the same time, while the demand for computing grows, modern
microprocessors are increasingly constrained by physical limitations, which
prevent them from realizing their full potential. Area, power, thermal, off-chip
bandwidth, and yield limitations constrain single-chip designs to a relatively
small number of cores, beyond which scaling becomes impractical. Multi-chip
designs can overcome these limitations, but require a cross-chip interconnect
with bandwidth, latency, and energy efficiency characteristics well beyond the
reach of conventional electrical signaling. Introduction of nano-photonic
interconnects, as undertaken in this proposal, can meet these requirements and
allow systems to break free of the limitations of single-chip designs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the context of this research, a rigorous
educational plan is also integrated into the research agenda that strongly
connects research to education, and enhances the participation of minorities and
undergraduates in research. This project capitalizes on existing collaborations
with the Searle Center for Teaching Excellence at Northwestern University to
implement innovative educational approaches, Northwestern?s Science in Society
outreach initiatives for the general public, and Northwestern?s Office of STEM
Education Partnerships to develop K-12 STEM outreach activities with outreach
potential extending to 140+ schools in the Chicago metropolitan area, reaching
368 teachers and 30,000 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific technical
aspects of this research aims to develop scalable, energy-efficient, and energy-
proportional interconnects for future multicores. To achieve this vision, the
research seeks to understand and mitigate the energy inefficiencies of the
dominant power consumers in silicon-photonics. The project involves a cross-
cutting approach to combine developments in novel materials, emerging devices,
and 3D-stacking with research in architectural and micro-architectural
techniques, memory systems, the runtime environment, and the operating system,
to develop adaptive techniques that minimize the energy consumed by nano-
photonic interconnects without sacrificing their performance. The overall effort
culminates on the design of a virtual macro-chip, a disaggregated many-core
design supported by a silicon-photonic interconnect that reaches scales of
thousands of cores, at a performance and power level impossible to realize with
conventional technology.