* 1453971
* LTREB/SG: Spatiotemporal fitness variation and avian group size
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Charles Brown, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 148,401.00

Many social organisms live in groups of variable size. Group size has many
important consequences, such as affecting the spread and transmission of
infectious diseases both within the group and to members of other groups. This
project seeks to understand why groups of variable size persist over long-term
time scales. As we better understand what promotes variability in group size, we
can better predict the extent to which the costs or benefits of group living
will change over time. One popular but untested hypothesis is that climatic
differences between years cause variation in food supply or in populations of
parasites and pathogens, and this in turn causes the payoffs of different group
sizes to vary annually. This project builds on a long-term study of a social
bird, the cliff swallow, which lives in colonies of widely different sizes, and
seeks to investigate whether changing selection on the animals' survival and
reproductive success can explain annual variation in group size. The research
addresses one of the most fundamental questions in evolutionary ecology.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will test the prediction that success of
individuals will increase with group size in some years, decrease with group
size in others, and remain unchanged in yet other years. It will be determined
to what degree the birds' annual nesting success varies from year to year in
colonies of different sizes. This will be investigated by systematically
collecting data at 20-25 colonies each year. The work will determine the causes
of variation in reproductive success by measuring the extent of parasite
infestation, time of breeding, bird condition, and other factors. This study
will promote better understanding of how group size affects individuals'
lifetime reproductive success across long-term time scales, assist in
interpreting the extensive variation in group size that is characteristic of
many organisms, and reveal the potential influence of recent climatic changes on
social behavior. The research will involve women, Native Americans, and students
from the Great Plains, promoting STEM training of underrepresented groups with
respect to gender, ethnicity, and geographic region.