* 1453157
* CAREER: Understanding sociality and symbiosis through the eye of non-Neoisopteran termites using molecular and morphological data
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Jessica Ware, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 02/29/2020
* USD 817,595.00

Termites are economically important because their wood feeding affects human
residential and business environments. Termites are also ecologically important
because they digest one of the most abundant macromolecules on land, cellulose.
Termites are social insects that eat plants, from grasses to hard wood. But they
cannot digest this diet, rich in cellulose, without small organisms that live in
their gut known as endosymbionts. The diet of termites varies among species, and
so too does the type of endosymbiont found in their gut. It is possible that
termites have changed diets and changed endosymbionts multiple times during
their evolution. This project uses genetic, behavioral, diet, and morphological
(appearance) traits to understand termite evolution. In addition, this research
will focus on mentoring, recruiting and retaining students from underprivileged
or underrepresented groups in science. This goal will be reached using an
academic pipeline extending from Newark High Schools to undergraduate study at
Rutgers University and ultimately to graduate research. Students from Newark
high schools will be trained in fieldwork and the scientific method via Aim
High, an existing program through Rutgers University, increasing recruitment of
underprivileged students to post-secondary education. Undergraduate and graduate
students will gain teaching experience through Aim High, while also being
trained in laboratory and fieldwork.

This project will test large,comprehensive phylogenetic hypotheses of
Termitoidea and their endosymbionts with a thorough, global taxon sample.
Phylogenetic reconstructions will be based on both molecular and morphological
data, and will be analyzed for co-evolutionary patterns. Divergence estimation
analyses, biogeographical analyses and ancestral-state reconstruction will allow
us to evaluate the timing of shifts in functional and phylogenetic diversity
globally. Diversification rate shifts in the lower termites will be estimated,
and evaluated in the context of diet, behavior and morphological adaptations.
This work will be used to address the question of which came first for termite
evolution, shifts in diet or shifts in the endosymbiont microbes living in their
guts? It further examines how these changes drove the evolution of termite
social behavior? By using knowledge of relationships in testing for the
correlation of ecological roles and endosymbiont diversity with termite
morphology and diet, researchers can determine what aspects of termite life
history led to the formation of new species.