* 1453205
* CAREER: Integrating microbiology and population genetics through experimentation with the origins of a microbial mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2024
* Kristina Hillesland, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,050,229.00

This research will study the evolution of two mutually-beneficial
microorganisms. Humankind has long been captivated by species that seem to help
each other out, such as interactions between pollinators and flowering plants or
our bodies and the microorganisms that inhabit them. Because such species affect
each other's ability to flourish, we expect to see some coordination of
evolution across species as each adapts to the changes imposed by the other.
Some mutations should only be beneficial in the presence of the coevolving
partner. However, we do not know how often these reciprocal changes occur
because we often cannot observe them as they happen and in many species it is
difficult to determine which changes were a response to a partner species and
which were adaptations to other features of their environment. This research
will answer these questions by observing these interactions evolve in a
microbial system. The research will also result in the development of an active-
learning module on microbial evolution to be used in general undergraduate
microbiology courses and the development of two inquiry-based courses for
undergraduates. In these courses undergraduates will test the effects of
mutations that occurred during evolution on the ability of populations to
flourish with or without mutualism, allowing them to learn fundamental concepts
of evolution and microbial ecology and genetics in an integrated manner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiment will consist of a two-species community of
the bacteria Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough and the archaeon Methanococcus
maripaludis, along with single-species control populations. Replicate
communities will evolve over 3000 generations. The population genetics of this
coevoling mutualism will be determined by sequencing the genomes of each species
at several time intervals. The level of adaptation of populations to the biotic
environment will be determined by comparing the fitness of populations with past
and future mutualists, by moving mutations of interest into ancestoral strains,
and by reconstructing all intermediates along the main line of descent and
testing their fitness with and without a mutualist partner.