* 1453129
* CAREER: Lifesaving Capsule Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Pietro Valdastri, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 01/31/2017
* USD 217,886.00

Capsule robots are pill-sized devices that leverage extreme miniaturization to
operate in environments that are out of reach for larger robots. In medicine,
capsule robots can enter the human body through natural orifices or small
incisions, and perform endoscopy and surgery while minimizing the invasiveness
of the procedure. If successful, this research will have an impact on millions
of Americans by enabling painless colonoscopy for colorectal cancer screening,
allowing pediatric patients to benefit from minimally invasive surgery, and
improving the current complication rate in radical prostatectomy. In this
project, research in capsule robotics is being integrated with education and
outreach by involving three tiers of students, from high school to graduate
level. Students will have the opportunity to experiment with a capsule robot
educational toolkit and will get first-hand exposure to this new technology.
Visits to middle and high schools are being organized to convey the excitement
for engineering and robotics, encouraging young minds to engage in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to characterize
fundamental principles at the intersection of robotics, magnetism, and control
which will enable intelligent capsule robots to amplify the diagnostic and
interventional capabilities of gastroenterologists and surgeons. Through this
project, the science and application of capsule robot architectures, real-time
control, and teleoperation of magnetic pill-size devices will be advanced.
Further, computationally efficient approximations of the magnetic field and
models for capsule-tissue interaction, combined with miniature wireless
electronics, will enable proprioceptive sensing techniques that can be
effectively adopted in clinical settings. For the first time in magnetically
manipulated capsule robots, environmental awareness and proprioceptive sensing
will be leveraged to explore the full spectrum of human-robot interaction. This
research will advance medical science as well by enabling new diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures targeting organs deep inside the human body.