* 1453298
* CAREER: Evolution of allosomes and dosage compensation in terrestrial isopods
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Christopher Chandler, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 09/30/2021
* USD 641,256.00

Allosomes are chromosomes that determine sex, like the X and Y chromosomes in
mammals, and they play crucial roles in the evolutionary biology of species.
They have evolved independently in a wide array of species, and while these
chromosomes in different groups share many similarities, they also exhibit
important differences. Explaining these differences, however, remains difficult.
While a strong body of theoretical work makes several important predictions
regarding the evolution of allosomes, conclusively testing those predictions has
been difficult because most prior research has focused on a small subset of
model organisms. This project will address this problem by examining allosomes
in terrestrial isopod crustaceans, which include woodlice and pillbugs.
Terrestrial isopods are an ideal group for these questions because they exhibit
considerable variation in sex-determining mechanisms, but, surprisingly, their
genomes have received little attention. The proposed experiments are designed to
help explain why these chromosomes are so unique, and how they contribute to
vital biological processes. Importantly, this project will also promote
diversity in science and create hands-on educational opportunities for students,
especially engaging those from under-served groups. First, a project-based
genomics course will be developed, and course materials made publicly available.
Second, an international summer program will be established that provides
undergraduates at SUNY Oswego with opportunities to conduct research abroad.
Finally, this work will generate interest in research on campus by allowing
incoming freshmen participating in an existing science and math summer 'bridge'
camp to take part in interdisciplinary laboratory
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address key questions on the
evolution of allosomes in three species of terrestrial isopod crustaceans
(Trachelipus rathkei, Porcellio laevis, and Armadillidium vulgare). This
research will (i) identify where changes in sex-determining chromosomes have
occurred on the isopod evolutionary tree; (ii) test whether genes on these
chromosomes are affected more strongly than autosomal genes by natural selection
and genetic drift; and (iii) test whether these species exhibit dosage
compensation. A comparative approach using whole genome sequencing and gene
annotation via RNA sequencing will be used to address the first two aims.
Fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH) will also be used to determine homology
of allosomes among species. The sex of terrestrial isopods can be experimentally
manipulated through surgical ablation or implantation of androgenic glands,
which offers a unique opportunity to accurately test for dosage compensation
using RNA sequencing in manipulated and unmanipulated individuals of the same
and opposite sex. By studying a unique taxonomic group, this research will help
examine the generality of patterns suggested by earlier work on allosomes,
providing significant insights into these influential components of so many
organisms' genomes, including those of humans.