* 1453633
* CAREER: Non-equilibrium wall-bounded turbulent flows at high Reynolds numbers
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Johan Larsson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/29/2020
* USD 500,000.00

1453633&lt;br/&gt;Larsson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though the majority of flows
in industry and in the environment are turbulent, significant gaps exist in our
knowledge of their behavior, especially in non-canonical cases (i.e., cases
where the flow is not at equilibrium). This is the white space that this CAREER
proposal aims to cover -- to develop theory and models for the simulation of
compressible, non-equilibrium turbulent flows with Large Eddy Simulations (LES).
In addition to the scientific broader impact, educational activities are
proposed that are focused on the development of a new classroom software tool
that can be used to provide experiential learning to undergraduate and graduate
students by offering visual answers to fluid dynamics questions. The software
tool would be available to other educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this proposal is to invent new LES models that can accurately simulate the
behavior of non-equilibrium turbulent flows close to solid walls (these are
known as wall models). This is a critical yet missing element from currently
available computational techniques, and the solution to this problem would open
up a whole new area of engineering flows that we would be able to predict. The
PI proposes to obtain high fidelity simulation data using direct numerical
simulations of representative flow cases and then utilize these data to both
develop and validate his new models. Successful completion of this project would
constitute a step change in our predictive capabilities for non-equilibrium
turbulent flows close to solid walls.