* 1453112
* CAREER: Commonality Exploiting Architectures for Energy Efficiency
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* David Wentzlaff, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 01/31/2021
* USD 511,176.00

An increasing amount of computation is moving into the Cloud and large-scale
data centers. Hosted web-applications, such as social networks, hosted email,
and photo sharing, are all examples of applications, which have moved into the
Cloud. In order to control costs and save energy, maximizing the computational
efficiency of datacenter computers is of paramount importance. This research
project investigates computational efficiency in datacenter processors by
looking for commonality between all of the applications that are executing in
the Cloud. This project explores how to change a microprocessor core to save
energy by exploiting the commonality available between applications in the
Cloud. In addition, this project utilizes an integrated education plan that will
disseminate information about computer architecture inside of the University,
across the New York region, and across the world through the use of a Massively
Open Online Course (MOOC). Accelerating data center and big data applications
can have large societal impact by helping humans understand data that has been
collected, thus enabling the understanding of social trends and public health
challenges. The success of the research project will create more efficient data
centers that will enable humanity to answer societal big data questions and have
richer Internet experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how
to create computer architectures that can exploit similarity between programs
executing on different cores across the data center. A software system
identifies likely candidates that exhibit commonality. Once likely commonality
has been identified, micro-architectural information is sent between different
cores or within a single core to enable the execution of one program to reduce
the energy needed to execute a second similar program. This project investigates
what is the best micro-architectural information to share between cores
executing common programs and how it is best to send that information between
cores. In particular, this project investigates customizing on-chip networks
specialized for sending commonality information and how to modify a manycore
processor to harvest common micro-architectural information.