* 1453130
* CAREER: Modelling Emergent Behaviour of Gene Networks Controlling Plant Stem Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2023
* Rosangela Sozzani, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 03/31/2023
* USD 743,619.00

Climate uncertainty, a growing scarcity of arable land, and the potential to
develop renewable sources of bioenergy all focus our attention on the degree to
which we depend on plants. One key to improving plant productivity is to
understand better the control of their growth and development. Plants possess
stem cells, whose division and differentiation is central to plant growth and
the building of new organs. Current understanding of plant stem cell regulation
does not address well the complex networks of regulation that are involved. This
project will use the model plant Arabidopsis to experimentally identify the
essential features that govern stem cell regulatory networks in the developing
root, and will develop accurate mathematical models that describe the behaviour
of these networks. The root captures nutrients essential to the plant, and
knowledge of the rules controlling root stem cell behaviour will facilitate the
future development of plants for crop improvement. The project will provide
cross-training and education to students through the development of courses at
the interface between plant biology and bioengineering. These courses will be
tailored to the needs of a diverse target audience. The research team will
engage a wider audience, ranging from K-12 students to adults, to inform the
public on important issues including plant stem cells, plant bioengineering, and
crop improvement. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A key to systems-level understanding of
the molecular mechanisms regulating stem cells is the ability to analyse the
dynamics of networks in the context of a living organism. Identifying the
essential features that govern stem cell regulatory networks and their emergent
behaviours will contribute to an accurate understanding of the design rules
governing cell pluripotency. This project integrates techniques derived from
biological, mathematical, and engineering science to elucidate mechanisms that
regulate plant stem cell fate and maintenance. The project's foundation will be
based on the transcriptional profile of two Arabidopsis root stem cell
populations, the cortex/endodermal initials (CEI) and xylem (XYL), as well as
the quiescent centre cells that maintain the stem cells in their
undifferentiated status. Bayesian modelling of transcriptional dynamics, and
perturbation testing of the models, have revealed TARGET OF MONOPTEROS3 (TMO3)
to be a key regulator of both CEI and XYL stem cells. Novel imaging techniques
have been developed that will enable quantitative measurements of diffusion,
concentration, and interactions of molecular factors responsible for signalling
between stem cells. By integrating these data with mathematical modelling, the
project will achieve an improved understanding of how stem cell division is
precisely regulated in space and time. The project's research goals are to: 1)
characterize the transcriptional signature responsible for stem cell regulation
and to test the hypothesis that interacting transcriptional networks operate
across different stem cells; and 2) generate mathematical models that
incorporate spatial and temporal information to describe communication between
stem cells. After determining which parameters are critical to generate a robust
mathematical model, models will be generated that describe how regulator signals
are propagated between and among cells, and will identify perturbations capable
of resetting decision-making signals. These efforts will provide a framework for
comparing stem cell development in plants and animals, and will contribute to
future plant breeding efforts in the face of climate uncertainty.