* 1453139
* CAREER:Software Requirements Evolution in a Multi-Jurisdictional Socio-Technical Ecosystem
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Travis Breaux, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 635,050.00

Pervasive and distributed computing decreases development time by allowing
engineers to reuse software in third-party components, platforms and cloud-based
services. Consequently, this software is subject to multiple policies and
regulations that impose legal requirements on the behavior of these complex
systems. Legal requirements create evolutionary pressure on system design as
developers roll out new product features, enter new markets that cross geo-
political boundaries, or when existing laws change or new laws are created. In
response, software engineers must reconcile legal requirements with their system
design to ensure their software complies with policy and law; a problem even
more challenging when innovation occurs in the absence of existing
law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to address this problem by
analyzing corpora of regulations that govern software: (1) to develop a set of
heuristics and semi-formal, domain-specific languages needed to express and
reason about legal requirements for the purpose of determining requirements
coverage; (2) to empirically measure gaps among policies and regulations from
different jurisdictions that indicate requirements trade-offs, trends and
potential disruptions due to changing requirements; and (3) to enable developers
to rationalize and select alternate requirements evolutions based on models of
changing coverage. The outcomes include new theory to explain and predict
requirements evolution across jurisdictions, and tools and techniques that
regulators, legal professionals and software engineers can use to reduce the
burden of responding to a globally evolving regulatory landscape. These outcomes
will be evaluated using mixed-methods research that combines formal methods,
information retrieval and human subject experiments aimed at furthering our
understanding of how professionals express and interpret requirements and how
they reconcile conflicting requirements in the presence of ambiguity and
conflicting business and regulatory goals. In addition to training and
education, the broader impact of this research aims to harmonize regulatory
goals with software systems, to engage the professions of software engineering
and law that have historically worked separately, and to inform policy and
lawmakers about the impact of regulations on software design and development.