* 1453784
* CAREER: Effects of mitohormesis on reproduction and longevity
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Wendy Hood, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,084,333.00

A central tenet of biology is that allocation to reproduction trades off against
allocation to processes that enhance longevity. Reproduction takes energy and
energy production induces the release of damaging reactive oxygen species (ROS)
within the mitochondria. ROS are normal byproducts of cellular respiration that
can damage cells and as a result, reduce longevity. Yet, several studies have
now shown that damage from ROS is typically unchanged or even reduced in animals
that reproduce compared to those that don't. In addition, new theory suggests
that low levels of exposure to ROS, as occurs during reproduction, not only
lowers damage from ROS but may also protect cells from the cellular damage that
contributes to aging. The goals of this project are to test if the ROS generated
during reproduction protects against future ROS damage, determine how ROS damage
and the performance of mitochondria change with reproductive experience and age,
and characterize the relationship between reproductive experience and longevity
in the house mouse. Research on the interaction between mitochondrial function,
reproduction, and longevity will be used as a platform for education and the
improvement of science literacy in the state of Alabama. In collaboration of
with local biology teachers, lesson plans with labs will be developed for 7th
and 9th graders. These lessons will feature the proposed research on
mitochondria and aging and will be submitted to the Alabama State Board of
Education for adoption in every 7th and 9th grade biology classroom in Alabama.
In addition, Auburn graduate students will be challenged to commit to regular
participation in outreach in a graduate-level seminar "mitochondria and
energetics". Students will prepare and present a lesson for Auburn University's
Get Under the Surface program that invites 5th grade students and their parents
to campus to participate in an interactive laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this CAREER project are to 1) test whether reproduction protects
against future oxidative damage and 2) to determine if mitochondrial function
and the cellular response to an induced oxidative stressor change with age in a
continuously breeding species, the house mouse (Mus musculus). Given the
potentially protective effects that reproduction has on processes that induce
aging, a third goal of this project is 3) to evaluate the interaction between
reproduction and longevity in female mice by comparing age at death in females
that have bred few times verses those that have bred many times. Several
cutting-edge techniques will be employed in this investigation including
measurements of ROS production from mitochondria and oxidative damage in organs
that commonly decline during senescence. In addition, respiratory control ratio,
electron chain complex activity, mitochondrial biogenesis, abundance of
uncoupling proteins and levels of endogenous antioxidants will be evaluated. The
impact of treatment on insulin-like growth factor-1 and telomere length will
also be evaluated as indicators of the impact of treatment on aging. This
investigation will provide a detailed assessment of the role that reproduction
plays in the accumulation of ROS and in resistance to stressors that hasten
aging. Unlike many studies that have searched for a mechanistic basis for the
tradeoff between reproduction and longevity, this study will ask whether such a
tradeoff really exists. Whether this study supports or refutes the idea that ROS
produced during reproduction contributes to age, the project will transform the
study of life-history evolution, and the outcome will be a better understanding
of the mechanistic relationship between aging and reproduction.