* 1453358
* CAREER: High-throughput Single-molecule Studies of Replication Conflict and Restart.
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Ilya Finkelstein, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2021
* USD 901,480.00

The genomes of all living organisms must complete two essential functions-DNA
replication and transcription. Conflicts between the replication and
transcription machineries are pervasive on DNA and can lead to catastrophic
outcomes including structural damage to DNA and mutagenesis. The goal of this
project is to examine at a molecular level how replication-transcription
conflicts occur and are resolved. The exciting research topic of "molecular
machines" will also be used to inspire students' interest in science at the
early-education stage. As part of the institutional Freshman Research Initiative
undergraduates with minimal laboratory experience will be trained in inquiry-
based research using quantitative biochemical and biophysical methods. Graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows will be trained in these interdisciplinary
areas as well. Additionally, the PI will participate in projects aimed at
exposing local under-resourced middle school students to research early in their
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-throughput single-molecule fluorescence
imaging will be used to directly observe the intricate choreography of
replication and transcription enzymes as they encounter each other on the same
DNA molecule. The findings will shed light on replication-transcription
conflicts, and help resolve the larger problem of how organisms replicate a
genome that is crowded with many DNA-binding proteins. As part of the project,
new methods for high-throughput single-molecule biology will be developed by
combining elements of micro-fabrication and surface chemistry, and disseminated
to the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is co-funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences (Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences: Genetic Mechanisms program and the Division of Emerging Frontiers)
and by the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Division of
Chemistry: Chemistry of Life Sciences program).