* 1453252
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education on Gravitational Wave Detector Optics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Gregory Harry, American University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 01/31/2021
* USD 504,276.00

This CAREER grant supports work on optics research to improve the sensitivity of
gravitational wave detectors and other precision optical measurements as well as
using expertise in optics to organize and host a day of fun competition, the
Optics Olympiad, for Washington DC high school students. Gravitational waves
come from Einstein's theory of gravity, and are one of the few specific
predictions of Einstein's theory that can be experimentally checked against
other theories of gravity (like Isaac Newton's). Determining if Einstein's,
Newton's, or perhaps some other theory of gravity correctly describes our
universe is necessary to developing a complete understanding of the laws of
nature. This experiment is being performed by the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) with two large, four kilometer long
detectors in Louisiana and Washington state. Once gravitational waves are
detected by LIGO, these detections will serve as another method of studying the
universe, complementary but different from optical, radio, and other
conventional telescopes. With gravitational wave detections, we expect to learn
more about black holes, neutron stars, supernova, the origins of the universe,
and other high energy astronomical events. Unfortunately, the effect of
gravitational waves on the LIGO detectors is very small, and noise from other
phenomenon can easily overwhelm the gravitational signal. This grant supports
work to better understand and reduce coating thermal noise, a critical noise
source that limits our ability to detect gravitational waves. The related
education and outreach project is to pass on the excitement about optics we
develop working on LIGO to high school students through a fun and educational
competition, the Optics Olympiad. In addition to individuals and teams competing
on knowledge and understanding of optics, there will be panel discussions, a
guest lecturer, and tours of science laboratories at American University.

Thermal noise in the coatings of the LIGO optics is caused by mechanical loss,
as shown by the Fluctuation Dissipation theorem. We will reduce this thermal
noise by developing Aluminum-Gallium-Arsenide (AlGaAs) crystals and silicon
nitride for use as LIGO coatings. AlGaAs has already shown lower thermal noise
in other precision optics experiments under different conditions. Preliminary
results with AlGaAs under LIGO conditions indicate some improvement in
mechanical loss compared to current coatings, but not as much as expected. This
may be due to surface conditions on the substrate, which will be explored using
various chemical and mechanical surface treatments. The effects of these
treatments on AlGaAs mechanical loss will be explored using normal mode quality
factor, or Q, measurements. We will also better characterize and understand
thermal noise from AlGaAs using the complete description of mechanical loss as
the imaginary part of the stiffness tensor. This may allow for ways to improve
thermal noise through the layer design of the coating beyond improvements from
better materials. The Optic Olympiad will include a formative assessment to
determine what elements of the Olympiad are helping to reach the goals of
increasing students understanding of physics and optics as well as improving
their impression of STEM careers. Results of this assessment and the Olympiad in
general will be presented to the physics education research community, likely as
a journal article or conference presentation.