* 1453542
* CAREER: A New Theory of Social Choice for More than Two Alternatives: Combining Economics, Statistics, and Computation
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2023
* Lirong Xia, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 01/31/2023
* USD 547,469.00

The proposal aims at generating computational mechanisms that will enable
individuals to contribute towards making better collective decisions (e.g., news
ranking) including crowdsourcing where aggregation of online noise answers can
occur. The proposal brings together ideas from economics, statistics, and
computation to expand the capabilities of social choice mechanisms to handle
large numbers of alternative choices, to extract ground truth from aggregated
preferences, and to address problems where individual agents might not be able
to compare some alternatives. In contrast to classical social choice theory,
which is limited to the selection between two alternatives, the project proposes
a rigorous study of a model for computational choice that will be robust enough
for discerning between thousands or even millions of
alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal could have a profound impact in
the way we build multi-agent systems, search engines and recommender systems.
The proposed effort can serve as a catalyst in the growing area of computational
social choice, including: (1) Rank aggregation has been used in many fields,
involving some high impact applications like ranking of news. However, this
problem is far from solved using traditional computational social choice methods
because they either only work for two alternatives, require full rankings, does
poorly in revealing the ground truth, or are hard to compute. The proposed
research will develop new methodologies to overcome these deficiencies by
designing objective, robust, and computable social choice mechanisms for rich
preferences. (2) Crowdsourcing, whereby online workers' noisy answers are
aggregated to produce a better overall answer to some question. This cannot be
solved by existing computational social choice techniques as the online workers'
answers are often partial orders, workers may manipulate the outcome by
providing false answers, and the objective of aggregation is to reveal the true
answer. The proposed research will directly tackle these challenges by designing
new mechanisms, which are directly applicable to existing systems.