* 1453658
* CAREER: Optimizing Learning Models for Interpretation of Heterogeneous Biological Data
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Tomasz Arodz, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2021
* USD 435,653.00

The gap between techniques for rapid gathering of data and the ability to
navigate the resulting large, heterogeneous datasets and formulate novel
hypotheses is widening. In molecular biology, this limits basic discoveries and
slows the translation of results from laboratory to clinic. Bridging this gap
will necessarily involve intelligent algorithms. Yet, despite significant
advances, machine-learning algorithms struggle with taking the calculated risk
that underpins promising hypotheses. A machine can generate de novo a number of
hypotheses that match experimental data, but are they plausible given our
understanding of biology? An algorithm can use the data to score which of the
known biological pathways is dysregulated in the disease, but can it propose a
novel explanation of the observations? This project will address the limitation
of current methods through novel algorithms that will be able to integrate
existing knowledge into data-driven analysis and modeling. Following rigorous
validation involving real and synthetic datasets, the proposed algorithms will
form a transformative computational tool set for biologists, greatly enhancing
the capabilities for understanding normal and pathological behavior of molecular
systems involving heterogeneous elements interacting in complex ways. The work
on the algorithms will involve undergraduate and graduate students. Through
participation in multidisciplinary research, they will learn how to overcome
barriers in cross-discipline communication, which is crucial in the world where
computer methods permeate many other areas. Students will also benefit from a
new course on Graph Theory and Machine Learning. The PI will make the learning
modules from the course available online to instructors at other institutions.
Also, annually, the PI will organize a high-school programming contest that will
serve as a hands-on demonstration of how algorithms can help solve societal and
scientific problems. All activities at high-school, undergraduate and graduate
levels will have emphasis on supporting women and other underrepresented groups
in their exploration of computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
main objective of creating algorithms for training classifiers that are accurate
and interpretable will be achieved through graph-regularized machine learning
that ties together ensembles, submodular set functions, and techniques for non-
smooth function optimization. Submodular regularizers have recently received
attention as a powerful way for equipping linear models with information about
structures in the feature space, but extending the approach to non-linear
classifiers is hampered by the nonlinearity of the relationship between measured
features and the predicted outcome. This research will move past this obstacle
by designing innovative ensemble-based methods that incorporate submodular
regularizers, thus leading to improved accuracy, reduced overtraining and
increased interpretability of models. These novel methods will be applicable to
any classification problem that involves features connected by a network. Such
problems are not confined to biology; the methods will be of broader use, for
example to image analysis or text categorization. For biological applications,
which will be the main focus of the work, a unified meta-network that links
molecular elements at genetic, epigenetic, transcriptomic, proteomic and
metabolomics levels will be constructed, and a new approach for dealing with
missing data will be designed using concepts from spectral graph theory.