* 1453346
* CAREER: Using Multiple Gaits and Inherent Dynamics for Legged Robots With Improved Mobility
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* C. David Remy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 02/29/2020
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project is to
investigate legged robots that are faster and energetically more efficient. The
project capitalizes on the currently untapped possibility of using different
gaits at different locomotion speeds. This idea is inspired by nature. Humans,
for example, switch from walking to running as they increase speed; horses
transit from walking to trotting and galloping. Switching gaits is analogous to
switching gears in a car. It increases versatility and reduces energy
consumption. Additionally, in nature the choice of gaits is strongly coupled to
an animal's morphology. A massive elephant moves differently than a filigree
gazelle. This project will investigate this complex relation of gaits, motions,
and morphologies, and will transfer the underlying principles to robotic
systems. The work will be conducted in simulation studies and with actual
robots. In the long term, this CAREER plan aims at the development of robots
that reach and even exceed the agility of humans and animals. It will enable us
to build robots that can run as fast as a cheetah and as enduring as a husky,
while mastering the same terrain as a mountain goat. Moreover, it will provide
us with novel designs for active prosthetics and exoskeletons. The project will
also leverage the fascinating topic of legged locomotion to spark the interest
of K-12 students, underrepresented groups, and a broader audience for science,
technology, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
understand the fundamental principles of designing, building, and controlling
legged robots that embrace and exploit their inherent mechanical dynamics. The
underlying premise is that locomotion can emerge in great part passively from
the interaction of inertia, gravity, and elastic oscillations. The goal of this
project is to identify systems in which such dynamics can be excited in a
variety of different modes. Different modes would correspond to different gaits,
and would enable efficient motion in different operational conditions. The work
will extend optimal control and machine-learning techniques, such as multiple
shooting, direct collocation, or probabilistic direct policy learning methods,
to allow the simultaneous generation of gaits, motions, and morphological
parameters (including stiffness values, mass distributions, or actuator sizes).
Since performance criteria such as speed, efficiency, robustness, and agility
only fully manifest themselves in actual hardware implementations, the research
team will study these concepts not only in simulation, but also with hardware
prototypes. In particular, the methodology will be employed to examine the
benefits of flexible spines in quadrupeds and of articulated ankles in bipeds,
as well as to compare series elastic actuation and parallel elastic actuation
concepts.