* 1453020
* CAREER: Towards Trustworthy Operating Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Zhi Wang, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,672.00

An operating system is the key software of a computer system that manages the
hardware and software resources and provides essential services to computer
programs. It plays a critical role in the security of the whole system.
Unfortunately, modern operating systems are often bloated with millions of lines
of source code, and serious vulnerabilities are routinely being discovered and
exploited from them. Researchers have proposed various novel solutions based on
the "one-layer-below" approach, in which a more privileged software component
(i.e., a hypervisor) is introduced to monitor and/or regulate the operating
system?s behavior. However, the large trusted computing base of modern
hypervisors and the recent attacks against them put this approach into question.
This project aims at developing a systematic approach to improve the
trustworthiness of operating systems by enabling their self-defense, without
resorting to other software layers that may be vulnerable
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is being achieved in
three key steps: first, the project develops a kernel-level security enclave
that will provide a trusted, secure execution environment for other security
systems and mechanisms. Second, based on the strong isolation provided by the
enclave, the researchers design and implement several self-defense techniques
for operating system kernels. Third, a cold-boot attack is a powerful physical
attack that can extract sensitive information from the physical memory of a lost
or stolen computer (including mobile devices). It has become a major security
concern for corporations and governments. This project investigates a
comprehensive defense against cold-boot attacks by encrypting the whole memory
of a sensitive program on commodity hardware platforms. The results from this
project could substantially improve our defensive capabilities against malicious
and stealthy kernel-level malware and cold-boot attacks, and thus significantly
improving the trustworthiness of computer systems. Research results are
disseminated through publications, releasing of the tools developed, and
integrating into the educational activities at both the graduate and
undergraduate levels.