* 1453639
* CAREER: Comparative Biology of Phagocytosis in Green Algae and Other Protists with Emphasis on its Roles in the Endosymbiotic Origin of Eukaryotic Photosynthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Eunsoo Kim, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 556,573.00

Eukaryotes are organisms whose cells have complex internal structures, such as
nuclei and mitochondria, unlike the cells of bacteria. Cells of photosynthetic
eukaryotes such as plants and algae possess a chloroplast, an organelle that is
typically colored green and is responsible for generating cellular energy from
sunlight. While a chloroplast is part of a cell and cannot live by itself
outside of a cell, it originated from a free-living bacterium, which was
engulfed (i.e., phagocytosis) by and formed an intracellular symbiosis with an
early host eukaryote. This research aims to characterize the feeding mechanism
of several taxonomically diverse groups, including green algae. Feeding is
especially poorly understood in these groups. Only a few green algae, for
example, still have the capacity to consume food particles. The study has the
potential to provide insight into the process of feeding on bacteria that
eventually led to the evolution of chloroplasts as organelles within
photosynthetic eukaryotes. The work will involve a combination of cell
culturing, imaging, and molecular sequencing tools, and will train a cohort of
young investigators, including graduate students and undergraduate summer
interns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator recently found
definitive evidence for phagocytosis in one lineage of green algae, a group that
was once considered to have completely lost such capacity. The research will
evaluate the molecular and cellular basis of phagocytosis in green algae as well
as in several other lineages of eukaryotes. Major questions driving the proposed
research include: 1) Are other "early" lineages of green algae capable of
ingesting bacteria? When and how many times was phagocytosis lost during green
algal evolution?; 2) Does resource limitation facilitate phagocytosis in
mixotrophic green algae? If so, could this have provided sufficient evolutionary
pressure for some green algae to still retain feeding capacity?; 3) What genes
and proteins are involved in phagocytosis in green algae and other protists?
Could lineage-specific traits of phagocytosis have played key roles in the
origin of eukaryotic photosynthesis? The project will use a combination of
methods, including feeding assays, growth experiments, fluorescence and electron
microscopy, transcriptome/genome sequencing, phagosome proteomics, and
quantitative PCR. The research will involve the training of one postdoctoral
researcher, two graduate students, and five undergraduate interns. In addition,
a course on imaging techniques will be developed and offered through the
American Museum of Natural History graduate program. This course will train
graduate students in the use of current microscopic techniques in comparative
cell biology.