* 1453276
* CAREER: Applications of Bayesian Inference to Human Memory and Decision-Making
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Pernille Hemmer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 12/31/2021
* USD 458,566.00

The objective of this research is to examine how an individual's experiences
influence his or her beliefs and how these, in turn, impact intertemporal
decisions. Understanding how experiences and resulting beliefs impact future
choice contributes to the national health through application to questions of
medication adherence and health outcomes (e.g., how patient' uncertainty about
illnesses might affect adherence choices.) The project also contributes to
national prosperity and welfare through the provision of integrated in-class and
laboratory training of graduate students and undergraduates in advanced
programming and Bayesian Cognitive Modeling. The research program also seeks to
advance diversity in STEM fields through outreach focused on attracting women
and underrepresented groups to the academic setting, and continued post-degree
mentoring, e.g., outreach to pre-college organizations serving underrepresented
minorities and organizations promoting retention of women in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our beliefs about the regularities of our
environment shape our understanding of the world, and in turn, influence our
cognitive processes and behavior. Beliefs are important not only for recalling
the past and making decisions in the now, but also for making predictions about
the future. People develop well-calibrated beliefs based on their life
experiences. However, subjective experiences leading to individual differences
in beliefs have also been found to bias decision processes. Time preference
(placing greater value on earlier outcomes by discounting the utility of later
outcomes) is one example where human choice and behavior is influenced by strong
individual differences, as well as changes within the individual. While
Discounted Utility, the accepted model of normative intertemporal choice,
assumes consistent assignment of discounting rates in time preference (i.e.,
stable individual difference), it has been suggested that people might exhibit a
change in time preference due to beliefs about the uncertainty in the
environment. An important question that remains unexplored is: what is the
effect of changes in the environment on subjective beliefs and the influence of
changing beliefs on memory and decision making under uncertainty (e.g.,
predictions for the future). This research provides a new framework for
inferring individual differences via the integrated application of Bayesian
analysis to Bayesian models of cognition. This integrative approach makes it
possible to infer individual differences in the underlying parameters of the
Bayesian cognitive model, and can be used to address how changing beliefs
influence how and what we remember, and the value of future outcomes. The theory
driven goal is to challenge the assumption of a constant discounting rate, and
instead assume that the rate changes, but that the system for determining the
rate remains consistent. The integrative approach makes it possible to implement
and compare multiple competing cognitive models of the effect of individual
discounting rates on time preference.