* 1453854
* EAGER: Adaptive Performance Models of Sensing Systems for Design Space Exploration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Sule Ozev, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,999.00

This research will implement a "lab on a chip" ChemFET (Chemically sensitive
Field Effect Transistor) sensor array in a Complementary Metal Oxide
Semiconductor (CMOS) technology that includes sensors with calibration and read-
out circuitry all in a common substrate. Selective membranes or coatings
deposited on the surface will enhance selectivity for a target molecule or ion
to achieve a multi-parametric sensor array. As for potential applications of
these biosensors, low cost/low power sensors can be used to crowd source
monitoring of the environment. The benefit to society will be in terms of
bringing the feasibility of ubiquitous sensing to reality. The acquired sensing
data can provide information about the environment and alert people to dangerous
conditions. Further, this information can be mined and analyzed with
applications in safety and environmental monitoring, production control, and
healthcare. Finally, the proposed research will be used to create a classroom
experience at the graduate level, and a free workshop though the Arizona Science
Lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The longer term potential of technical impact of the
exploratory project work is in the design space exploration for the sensing
systems using methods from design automation. Co-design and models of sensors
and analog integrated circuits will be examined using performance metrics.
Through this work the design process for sensing systems can be transformed from
a completely bottom up approach to a systematic optimization of the entire
system from individual sensors to circuits to communication devices. In
addition, the system parameters can be adjusted on the fly to adapt the behavior
and performance under the influence of sensor drift, environmental factors such
as temperature variation, power supply and network availability. Through the use
of predictive models and algorithms to govern the system behavior and operating
conditions, strides toward a new paradigm in sensing system design and
implementation can potentially be made.