* 1453721
* CAREER: Statistical Information Retrieval Modeling for Complex Search
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Grace Hui Yang, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 01/31/2021
* USD 552,012.00

With the increasing popularity of Web applications and users' deep involvement
in the Web, search engines face great challenges with a new degree of
complexity. For instance, location-based services collect more complex
contextual information such as geo-locations, season, time and temperature.
Users' search activities have become more complex and usually task-based
generating a variety of feedback and engagement signals such as clicks, mouse
movements, eye tracking results, and query reformulations.Â  Moreover, search is
not only an individual user's personalized activity, but also activities shared
by many users with similar information needs. Search engines are presented with
the richest types of information and the largest amount of data ever and the
complexity of the available information is tremendous. This demands that search
engines be upgraded from retrieval systems that basically look for documents for
single queries to decision engines that can pick the best choices for
information seeking tasks. Through disseminating research results in papers and
tools, the project will make three types of broad impact. First, the techniques
developed in this project will benefit a broad population of everyday users and
empower them to deal with complex, task-oriented web search. Second, the
algorithms and software developed will provide fellow researchers and
practitioners a handful of useful tools for solving IR problems incorporating
dynamics. Third, the project will reach out to middle school girls and
elementary school students. It will be easy for any search engine user to start
using the proposed new search engine. However, to be an expert on IR, students
need to be good at mathematics, natural language processing, user interface,
artificial intelligence, and programming. This will be an excellent project to
attract young people and minorities to these STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to create the next
generation search engines, to be more specific, decision engines. The focus will
be on designing, experimenting, and deploying statistical models for modeling
the dynamics presented in the search process. The technical challenges are: (1)
given the complexity of the available data, integrating a search engine
appropriately into the right places in the larger context for the ultimate
information seeking tasks; (2) providing theoretical and practical support to
formal modeling of user engagement and other dynamics in retrieval models for
better retrieval effectiveness; (3) modeling a user's exploration in the
information space and optimizing a search engine's actions and algorithms; and
(4) modeling interactions between a user and a search engine as well as
interactions among multiple users, creating the dynamic environment for them all
to interact and to game with each other and achieve a win-win optimization. The
success of this project will start a new research field in IR: dynamic IR
modeling. The results of this research will be highly influential with great
impact on the next generation search engines. The work will build a foundation
for future advances in the fields of reinforcement learning in IR and game
theory in IR.