* 1453141
* CAREER: Advances in Monitoring Human Performance: Moving Wearable Technology from the Expert to Nonexpert User
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Leia Stirling, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2021
* USD 635,901.00

Wearable computing technology is rapidly proliferating and playing an increasing
role in our daily lives. The PI's focus in this research is on developing
technology for the monitoring by non-experts of human performance within the
context of stroke rehabilitation, which will be applicable to a wide spectrum of
applications. Robust performance metrics that can be interpreted by a non-expert
would enable people to track their well-being in a manner not currently
possible. With technology in the home environment, there is the potential to
better engage the user in self-monitoring, to increase motivation, and to
improve motion strategies for activities related to well-being. From the
healthcare professional's perspective, wearable technology in the home could
allow the clinician to change the balance of time so as to emphasize educating
and working with the patient on enabling tasks, because the wearable technology
would provide information on compliance history and progress. The longitudinal
data from the sensors would also permit improved evaluation of patient-specific
dose-response sensitivity. The human-centered research methodology implemented
here will also provide new insights into systems modeling heuristics, in
particular how to formalize relationships between the human and computer
entities of the systems architecture. Because the research will involve both
healthy and stroke participant groups, project outcomes will include a novel
database with participant demographics, expert outcome measures, and daily home
task performance which will permit the advancement of new algorithms and will
provide a way to compare algorithm performance across populations.

The PI argues that higher fidelity motion sensing is the key to empowering
improved human performance, goal monitoring, and well-being. To this end, in
this project she will extend the capabilities of wearable motion sensing
technology through advances in dynamic system modeling and signal processing to
account for the underlying variability in motion and compliant structure of the
individual. A cyber-human platform will be developed for those with limited
knowledge in sensor technology and physiological systems (non-experts), through
analysis of performance metrics and decision-making interfaces with the end user
in mind. The effort will involve three related thrusts that will be demonstrated
within the context of stroke rehabilitation: characterization of variability for
relevant tasks in a natural environment; application of estimation algorithms
and investigation of performance metrics robust to uncertainties in the natural
environment; and evaluation of decision-making interfaces synergistic with the
expected end user. The PI will implement novel estimation and calibration
algorithms to inform performance metric generation, and will integrate these
parameters into a user interface that is evaluated in human studies as a
platform for decision making across expertise level. By bridging biomechanics
and control theory, new capabilities will be enabled for wearable motion-sensing
devices that integrate relevant nonlinear models with the appropriate
stochasticity, which in turn will lead to exciting research opportunities for
the biomechanics community to understand motor behavior in natural settings, as
well as adaptations and extensions in control theory from a methods perspective
due to new challenges in maintaining calibrations for systems with compliance
and underlying variability.