* 1453529
* CAREER: Atomic resolution modeling of proteoglycans
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Olgun Guvench, University of New England
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 04/30/2021
* USD 1,052,985.00

Proteoglycans are a major part of the biological "glue" that holds cells
together in many different animals and in people. Proteoglycans also help cells
to sense what is going on outside of them. Because proteoglycans are very
flexible and difficult to isolate as pure samples, their structure has been
difficult to study using regular experiments. Therefore, this project will apply
cutting-edge physics-based computer modeling to proteoglycans. As a result, this
project will increase the understanding of the normal growth and development of
humans and many other animals. During the project, twelve early university
students will be exposed to career paths in science, an advanced university
student will receive both research and educational training, five elementary
school teachers will receive training in modern computer tools for teaching
science, and 500 fourth and fifth grade students from a diverse range of
ethnicities and socio-economic backgrounds will receive enriched science
teaching and interact with university students studying
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific scientific goals of the project are
to: (1) develop a high-precision public database of the conformational free
energies for all carbohydrates found in proteoglycans to facilitate computer
modeling; (2) understand the dynamics and thermodynamics of carbohydrate
polymers and the non-covalent interactions between pairs of carbohydrate
polymers as relevant to proteoglycans; and (3) transform the extracellular
proteoglycan biglycan, the membrane-anchored glypican proteoglycan Dally-like,
and fragments of the matrix proteoglycans aggrecan and versican into research
platforms that reveal how interactions between protein, carbohydrate, ion, and
lipid components affect the structure and dynamics, and therefore functions, of
proteoglycans. Standard unbiased molecular dynamics simulations and enhanced
sampling and free-energy methods including replica exchange molecular dynamics
and Adaptive Biasing Force molecular dynamics will be used to meet these
scientific goals, thereby contributing to an area where advancement has been
hindered because of limitations in experimental approaches.