* 1453960
* CAREER: Innovative Structural Systems for Multi-hazard Resistance  Using Steel Plate with Cutouts
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Matthew Eatherton, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 05/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will pursue
research to create new enhanced structural systems by strategically removing
material (i.e. introducing engineered cutouts) in constituent steel plates.
Structural systems subjected to extreme lateral loads due to earthquake or wind
resist collapse when they can sustain large deformation without breaking. This
property, known as ductility, protects the lives of inhabitants because
buildings can deform without collapsing. Typical structural systems that rely on
shear deformations in steel plates to develop ductility are challenged by shear
buckling and the potential for fracture. This research attempts to revolutionize
structural systems that rely on ductile shear deformations. The innovative
approach is to improve ductility and energy dissipation ability by strategically
removing material from the plates rather than adding more material. This project
will develop cutout patterns, and the underlying science, to convert shear
deformations into smaller ductile mechanisms that resist buckling. The new
structural systems have the potential to improve the performance of the built
environment when subjected to extreme lateral loads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's approach involves converting global shear deformations into local
ductile yielding mechanisms in a way that can resist buckling, develop increased
stiffness, exhibit stable and full hysteretic behavior, and allow structural
behavior to be tuned. The computational and experimental studies will lead to a
new understanding of the mechanics of ring-shaped and yielding link hysteretic
elements. Fundamental knowledge about approaches for creating ductile shear
behavior will be discovered by 1) computationally exploring size, shape, and
layout of cutouts for buckling resistant mechanisms, 2) developing methods to
tune behavior, 3) validating concepts through small- and large-scale
experiments, and 4) structural system level modeling. A related educational plan
will inject visual demonstrations and hands-on activities into structural
engineering curricula by 1) conducting and videotaping hands-on activities for
K-12 outreach, 2) creating well-produced videos of the outreach activities,
experiments, and key demonstrations, and then 3) creating an online warehouse
for videos and instructions related to structural engineering.