* 1453018
* CAREER: Direct Manipulation of Numerical Optimization for Structured Geometry Creation
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Yotam Gingold, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2021
* USD 595,738.00

The physical world surrounds us with geometric and spatial information. A large
variety of sensors and scanning equipment can readily turn this physical data
into unstructured digital geometry, such as point clouds and triangle meshes.
However, next generation digital geometry processing applications (say, for
computer-aided design or for medical image analysis) require structured data in
which an object is organized into meaningful parts and relationships. People
have no trouble perceiving the structure of a sketch, MRI, or scanned car
miniature, easily identifying which organs or machine parts are present and the
approximate location of each. Whether due to our learned expertise or innate
skill, such human perceptual abilities are extremely challenging to automate;
resolving ambiguities in the input (e.g., a dark region in an MRI that could be
a malignant tumor or an innocuous shadow) typically necessitates human
involvement. On the other hand, we struggle with tedious low-level geometric
tasks such as precisely delineating a bone fracture or the surface of a car
door. While nonlinear optimization algorithms excel at improving approximate
input, they are often too slow to integrate into interactive applications. Thus,
a problem arises in situations where new user input is provided continuously; if
an in-progress nonlinear optimization is repeatedly canceled and restarted no
solution will ever be found, but if allowed to continue it will compute an
outdated solution.

The PI's objective in the current research is to resolve this fundamental
conflict between interactivity and nonlinear optimization, and to explore
minimal interactive approaches for creating structured geometry in medical and
design applications. His approach merges direct manipulation interfaces, which
are powerful and easily learned, with nonlinear optimization, which is capable
of solving precise geometric problems given approximate input from a human. The
PI will synthesize techniques from human-computer interaction, perceptual
psychology, and numerical optimization to exploit the fact that people typically
interact with computers in a low-dimensional manner (e.g., by moving a mouse),
which allows one to predict both human input and whether parallel optimization
processes will converge to the same solution. He will evaluate these approaches
with interfaces for creating high-quality, structured 3D models from noisy and
inconsistent partial data as is commonly found in scans of physical models for
computer-aided design and anatomical scans for medical imaging. Project outcomes
will vastly increase the computational resources available to numerical
optimization in interactive systems while greatly reducing expensive operator
time, and will also help unify physical and digital design. The PI will seek to
widely disseminate project outcomes, by open-sourcing broadly-reusable
algorithms and by technology transfer to industry. He will also engage in a
variety of educational and outreach activities, including a "reverse science
fair" at a local high school during which guest speakers deliver accessible
introductions to state-of-the-art research and students practice science
journalism.