* 1453106
* CAREER: The Multi-functional Foot and its Role in Locomotor Control Across a Range of Complex Media
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Shi-Tong Hsieh, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,120,951.00

Nature is filled with surfaces that deform and flow in unexpected ways upon
impact. How an animal interacts with these surfaces during locomotion can be
critical to its survival. Research by the PI over the last decade reveals that
the feet of running lizards are surprisingly multi-functional and that the
relationship between foot-surface dynamics and the control of movement are more
complicated than currently appreciated. This award will support studies to
explore how kinematics and passive properties of the feet affect interactions
with the ground when running across a range of materials. The research will
generate fundamental knowledge about the role of active and passive control
mechanisms in tuning foot-substrate interactions on complex media. The outcome
of the studies will impact the way researchers view the role of the feet during
legged locomotion. This research provides an excellent starting-point from which
to engage children and the public in complex concepts that integrate biology,
physics, and materials sciences. The educational objective of this award is to
increase engagement of middle school students in science through the development
and dissemination of research-driven curricula based on results from the
proposed research studies, and by training current and future science teachers
in inquiry-based pedagogical techniques. Finally, the research findings from
these studies will have impacts reaching beyond biology, including the design
and actuation of mobile robotics and robust prosthetic
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is to
determine how foot morphology and impact kinematics affect foot-ground
interactions. Specifically, the studies will: (1) characterize the kinematic
patterns associated with running across different surface types; (2) quantify
the patterns of foot-ground interactions in complex media; and (3) determine how
changes in foot flexibility, geometry, and kinematics affect foot-ground
interactions. By using a combination of biological and physical experimental
techniques, the results from these studies will address general principles of
foot intrusion dynamics that are broadly applicable across diverse taxa.
Consequently, our findings will stimulate research that explores the
evolutionary basis of foot morphology conservation and diversification, and the
dynamics of foot-surface interactions, linking biology with materials science. A
range of experimental approaches, including X-Ray PIV, physical and mathematical
modeling, and high-speed videography will be employed over the course of the
studies. Results from the research will be disseminated through publications in
peer-reviewed journals and through presentations at scientific meetings.