* 1453046
* CAREER: Trustworthy and Adaptive Intrusion Tolerance Capabilities in Cyber-Physical Critical Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2022
* Saman Zonouz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 04/30/2022
* USD 508,309.00

Cyber-physical critical infrastructures integrate networks of computational and
physical processes to provide the society with essential services. The power
grid, in particular, is a vast and interconnected cyber-physical network for
delivering electricity from generation plants to end-point consumers. Protecting
power grid critical infrastructures is a vital necessity because the failure of
these systems would have a debilitating impact on economic security and public
health and safety. However, several recent large-scale outages and the
significant increase in the number of major attacks over the past four years
confirm the insufficiency of the current protection solutions for these systems.
Existing tedious manual tolerance procedures cannot protect those grids against
sophisticated attacks. Additionally, use of purely-cyber security solutions for
power grid resiliency is not sufficient because they ignore the cyber-physical
interdependencies, power-side sensor measurements, and the possibility of
countermeasures in power infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to investigate fundamental problems in cyber-physical tolerance
and develop an integrated set of mathematically rigorous and real-world
deployable capabilities, resulting in a system that can model, analyze, predict,
and tolerate complex security incidents in computing, physical, or communication
assets in a near-real-time manner. The proposed research will provide system
administrators and power grid operators with scalable and online integrated
cyber-physical monitoring and incident response capabilities through keeping
track of cyber-physical infrastructure?s dynamic evolution caused by distributed
security incidents, optimal proactive response and recovery countermeasures and
adaptive preparation for potential future security
incidents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will facilitate
trustworthy operation of next-generation complex and large-scale power grids.
The research outcomes will be integrated into educational and knowledge transfer
initiatives that involves implementation of curricular activities, innovative
learning game development, university workshops, and hands-on K-12 summer camps
and academic-year high-school courses, as well as Industry technology transfer
efforts to develop a workforce with the capability to reason across multiple
disciplines. Through holistic consideration of both cyber and physical factors
under adversarial situations, this fundamental work will be applicable to other
cyber-physical domains and can transform the way people approach the problem of
cyber-physical security.