* 1453168
* CAREER: Linking Structure, Stability and Protection in Protamine Packaged DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2024
* Jason DeRouchey, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/29/2024
* USD 694,308.00

Chromatin (the material of chromosomes) is much more compact and highly
organized in the nucleus of sperm cells than in the nucleus of other cells. This
high degree of compaction, brought about by the association of the DNA with a
class of proteins called protamines, is thought to help protect the DNA from
damage. Despite previous research, the mechanisms underlying the tight packaging
of DNA by protamines remain poorly understood. The goals of this project are to
use a multidisciplinary array of tools to establish fundamental knowledge of the
mechanisms by which nature utilizes protamines to package, protect and store DNA
in sperm cells. The project spans the disciplines of molecular biology,
biochemistry, biophysics and analytical chemistry. The unique properties of
protamines also have promise for new biotechnological applications in the
creation of novel devices for DNA delivery and the development of biosensor
technologies. The multidisciplinary nature of the research will create unique
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate student researchers. The
project also includes education in chemistry and biophysics, including the
development of massive open online courses (MOOCs). Summer workshops will be
created for high school teachers to learn about and actively participate in
refining and assessing the proposed MOOC courses to best meet the needs of
teachers and their students
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spermiogenesis is a unique multi-
step process resulting ultimately in the replacement of histones by protamines
in sperm nuclei to a final volume roughly 1/20th that of a somatic nucleus. The
near crystalline organization of DNA in mature sperm is crucial for both DNA
delivery and the protection of genetic information due to the absence of DNA
repair. The long-term goal of the project is to understand the link between
physical compaction, interaction energetics and biochemical driving forces in
protamine-DNA complexes. The project will use a variety of structural,
biophysical and biochemical methods to evaluate protamine-DNA structure and
stability to free radicals in vitro and in vivo. These experiments will provide
a realistic model of how protamine chemistry controls sperm chromatin
organization and quantitative knowledge of the link between DNA packaging and
susceptibility of DNA to reactive oxidative species. Protamines exhibit a
combination of phosphorylation sites, disulfide bonds, and zinc ions that make
them a uniquely rich system to investigate the physical chemistry and structure
of protein/DNA interactions and the structure of DNA in the compacted state.
These novel aspects of protamine have potential for expoitation in synthetic
systems, and the models developed and tested in this project will make
contributions to our understanding of protamine-DNA compaction in sperm
chromatin as well as providing insights for biotechnological exploitation of DNA
devices.