* 1453718
* CAREER: Fundamental Security-Performance Tradeoffs for Active Attacks Against Communication Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Oliver Kosut, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2021
* USD 475,699.00

The vast and distributed nature of communication networks makes them inherently
vulnerable to attack. This research focuses on combating active attacks, in
which a malicious intruder acts to subvert the natural behavior of the system.
These attacks include distributed denial of service attacks, wireless jamming,
man-in-the-middle attacks, and Byzantine attacks. This research takes an
information-theoretic approach to characterizing the fundamental trade-offs
between security (degree of protection against attacks) and performance
(achievable communication rates among legitimate users) in communication
networks. To this end, this research effort investigates (i) secure strategies
including polytope codes and hash-based verification, (ii) analytical tools for
deriving bounds on fundamental limits, (iii) solutions for combating the unique
challenges of attacks in the wireless environment, such as fading, mobility, and
asynchronism, and (iv) applying attack-resilient strategies to timely
applications such as distributed storage systems and the smart
grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If left unchecked, active attacks could significantly
undermine the reliability of networks of connected devices just as they are
becoming increasingly vital to modern society. This research provides new
techniques to bolster the resilience of communication networks in the presence
of these potentially damaging attacks. In addition, this project incorporates
efforts to educate and engage students of all ages in thinking about the
security problems in their lives. These efforts include security competitions
for undergraduates, an outreach program for high school students, and a graduate
course.