* 1453502
* CAREER: Structural Health Monitoring, Diagnosis and Prognosis of Minimally Instrumented Structural Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Eric Hernandez, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award will pioneer a
novel framework to assess the safety of minimally instrumented structural
systems of buildings and bridges. The ultimate goal of the research is to
predict remaining life of instrumented structures with knowledge of the state of
damage, of material degradation and incorporating uncertainties in the loading
environment. The work will focus on two types of loading that abound in civil
engineering and that share many common characteristics with other systems in
mechanical/bio-medical and aerospace applications. The project will investigate:
(i) seismic load induced low-cycle fatigue damage in building structures and
(ii) traffic load induced high-cycle fatigue in bridges. The structural systems
of buildings and bridges are large, complex and can only be instrumented with a
relatively small number of sensors in relation to the total number of degrees-
of-freedom. Monitoring the operational safety of these systems is a significant
engineering challenge. The computational methods developed in this project will
enable early damage diagnosis and future life prognosis of structural systems
using minimal instrumentation. This project will integrate multi-disciplinary
research, education, and broadens the participation of underrepresented groups
in engineering and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this
project investigates a new framework for structural health monitoring of
structures subjected to cumulative damage such as fatigue. This project deviates
from the conventional approach of identifying damage as changes in model
parameters. Instead, this project will investigate a novel framework that
combines probabilistic damage mechanics and dynamic state estimation. A new
algorithm will be developed which will be capable of optimally combining the
predictive capabilities of multi-scale finite element models with that of sensor
measurements to reconstruct the complete dynamic response of a structure. The
reconstructed response allows assessment of the state of cumulative fatigue
damage throughout the structure, thus anticipating potential damage before it
reaches a critical level. Once the state of damage together with its uncertainty
is determined, the condition of the structure can be projected into the future
in order to perform probabilistic damage prognosis. The research involves
development of computational algorithms, laboratory experiments and field
validation using real data from minimally instrumented operational bridge and
building structures.