* 1453520
* CAREER: CS-CLIMATE: Fostering Collaborative Dialogue for Rigorous Learning and Diverse Student Retention in Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Kristy Boyer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 06/30/2016
* USD 497,149.00

A rich body of evidence suggests that collaborative learning holds many benefits
for computer science students, yet there is growing recognition that neither
collaborative learning itself, nor the innovative curricula in which it may be
situated, are "magic bullets" for solving computing's pipeline problem. In
contrast to being a one-size-fits-all solution, collaborative learning is highly
dependent upon characteristics of the collaborators and on fine-grained
interactions. The overarching research question of this project is: Can we
identify and support the facets of collaborative dialogue that are particularly
effective for fostering learning, sense of identity, motivation, and continued
engagement for diverse computer science learners?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project investigates this question in three activities. Firstly, a rich set of
computer science collaborative learning data will be collected, leveraging the
ASCEND learning environment, which supports remote collaboration with textual
natural language dialogue, synchronized code editing, and integrated repository
control for two or more collaborators. Data will be collected at three
partnering institutions: North Carolina State University, Meredith College (an
all-women's institution), and Florida A&amp;M University (a minority-serving
university with 90% African American enrollment), and will include student
characteristics of gender, race/ethnicity, personality profile, and achievement
goal orientation, as well as measures of outcomes such as learning, sense of
computing identity, motivation, and engagement. Secondly, the project will
examine the fine-grained facets of collaborative dialogue that are particularly
effective for diverse computer science learners, in order to create fine-
grained, theoretically informed models that capture collaborative dialogue and
problem solving phenomena associated with learning, identity development,
motivation, and engagement. Thirdly, the project will implement and evaluate
evidence-based pedagogical support for fostering effective collaborative
dialogue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the resulting pedagogical
support will significantly improve learning, sense of identity, motivation, and
continued engagement for students overall, and for women and African American
students in particular. In addition, the project will produce fine-grained
sequential analyses and rich qualitative findings that further the state of
knowledge about how diverse students learn computing.