* 1453943
* CAREER: Physical Causes of Multi-Scale Temporal Variability in Atmospheric Tides from the Troposphere to the Dynamo Region
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Jian Du, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Atmospheric tides originating in the lower atmosphere are an important driver of
ionospheric variability and thus of the longitudinal and local time variability
of ionospheric plasma density. The overarching objective of this project is to
better understand the major sources of, and processes responsible for, the
multi-scale temporal variability of the atmospheric tides from the troposphere
to the ionosphere dynamo region. This will advance our understanding in cross-
scale coupling processes of the upper atmosphere to the lower atmosphere through
the transformation and transport of energy, mass, and momentum by atmospheric
waves and ultimately, result in a better space weather forecasting capability.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In particular, the project will examine: i) the inter-
annual variability of the atmospheric tides from the lower to upper atmosphere
and their coupling processes to the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and the
stratospheric Quasi-biennial Oscillation (QBO), ii) the seasonal variability of
the atmospheric tides from the lower to upper atmosphere, and iii) the day-to-
day variability of the atmospheric tides from the lower to upper atmosphere and
its coupling with the Stratospheric Sudden Warming (SSW) events. The data
employed are from an advanced dynamics-chemistry coupled Global Circulation
Model, the extended Canadian Middle Atmosphere Model (eCMAM). The analysis
period covers 1979-2010.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be led by a
female assistant professor in a growing program of atmospheric science at the
University of Louisville, which is attracting minorities and women. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in space-weather related research.
Outreach activities will expose K-12 students and high school teachers to
atmospheric science.