* 1453662
* CAREER: A Programmable Measurement Architecture for Network Operations
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Minlan Yu, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 01/31/2017
* USD 172,909.00

Many companies (e.g., Google, Microsoft, Facebook, Amazon) put huge capital
investments into building larger data center networks with higher link speeds.
It becomes increasingly important to carefully manage such large data center
networks to support multiple tenants, meet service level agreements of
applications, and reduce operation cost. Most network management tasks, such as
traffic accounting, traffic engineering, load balancing, and performance
diagnosis, rely on accurate and timely measurement of time-varying traffic
across the entire network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, there are three
key problems in today's measurement support: (1) Network device vendors often
treat measurement as a second-class citizen, devoting most of the resources to
meet the networking control functions (forwarding, firewalls, load balancing,
etc.), leaving limited resources for supporting measurement. (2) Operators have
limited control over what (not) to measure and when to measure. As a result, the
already limited measurement resources are sometimes wasted to measure flows that
operators do not care, leaving even fewer resources for measuring important
flows. (3) These solutions are device oriented instead of network wide.
Operators have to dive into the limited measurement support at multiple devices,
taking great efforts to understand these measurement results offline, and find
it challenging to answer their network-wide queries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to design and build a programmable measurement architecture MAP,
which transforms today's network measurement practice in enterprise and data
center networks. Inspired by software-defined networking, MAP allows operators
to flexibly program their network-wide measurement queries in a controller. To
answer these queries, MAP automatically configures and coordinates new
measurement primitives at different places across the network stack. MAP also
allows operators to dynamically change their queries and automatically
reconfigure the primitives accordingly to handle network
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three key research directions: First,
the project will bring novel measurement algorithms and designs throughout the
network stack (VMs, hypervisors, switches, and packet sniffers). The researcher
will redesign the measurement primitives at these devices to make them both
generic in supporting diverse measurement requirements, and efficient in packet
processing performance with limited resources and capabilities. Second, the
researcher will design new declarative measurement abstractions for operators to
clearly express what to measure at the network level and their
accuracy/timeliness requirements. The researcher will also design and implement
a runtime system that automatically matches the measurement abstractions with
primitives at devices, dynamically allocates resources across tasks and handles
network dynamics such as mobile hosts and routing changes. Finally, the
researcher will study how to support several important and novel measurement
tasks with MAP?s primitives, abstractions, and runtime, and evaluate them on
MAP. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research, if successful, will
fundamentally change network measurement and management practice in enterprise
and data centers, and lead to new designs of network devices. The research will
facilitate inter-discipline research between theory, programming languages, and
networking. The project also has a significant education component, including
the design and innovations of graduate courses and course material on software-
defined networking and computer networking, as well as research experiences for
undergraduate students and members of under-represented groups.