* 1453083
* CAREER: Bottom-Up Approaches for Precisely Nanostructuring Hybrid Organic/Inorganic Multi-Component Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Yang Qin, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2021
* USD 525,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This project is aimed at establishing an integrated education and research
program that utilizes bottom-up self-assembly approaches borrowed from nature,
to construct precisely controlled structures on the nanometer scale and produce
organic solar cells with enhanced performance and stability. A basic
understanding of the intricate cooperative effects of molecular interactions and
material structural parameters that control the self-assembly processes of
specially designed molecules will be aimed at. New designs and synthetic
methodologies for constructing semiconducting polymers and block copolymers will
be developed and a fundamental knowledge base on structure-property
relationships of newly prepared materials will be established. These findings
will not only advance basic sciences but can also be extended to a wide range of
materials and hierarchical nanostructures for organic electronic applications.
Students working on these projects will gain interdisciplinary knowledge and
skills, which will benefit their future scientific careers. New courses
emphasizing materials chemistry and energy research will be developed and
refined over the years. An outreach program, designed to attract K-12 students
in New Mexico, especially Hispanics and Native Americans, into sciences will be
established. These historically underrepresented students will obtain hands-on
experiences in chemistry and materials sciences by means of one-day field-trips
to the UNM campus. Overall, the proposed activities will not only advance the
basic sciences, but also foster the mission to train a diverse group of in
skilled scientists who will make positive impacts on society's future.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Nanostructuring organic polymers and organic/inorganic hybrid materials and
control of blend morphologies at the molecular level have become the
prerequisites for modern electronic devices. To achieve all-around high
performance, multiple organic and inorganic entities, each designed for specific
functions, are commonly incorporated into a single device. Current state-of-the-
art approaches to morphology control in these multi-component systems typically
involve physical blending and optimization via thermal/solvent annealing. Such
trial-and-error approaches are, however, highly system dependent, lack
controllability on the molecular level and generally lead to morphologies at
only thermodynamically metastable states. Through the proposed research, a
versatile toolbox employing supramolecular chemistry will be created that is
capable of precisely nanostructuring multi-component organic/inorganic hybrid
materials through cooperation of multiple orthogonal non-covalent interactions.
Materials specifically designed for polymer solar cell applications, including
organic/organometallic conjugated block copolymers possessing different
bandgaps, quantum dots having complimentary absorption profiles and fullerene
derivatives as electron acceptors, will be employed as the workhorses and test-
beds for evaluating the hypothesis and refining the methodology. A basic
understanding of the intricate cooperative effects of these interactions and the
material structural parameters that control the self-assembly processes will be
aimed at. New designs and synthetic methodologies for constructing conjugated
polymers and block copolymers will be developed and a fundamental knowledge base
on structure-property relationships of newly prepared materials will be
established. These findings will not only advance basic science but also can be
extended to a wide range of materials and hierarchical nanostructures for
organic electronic applications.