* 1453460
* Preliminary Study to Demonstrate the Performance and Power Advantages of FPGAs over GPUs for Deep Learning in Computer Vision
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Peter Milder, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2016
* USD 95,000.00

We stand on the verge of dramatic advances in deep learning algorithms, which
will soon enable widespread adoption of computer-vision-based object recognition
in scientific inquiry, commercial applications, and everyday life. However,
practical large-scale applications in this area are currently limited by the
computational capabilities of conventional computer systems. In recent years,
technological improvement in computer processors (CPUs) has considerably slowed.
This has led to an increase in interest in using Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs) to accelerate deep learning computer vision algorithms. Although GPUs can
perform these tasks faster than CPUs, they suffer from inflexibility and very
high power cost. An alternative technology called the Field-Programmable Gate
Array (FPGA) is very attractive for problems in this domain thanks to its
flexibility and power efficiency. However, FPGAs have been underutilized in this
area, in large part due to unfamiliarity and misconceptions. The goal of this
project is to demonstrate the power and performance advantages of FPGAs over
GPUs for deep-learning-based computer vision problems via hard experimental
evidence. The PIs will disseminate their findings to the research community at
large with the goal of encouraging the use of FPGAs in ground-breaking work
tackling the grand challenges of deep learning and computer
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of a three-stage
research plan. First, the PIs will prepare and validate a state-of-the-art image
detection application based on convolutional neural networks. This will utilize
the popular Caffe library, which allows convolutional networks to be evaluated
on CPU and GPU. Second, the PIs will perform a detailed characterization and
profiling of the performance of this application on GPU, seeking to understand
the performance characteristics and their underlying causes. Third, the PIs will
implement portions of the algorithm on an FPGA, and perform an in-depth analysis
to find and explain the advantages and disadvantages offered by the platform.
The PIs anticipate demonstrating that the slowest portion of the algorithm on
the GPU will achieve significant speedup on the FPGA, arising from the efficient
support of irregular fine-grain parallelism. Meanwhile, the fastest portion of
the algorithm on the GPU is anticipated to run with comparable performance on
the FPGA, but at dramatically lower power consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will integrate research with graduate and undergraduate education. PhD
students will be exposed to GPU optimization and application-specific high-
performance FPGA design. Masters and undergraduate students will gain valuable
skills assisting the project through the Masters Advanced Project in Computer
Science and the Undergraduate Senior Design Project in Electrical and Computer
Engineering. The results of the study will be published at prominent venues to
ensure maximum exposure for the relevant research communities.