* 1453868
* CAREER: Generalizable, Robust, and Closed-Loop Brain-Machine Interface Control Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2024
* Maryam Shanechi, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2024
* USD 503,148.00

Brain-machine interfaces (BMI) aim to restore movement in millions of disabled
people. Despite successful laboratory demonstrations, the lack of
generalizability and robustness, and the low performance remain key challenges
hindering clinical viability. BMIs should be able to control a variety of
prosthetic devices, and to exploit any neural signal modality as their control
signal. This research develops generalizable, robust, and closed-loop BMI
architectures for neuroprosthetic control, and applies these architectures both
to build proficient neuroprosthetics and to investigate the brain mechanisms
underlying such control. This research is fully integrated with outreach and
education activities including interactions with disabled Veterans, and
mentoring of women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
main reason for the lack of generalizability and robustness in existing BMIs is
that they do not model the behavior of the single common component in all BMI
settings, i.e., the brain, which controls the movement. Moreover, performance of
current BMIs has been sacrificed because they have not been adapted to the
statistical properties of the recorded neural signal modality and have used
standard signal processing algorithms for any modality. This research develops a
BMI that can control prosthetics with various dynamics and using different
neural recording modalities. It builds a novel model of the brain in closed-loop
control, constructs principled stochastic models for different recording
modalities, and combines these two models to devise an adaptive supervised
learning and decoding algorithm. It also uses the architecture to investigate
the brain mechanisms underlying neuroprosthetic control. This research enables a
universal and principled neuroprosthetic architecture, replacing ad-hoc
approaches; it significantly improves neuroprosthetic performance; finally, it
allows for a deeper understanding of the fundamental brain mechanisms underlying
neurprosthetic and motor control.