* 1453040
* CAREER: Applying a Criminological Framework to Understand Adaptive Adversarial Decision-Making Processes in Critical Infrastructure Cyberattacks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Aunshul Rege, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Infrastructure systems (such as power, water and banking) have experienced a
surge in cyberattacks over the past decade. These attacks are becoming more
sophisticated and resilient, suggesting that the perpetrators are intelligent,
determined and dynamic. Unfortunately, current cyberdefense measures are
reactive and frequently ineffective. Defenders need to move to a proactive
approach, which will require an understanding of the human characteristics and
behaviors of the people behind these cyberattacks. At present, this absence of
the human element in existing cyberattack analysis is a fundamental weakness in
our infrastructure protection. This project will integrate observations from
live cybersecurity exercises, interviews with infrastructure protection experts,
and logs from real-time cyberattacks to understand adaptive adversarial
processes. This research will offer a new understanding to the protection of
digital infrastructure by bringing together a diverse set of multidisciplinary
academics and national and international infrastructure cybersecurity experts.

This project will investigate the adaptive and evolving adversarial decision-
making (ADM) process in critical infrastructure cyberattacks. Specifically, this
project will apply a criminological perspective to achieve five research
objectives: (1) Investigate adversary-defender interaction and identify
adversarial attack paths, (2) Understand adversarial adaptability when attack
paths are disrupted, (3) Investigate the importance and characteristics of the
various stages in attack paths, (4) Identify which factors impact ADM at each
stage of the attack path, and (5) Improve the transparency, consistency and
validation of adversarial attack paths. The Rational Choice Perspective
criminological theoretical framework will be exploited to comprehend how
adversaries make decisions on target selection, exploit criminal environments,
plan, design, and execute attacks, and manage preventative and reactive
measures. Three methods will be triangulated to examine ADM: (i) interviews with
infrastructure cybersecurity experts to identify attack paths and factors
impacting ADM, (ii) observations of attacker-defender (red team-blue team)
cybersecurity exercises to examine real-time and adaptive decision-making
processes, and (iii) logs from real-time cyberattacks. Each of these datasets
will yield unique perspectives on ADM processes and will be combined to better
capture the human element in cyberattacks.