* 1453171
* CAREER: Query Compilation Techniques for Complex Analytics on Enterprise Clusters
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2023
* Tim Kraska, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

Big data and the evolving field of Data Science are fundamentally shifting the
meaning of analytics. Highly complex computations have come to define the
typical workload, with jobs ranging from machine learning to large-scale
visualization. However, there is a fundamental discrepancy between the
availability of analytical tools for big Internet companies and those for non-
tech enterprises. Current analytics frameworks, like Spark or Hadoop, are
designed to meet the needs of giant Internet companies; that is, they are built
to process petabytes of data in cloud deployments consisting of thousands of
cheap commodity machines. Yet non-tech companies like banks and retailers - or
even the typical data scientist - seldom operate deployments of that size,
instead preferring smaller clusters, aka Enterprise clusters, with more reliable
hardware. In fact, recent industry surveys reported that the median Hadoop
cluster was fewer than 10 nodes, and over 65% of users operate clusters smaller
than 50 nodes. Targeting complex analytics workloads on smaller clusters,
however, fundamentally changes the way we should design analytics tools. Most
current systems focus on the major challenges associated with large cloud
deployments, where network and disk I/O are the primary bottleneck and failures
are common, where the next generation of analytics frameworks should optimize
specifically for the computation bottleneck. As part of this project, the PIs
will systematically design a new analytical open-source engine, called
Tupleware, build specifically for the infrastructure of non-tech companies.
Tupleware will make complex analytics more accessible and push the boundaries of
what computations are possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the PIs will
design, implement and evaluate various program synthesis, i.e., query
compilation techniques, for complex analytics on enterprise clusters with fast
interconnects and considerable available memory. Existing query compilation
techniques focus on SQL and are not designed for workloads where UDFs and
iterations dominate the computation, nor do they target distributed setups; all
issues the PIs will address in this proposal. Furthermore, the PIs aim to
combine high-level query optimization with compiler technology to holistically
optimize complex analytical workflows by considering statistics about the data
(e.g., the selectivity of predicates) with low-level statistics about the UDFs
(e.g., the number of used registers). Finally, all the results will be
integrated into the Tupleware system and thus, made accessible for a broader
range of users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web
site at: http://tupleware.cs.brown.edu/