* 1453924
* CAREER: Atomic Scale Design of van der Waals Heterostructure Nanoribbons
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Joshua Robinson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 04/30/2021
* USD 560,000.00

Non-technical Description: Combining two-dimensional (2D) layered materials,
such as graphene (one atomic layer of carbon) and transition metal
dichalcogenides, to form heterostructures provides innovative routes of tuning
electronic and photonic properties of materials on-demand. In addition to
vertical stacking of atomic layers, which has been achieved in recent years,
novel 2D materials can also be realized by producing quasi-one-dimensional
strips, known as nanoribbons. The research component of this CAREER award
focuses on understanding of the fundamental science behind synthesizing a new
class of materials that are only one-atom thick, with controllable width down to
the nanometer scale: van der Waals heterostructure nanoribbons (vdW ribbons).
These vdW ribbons may exhibit energy band gaps, ferromagnetism, and half-
metallic properties that vary with width and termination of the ribbon edges.
The principal investigator is utilizing prior research experience and broad
collaborations across academia, industry, and government to develop the
foundational theory, synthesis techniques, and device architectures to establish
vdW ribbons as a new paradigm in materials science. Importantly, this project
prepares graduate and undergraduate students for research and engineering beyond
academia by providing opportunities for industrial internships and developing
new workshops for bridging the science of these atom-thick materials to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The predicted
properties of two-dimensional heterostructures of transition metal
dichalcogenides indicate that these materials have strong potential to impact
next-generation optoelectronics. Heterogeneous stacking of the atomic layers
while controlling their vertical and lateral dimensions at the nanoscale will
significantly enhance the control of the electronic, photonic, and magnetic
properties of these novel material systems. More specifically, the objectives of
the CAREER award are: 1) Developing theoretical models that predict the
optoelectronic and transport properties of vdW heterostructure nanoribbons; 2)
Establishing novel metal-organic chemical vapor deposition processes capable of
layer-by-layer synthesis with atomic precision; 3) Demonstrating the impact of
layer stacking on nanoscale interactions and properties in vdW solids; and 4)
Developing fundamental understanding of the roles of edge termination and defect
formation on the optoelectronic properties of vdW hetero-ribbons.