* 1453204
* CAREER: Many-body Ab initio Potentials and Quantum Dynamics Methods for "First Principles" Simulations in Solution: Hydration, Vibrational Spectroscopy, &amp; Proton Transfer/Trans
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Francesco Paesani, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 03/31/2020
* USD 625,000.00

Francesco Paesani of the University of California San Diego is supported by a
CAREER award from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program
in the Chemistry Division and the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to
develop new theoretical and computational approaches for molecular-level
computer simulations. Such simulations have become a powerful tool in chemistry,
often providing fundamental insights into complex phenomena which are otherwise
difficult to obtain. However, achieving the necessary accuracy for realistic and
predictive simulations remains challenging. Paesani and his research group are
meeting this challenge by combining a variety of approaches to generate very
accurate models of many systems including ions in solution. The new methodology
enables computer simulations of aqueous systems with unprecedented accuracy,
providing information on fundamental molecular processes from ion hydration in
bulk and at interfaces to proton transfer and transport in solution. The new
methodology will be available to the community through its implementation in the
open and free OpenMM software toolkit for molecular simulations. This "reference
implementation" aims to provide the community with a completely open
computational tool which may be used by other researchers interested in
implementing it in their own simulation codes. In addition, this initial
implementation is a starting point for future developments of unique software
elements specifically designed for high-performance computing which will enable
many-body simulations with unprecedented accuracy on both multicore CPU and GPU
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In parallel with the proposed research
activities, Paesani has established an innovative education and outreach plan
focusing on the development of an entry level course that introduces
undergraduate students in their freshman and sophomore years to the use of
computational methods in chemistry, as well as on mentoring activities
specifically designed to promote study in the STEM disciplines among students
from underprivileged and traditionally underrepresented groups through the
development of a summer exchange program at UC-San Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Both the realism and the predicting power of a computer simulation
strongly depend on the accuracy with which the molecular interactions and the
overall system dynamics are described. Although ab initio methods can, in
principle, enable the characterization of physicochemical processes without
resorting to ad hoc simplifications, the associated computational cost
effectively prevents the use of these methods to model realistic condensed-phase
systems. Furthermore, a rigorous description of the actual molecular dynamics
often requires a quantum-mechanical treatment of the nuclear motion, which
further increases the computational cost associated with ab initio computer
simulations. The methods developed by Paesani and coworkers seeks to overcome
these limitations by combining machine-learning many-body potential energy
surfaces derived entirely from highly-correlated electronic structure data with
novel quantum-dynamical approaches based on path-integral molecular dynamics and
centroid molecular dynamics. The efficient integration of these components
pushes the boundaries of current molecular dynamics techniques and provides new
opportunities for realistic simulations of condensed-phase systems in direct
connection with corresponding spectroscopic measurements. Although much broader
in scope, the initial application of the methodology is to modeling
physicochemical processes in solution, with a specific focus on ion hydration,
linear and nonlinear vibrational spectroscopy, and proton transfer/transport.
The new methodology will be made available to the community through its
implementation in the C++ "reference platform" of the open and free OpenMM
software toolkit for molecular simulations. Specifically, implementation will
consist of an independent plug-in to provide the community with a completely
open implementation of these many-body potentials. This plug-in will include a
complete suite of unit tests that cover all energy and force components as well
as the inner functions of our many-body potentials. A number of test cases will
also be made available for comparing output energies and forces obtained with
OpenMM with the reference values calculated with the PI's in house
implementation. To facilitate the use of the new many-body potentials, the plug-
in will also offer a Python wrapper that will simplify both setting up and
running many-body molecular simulations to the point where all simulation
parameters will be entirely defined in an XML file. This plug-in will thus
provide other researchers with a comprehensive implementation of our many-body
potentials for aqueous simulations, which can be used as a reference for the
implementation in other software. In addition, this reference implementation
will serve as a starting point for future developments of unique software
elements for the OpenMM toolkit, specifically designed for high-performance
computing on both multicore CPU and GPU architectures. The development and
application of the new simulation methodology will involve the training and
education of undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral
fellows, who will acquire a solid foundation in theoretical, physical, and
computational chemistry. The interdisciplinary nature of the proposed project
will provide an opportunity for students and postdocs to establish bridges and
inter-connections between the fundamental laws of physical chemistry at a
molecular level and the properties of condensed-phase systems. The possibility
to work at the interface of different disciplines will prepare both students and
postdocs for a wide range of scientific careers.