* 1453645
* CAREER: Generation of Highly Selective Inhibitory Antibodies by Novel Paratope Design, Function-Based Screening, and Deep Sequencing
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Xin Ge, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

1453645&lt;br/&gt;Ge, Xin &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will significantly
advance our understanding on the mechanisms of enzymatic inhibition and virus
neutralization, and thus will lead to development of a panel of novel methods
for the generation of highly potent inhibitory antibodies for a broad range of
applications in pharmaceutical and biotechnological industries. Specifically,
the work aims to develop antibodies that interfere and inhibit the binding of
protein cleaving enzymes or proteases. The project will (i) increase US
technological competitiveness; (ii) develop a globally competitive STEM
workforce; (iii) increase participation of women and underrepresented
minorities; and (iv) contribute to undergraduate and graduate STEM education. UC
Riverside is the minority serving institution with the largest Hispanic student
population among all UC campuses. More specifically, the PI plans to first
prepare UCR STEM undergraduates for a global marketplace and dynamic scientific
communities through collaboration with two Chinese universities; and second
increase university/college enrollment of high school graduates in Riverside and
San Bernardino Counties, especially those from minority and other disadvantaged
socio-economic backgrounds, by inspiring their interests in science and
engineering programs through lectures, workshops and interacting events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As extremely important signaling molecules, proteases
precisely control a wide variety of physiological processes, and thus represent
one of the largest families of potential pharmaceutical targets. Considering
that ~2% of the human genome is estimated to encode proteases, specificity is
highly desired for any protease inhibition therapy. However, proteases share
high amino acid similarity among the same class of proteases and their active
sites are extensively conserved. It has been a challenging task to develop small
molecule inhibitors that can deliver required specificities. Therefore,
antibodies are emerging as a very attractive alternative for highly selective
inhibition. To date, at least three obstacles make the routine discovery of
protease-inhibiting monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) considerably difficult: (i) low
antigenicity of the proteolytic active sites, (ii) lack of a function-based
selection method, and (iii) loss of beneficial clones during the selection. The
long-term goal of this CAREER award is to develop therapeutic monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) or biologics that inhibit specific proteases for biomedical
applications. The objective of this research is to overcome the technical
hurdles and establish general methodologies that facilitate the identification
of inhibitory antibodies. The hypothesis is that convex antigen-binding sites
(paratopes) are inhibition-prone. This central hypothesis will be tested by the
following three specific approaches: (1) Clearly verify inhibition mechanisms by
design, construction and optimization of synthetic human antibody libraries
enriched with convex paratopes; (2) Efficiently identify inhibitory antibodies
by developing a function-based high-throughput screening method; (3)
Systematically understand sequence-inhibition landscapes by deep sequencing and
data mining.