* 1453251
* Collaborative Research - Ocean Acidification Category 1: Interactive Effects of Temperature, Nutrients, and Ocean Acidification on Coral Physiology and Calcification
* BIO,EF
* 01/06/2014,03/31/2015
* Wei-Jun Cai, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2015
* USD 27,485.00

Atmospheric and sea surface CO2 concentrations are expected to continue to
increase substantially over the coming decades resulting in warmer and more
acidic oceans, which will greatly stress the health of coral reefs. In addition,
ocean margins where most corals live will also see continued increases in human-
produced nutrient inputs. While there has recently been a considerable focus on
how ocean acidification (due to higher CO2 alone) could negatively impact the
growth of reef-building corals due to the projected loss in calcification, the
combined impacts of CO2, temperature, and nutrients on coral physiology and
calcification are poorly understood. This project will investigate the possible
synergistic and antagonistic effects of elevated temperature, CO2, and nutrients
on the physiology and internal calcifying chemistry of several species of corals
in a laboratory setting. Research tools will include the assessment of coral
energy reserves and metabolic demand, symbiotic algal physiology and molecular
diversity, coral calcification, and direct measurement of the internal coral pH
and carbonate concentration via microprobes. The results from this project have
the potential to supply broad scientific impacts regarding how (or if) reef-
building corals will survive future climate change scenarios, and will help
establish several parameter ranges that could be used to strengthen ocean
acidification and coral reef growth models. Likewise, broader impacts toward
further education will include the professional development of two postdoctoral
scholars, two PhD graduate students, and several undergraduate students. This
project will also enhance scientific and technological understanding by several
public outreach efforts, including participation and research education in the
Young Ocean Explorers program at the Batelle Discovery Center in Ohio, the
annual Coast Day public open house at the University of Delaware, as well as
advisement in the National Ocean Science Bowl in Georgia.