* 1453508
* CAREER: Towards Practical Deterministic Parallel Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Ryan Newton, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2020
* USD 535,043.00

Title: CAREER: Towards Practical Deterministic Parallel
Languages&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parallel, multicore processors have become
ubiquitous, but parallel programming has not. This gap implies that many
everyday programs do not fully use the hardware on which they run. The problem
persists because traditional parallel programming approaches are high-risk: a
parallel program can yield inconsistent answers, or even crash, due to
unpredictable interactions between simultaneous tasks. Certain classes of
programs, however, admit strong mathematical guarantees that they will behave
the same in spite of parallel execution. That is, they enable deterministic
parallel programming. Functional programming, extended with "LVars" --shared-
state data structures that support commutating operations-- is one such model.
While this theoretical model has been proven deterministic, significant
questions remain regarding practical aspects such as efficiency and scalability.
This research addresses those questions by developing new LVar data structures
and scaling them to larger distributed memory machines. The intellectual merits
are in the development of novel algorithms that support parallel programming.
Further, the LVar model provides a new lens through which to view problems in
parallel programming, which can lead to downstream discoveries. The project's
broader significance and importance are (1) its potential to lower the cost and
risk of parallel programming and (2) its educational goal: to employ
deterministic parallel programming in the introductory programming course at
both a university level, and in K-12 education. Changing how programming is
taught may be necessary for leveraging hardware parallelism to become a normal
and unexceptional part of writing software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three specific
technical challenges are addressed in this research. First, LVars traditionally
require more storage space over time, because "delete" operations do not commute
with others. Semantically, the state-space of each LVar forms a join semi-
lattice and all modifications must move the state "upwards" monotonically.
Nevertheless, this project investigates new ways that LVars can free memory,
using a concept of Saturating LVars. Second, this research seeks to formalize
the relationship of LVar-based parallel programs to their purely functional
counterparts, characterizing asymptotic performance advantages. Finally, this
project explores the scalability of LVar-based programming abstractions in a
distributed memory setting, where they share similarities with recent
distributed programming constructs such as concurrent replicated data
structures.