* 1453781
* CAREER: Advanced Knowledge Extraction of Affective Behaviors During Natural Human Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Carlos Busso, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2021
* USD 535,853.00

Identifying and characterizing emotional behaviors are challenging but very
important research topics for enriched speech-derived analytics and human-
computer interaction. This CAREER project aims to create novel algorithms to
recognize spontaneous affective behaviors from speech that capture the
underlying externalization process of emotions and generalize to recordings of
human interactions collected under real-world conditions. The lack of
generalization of current speech emotion algorithms to recognize expressive
behaviors during natural human interaction is the key barrier to deploying
affective-aware technology in real-life applications. Under a theoretical
framework grounded in the nonuniform externalization of expressive behaviors,
the project brings transformative solutions to address this problem. The
proposed models and algorithms promise insights to explore and extend theories
in linguistic&amp;#8232; and paralinguistic human behaviors. Several new
scientific avenues can emerge that serve as truly innovative advancements that
will impact applications in security and defense, next generation of advanced
user interfaces, health behavior informatics, and education. The role of human
centered technologies, especially contextualized in applications of direct
societal relevance, can inspire young &amp;#8232;scholars into computing and
engineering: from creating robust technologies for sensing, to
&amp;#8232;actually incorporating such information as a part of advanced
analytics and enhanced user experiences. As a Hispanic faculty, the PI serves as
a mentor and role model for high school, undergraduate &amp;#8232;and graduate
students involved in the Minority Scholars Symposium, Diversity Scholarship
Program and Graduate Student Mentoring Program at the University of Texas at
Dallas. Through lab open houses, demonstrations, and active online and social
media presence, the PI is reaching out to non-traditional students, as well
&amp;#8232;as the broader, non-technical audience interested in human behavior
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project evaluates &amp;#8232;the powerful,
scalable and appealing concept of using neutral reference models to contrast
deviations in speech characteristics associated with emotions. The study
proposes flexible, integrative and discriminative frameworks that capture the
underlying encoding process of expressive behaviors including of emotion salient
regions in the speech stream, intrinsic reliability of features,&amp;#8232; and
dynamic evolution of emotions. The study considers binary and rank-based
classifiers to recognize and rank-order specific expressive behaviors. The
project presents speaker and lexical compensation schemes, and model adaptation
strategies to increase the robustness of the proposed models. All these
theoretical and algorithmic advances are carefully evaluated with naturalistic
data, in which emotional content will be annotated &amp;#8232;with a novel
crowdsourcing scheme that tracks in real time the performance of the evaluators.