* 1453343
* CAREER: Traffic Injuries, Urbanization, and Infrastructural Development
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2022
* Harris Solomon, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 437,376.00

A key feature of urbanization worldwide is intensified traffic, and along with
it, an ever-increasing number of traffic-related injuries. Traffic-related
injuries are a leading cause of morbidity and mortality globally, yet little is
known about the social contexts, causes, and consequences of the problem. This
project will examine the ways that traffic associated with modern urban life
relates to bodily injury among urban residents. The project will provide new
insights regarding how traffic and its injuries interrelate as well as how
injuries distribute unequally across a city and across different types of
mobility. The project also has a significant educational component that will
train both undergraduate and graduate students. Educational activities include
courses and student-led experiential research related to automobile accidents in
the US. The project has several significant broader contributions to society. It
will create several US-India connections through research and education linkages
between Duke University and research groups in Mumbai, India. The data gleaned
from the research can inform and advance policy in urban development and health
by offering researchers and officials insights into the factors that shape
traffic injuries and thus potential avenues for their
reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of a Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Award, Dr. Harris Solomon (Duke University) will undertake
a five-year study of the medical impacts of rapid urban infrastructural
development. Current studies of the social aspects of urban mobility generally
approach traffic as a phenomenon that people enter and leave at will. Dr.
Solomon will undertake research from a different perspective that poses traffic
as something that can leave lasting effects on the body. The field research will
be conducted in Mumbai, India, one of the world's most populous cities where
traffic-related accidents have become one of the leading causes of injury and
death. Ethnographic methods of participant observation and interviews will be
employed across three key sites: a middle-class neighborhood where public and
private transportation is a regular feature of daily life; trauma wards of local
hospitals where traffic-related injuries are treated; and offices of traffic
scientists and civil engineers whose plans for managing the city both affect and
are affected by traffic accidents. These data will allow the researcher to
better understand possible relations among urban density, experiences of
injuries, and the ways people accommodate the necessity of moving through a city
even as that movement comes at considerable risk to their well-being.