* 1453126
* CAREER: Resilient Design of Networked Infrastructure Systems: Models, Validation, and Synthesis
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Saurabh Amin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This project advances the scientific knowledge on design methods for improving
the resilience of civil infrastructures to disruptions. To improve resilience,
critical services in civil infrastructure sectors must utilize new diagnostic
tools and control algorithms that ensure survivability in the presence of both
security attacks and random faults, and also include the models of incentives of
human decision makers in the design process. This project will develop a
practical design toolkit and platform to enable the integration of resiliency-
improving control tools and incentive schemes for Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS)
deployed in civil infrastructures. Theory and algorithms will be applied to
assess resiliency levels, select strategies to improve performance, and provide
reliability and security guarantees for sector-specific CPS functionalities in
water, electricity distribution and transportation infrastructures. The main
focus is on resilient design of network control functionalities to address
problems of incident response, demand management, and supply uncertainties. More
broadly, the knowledge and tools from this project will influence CPS designs in
water, transport, and energy sectors, and also be applicable to other systems
such as supply-chains for food, oil and gas. The proposed platform will be used
to develop case studies, test implementations, and design projects for
supporting education and outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current CPS
deployments lack integrated components designed to survive in uncertain
environments subject to random events and the actions of strategic entities. The
toolkit (i) models the propagation of disruptions due to failure of cyber-
physical components, (ii) detects and responds to both local and network-level
failures, and (iii) designs incentive schemes that improve aggregate levels of
public good (e.g., decongestion, security), while accounting for network
interdependencies and private information among strategic entities. The
validation approach uses real-world data collected from public sources, test
cases developed by domain experts, and simulation software. These tools are
integrated to provide a multi-layer design platform, which explores the design
space to synthesize solutions that meet resiliency specifications. The platform
ensures that synthesized implementations meet functionality requirements, and
also estimates the performance guarantees necessary for CPS resilience. This
modeling, validation, exploration, and synthesis approach provides a scientific
basis for resilience engineering. It supports CPS education by providing a
platform and structured workflow for future engineers to approach and appreciate
implementation realities and socio-technical constraints.