* 1453705
* CAREER: Flashing Up Data Centers: An Orchestrated Design for Flash-based Distributed Storage Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Feng Chen, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 540,000.00

A large-scale deployment of flash devices into data centers can greatly improve
the overall system performance and reduce the rapidly growing management cost
(e.g., power, cooling, staffing, floor space). Despite the technical merits
promised, such a grand technical transition fundamentally changes the long-held
system design assumption for a disk-based storage and will inevitably bring
major critical challenges in a real-world practice. For example,
underutilization of flash space would cause huge economic loss; premature device
wear-out may result in catastrophic data corruption; unbalanced system could
bring severe resource contention; unoptimized applications may not receive
anticipated benefits; and many others.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to address these challenges. Research will be conducted to develop a cohesive
design approach to providing an orchestrated whole-system optimization. By
revisiting the entire storage hierarchy, from hardware, operating system,
cluster middleware, to applications, the team will redesign the device
architecture to enable an organic integration of flash devices as integral
elements in a huge flash storage system, create a flash-based distributed
storage service with optimized resource utilization and guaranteed data
reliability. Furthermore, a set of key data center applications will be enhanced
to fully exploit the great potential of the flash technology. As part of this
CAREER project, the team will also seek influence to the industry, contribution
to curriculum, and outreach to local area under represented students.