* 1453241
* CAREER: The evolutionary genetics of constraint and evolvability in an RNA bacteriophage
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2022
* Siobain Duffy, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2022
* USD 702,200.00

The goal of this project is to study how interactions among genes limits
evolution. Using viruses that only infect bacteria, the steps that viruses take
when infecting and adapting to new hosts will be studied. Understanding
evolutionary limits is especially important for viruses as they can be threats
to the health of humans, livestock, and crops. Successfully switching to a new
host species requires multiple changes in a virus' genes, and there are many
possible sets or pathways of change. Because these viruses are not pathogenic to
humans, middle-school students at an urban charter school can be involved in
some of the actual experimental work during an after-school activity. This
research will be furthered by a laboratory course in experimental evolution for
undergraduate students, and trainees supported by the grant will be mentored and
trained in teaching techniques and curriculum development as well as research
methods. Through this approach, 50 New Brunswick middle school students and 40
Rutgers undergraduates will be introduced to research in viral evolution, while
two junior scientists will be prepared for an academic career that combines
research and teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The double-stranded RNA
bacteriophage phi6, which infects different strains and species of Pseudomonas
bacteria, will be used to study how initial host range mutations and previous
evolution (mutations fixed during specialization on one host) affects phage
evolutionary pathways and emergence in different novel hosts. Experimental
evolution of replicate populations will expose phages to single or multiple
hosts for over 100 generations at a time. Sequencing will determine how often
the same mutations were fixed by replicate lineages, or by different genotypes.
Finally, genetic crosses will create hybrid viral genotypes that will explore
how interactions between mutations affect emergence on alternate strains of
bacteria, and how many mutations trap a lineage by limiting its evolvability.
These experiments will demonstrate how often RNA viruses must reverse
substitutions that were adaptive in one environment in order to adapt to
another.