* 1453147
* CAREER: Synthetic Regulatory Systems for Dynamic Metabolic Pathways
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Fuzhong Zhang, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2019
* USD 616,942.00

Nontechnical Description: Engineering microbial metabolic pathways allows the
production of chemicals, biofuels, materials, and pharmaceuticals from renewable
and low-cost feedstocks. For this technology to be scalable and economically
viable, engineered microbial hosts must be able to continuously balance the
pathway metabolism to cope with high titer and high yield production. Dynamic
metabolic regulation systems (DMRSs) are synthetic biological components that
provide dynamic control to the concentration of pathway enzymes and metabolites
(the chemicals on which enzymes act). This study will provide a systematic and
quantitative understanding of how DMRSs change the dynamic behavior of metabolic
pathways and how DMRSs improve pathway productivity. The knowledge will enable
researchers to design metabolic control systems more easily, effectively, and
reliably, improving productivities, yields and robustness for a variety of
metabolic pathways and making the microbial production of chemicals,
pharmaceuticals, biofuels, and material more economically viable. This project
will provide tools that are useful for studying the effect of dynamics on
natural metabolic pathways, revealing the evolutionary significance of natural
regulatory systems. These tools can be further extended to regulate a variety of
complex synthetic systems, such as chemical-controlled, contaminant-cleaning
microbes. This project will also provide educational and training opportunities
for K-12 students and teachers from local public schools with a high percentage
of underrepresented students through a series of activities including "Hot Topic
Workshops" and "Lab Research Experience" These educational and training programs
will promote students' interests in cutting-edge science and to develop basic
skills for research in systems and synthetic biology.

Technical Description: Synthetic regulatory systems that provide dynamic control
on metabolic pathways (referred to as DMRSs) are very powerful tools in
microbial engineering for the production of chemicals from complex metabolic
pathways. Previous proof-of-concept studies have demonstrated that DMRSs were
able to significantly enhance both pathway productivities and yields. However,
due to the complex protein-metabolite/protein-DNA interactions, construction of
effective DMRSs is challenging and often needs to test a large number of
parameters and regulatory topologies (e.g. upregulation v.s. downregulation,
long-range feedback vs. short-range feedback). For DMRSs to work robustly and to
be applicable to a broad range of pathways, this project aims to develop a
systematic understanding of metabolic dynamics and of how metabolic dynamics
affects pathway productivities. Using a combination of experimental and
theoretical strategies, including biosensor-enabled ensemble-fluorescence
measurement, single cell imaging, chromatographic metabolite quantifications,
and kinetic models, this project will systematically characterize metabolic
dynamics, metabolic fluctuation, and cell-to-cell metabolic variation under
various regulatory topologies.