* 1453847
* CAREER: Programming digital bits with DNA for barcoded nanoscale imaging applications
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Shawn Douglas, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2018
* USD 240,000.00

Nontechnical explanation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomolecules are the tiny
molecular building blocks out of which all living organisms are made.
Understanding the structure and function of biomolecules is critical for
advancement of our understanding of how life works, as well as emerging
engineering disciplines that seek to repurpose biomolecules for technology
development. Electron cryo-microscopy (cryo-EM) enables researchers to visualize
the structure of biomolecules. One technical limitation of the technique is that
biomolecules must be imaged one at a time because they are too small to tell
apart when mixed together. It would be a significant advance if it were possible
to attach "barcodes" to biomolecules so they could be imaged simultaneously and
uniquely identified during data analysis. The goal of this project is to create
and optimize such barcodes using DNA as a nano-scale programmable building
material. If successful, the proposed approach should greatly increase the speed
and impact of the cryo-EM technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward overcoming the throughput limitation of
electron cryo-microscopy (cryo-EM), PI proposes to create DNA-based
nanostructures that make use of modular, well-defined asymmetric features
("bits") that can be toggled between different states that enable sample
multiplexing. The structural difference of toggling even a single bit is
dramatic enough that different barcodes can be easily distinguished by EM, and
sorted into distinct classes by standard image processing algorithms. PI
proposes to validate this methodology by first performing structural studies of
nanostructures bound to a protein that has already been imaged and described,
and then extend this research to image and describe macromolecules that have not
yet been visualized by other methods.