* 1453538
* CAREER:Exploring Structure-Function Relationships in the Human Airways Through Fluid Mechanics Experiments
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Filippo Coletti, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2021
* USD 509,559.00

1453538&lt;br/&gt;Coletti&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this CAREER
project is to explore how structural features of healthy and diseased airways
affect the fluid mechanics of respiration. Since currently used aerosol drug
delivery techniques are not efficient, the proposed work would have an impact on
targeted drug delivery for respiratory diseases. It could also improve the
design and manufacturing of functional implants. The proposed study of both
healthy and diseased human airways can offer an understanding of the effect of
behaviors such as smoking on the fluid structure interactions of airways. 3D
printing of realistic airways significantly increases the broader impact of this
research, because it offers a more direct connection to actual airways, and how
they are changed by disease. The inclusion of particle deposition is also
important because of its potential impact on inhalation therapies. The proposed
educational activities combine engineering, physiology, and advanced imaging,
such as the development of a 3D printed virtual tour of the lung based on MRI
imaging as outreach to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to
address a rather significant bio-inspired fluid dynamics problem with an arsenal
of state-of-the-art tools: MRI imaging and PIV velocimetry to characterize the
flow experimentally and 3D printing for fabricating models to study realistic
geometries for healthy and diseased human airways. The experimental system has
already been manufactured so that important dimensionless groups in the model
are matched to actual behavior in the human airways. The PI proposes to explore
the relation between structure, defined as the morphology and the mechanical
properties of the airways, and function, defined as the transport of inhaled
particles.