* 1453796
* CAREER: Verified Compilers for a Multi-Language World
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2022
* Amal Ahmed, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 04/30/2022
* USD 540,092.00

Title: CAREER: Verified Compilers for a Multi-Language
World&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compilers play a critical role in the production of
software. As such, they should be correct. That is, they should preserve the
behavior of all programs they compile. Despite remarkable progress on formally
verified compilers in recent years, these compilers suffer from a serious
limitation: they are proved correct under the assumption that they will only be
used to compile whole programs. This is an entirely unrealistic assumption since
most software systems today are comprised of components written in different
languages compiled by different compilers to a common low-level target language.
The intellectual merit of this project is the development of a proof
architecture for building verified compilers for today's world of multi-language
software: such verified compilers guarantee correct compilation of components
and support linking with arbitrary target code, no matter its source. The
project's broader significance and importance are that verified compilation of
components stands to benefit practically every software system, from safety-
critical software to web browsers, because such systems use libraries or
components that are written in a variety of languages. The project will achieve
broad impact through the development of (i) a proof methodology that scales to
realistic multi-pass compilers and multi-language sofware, (ii) a target
language that extends LLVM---increasingly the target of choice for modern
compilers---with support for compilation from type-safe source languages, and
(iii) educational materials related to the proof techniques employed in the
course of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two central themes,
both of which stem from a view of compiler correctness as a language
interoperability problem. First, specification of correctness of component
compilation demands a formal semantics of interoperability between the source
and target languages. More precisely: if a source component (say s) compiles to
target component (say t), then t linked with some arbitrary target code (say t')
should behave the same as s interoperating with t'. Second, enabling safe
interoperability between components compiled from languages as different as
Java, Rust, Python, and C, requires the design of a gradually type-safe target
language based on LLVM that supports safe interoperability between more
precisely typed, less precisely typed, and type-unsafe components.