* 1453142
* CAREER: Addressing Deepening Variability Challenges for Next-Generation Margin-Free VLSI Computing Platform Design
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Mingoo Seok, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/28/2021
* USD 461,025.00

The goal of this CAREER project is to address deepening variability challenges
in today's computing chip design. Over the last four decades, semiconductor
technology has enjoyed rapid advancement, making computing chips the major
workhorse for our information age. Continued efforts are ongoing for further
improvements, and yet scientists and engineers have recently observed a
diminishing return on the research efforts. One of the main causes for this is
the ever-growing variability in circuit performance within a chip, from chip to
chip, and over the lifetime of the chip. While conventional design practices
have ignored the variability aspect for performance improvement, this aspect has
now become too compelling and it is prohibitive to simply discard it. The
project will essentially address this issue. The project also entails
education/outreach plans targeting middle/high-school, undergraduate, and
graduate students as well as working professionals within the current
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the project will seek a way
to reap the variable portion of improvement in computing chips by creating
holistic techniques across design layers. The focus is to address the critical
limitations of earlier efforts, e.g., large overhead, limited voltage-
scalability, hidden worst-case design practices, and new variation sources, so
that chips can monitor variations and dynamically adapt to them. Particularly,
the project will pursue low-overhead, voltage-scalable error-detection and
correction schemes, fine-grained on-chip thermal monitoring with 10-100X smaller
sensor fabrics, and in-field self-testing for adapting to chip-aging effects.
The results of the research will have an impact across the spectrum of computing
systems - high-performance, cloud, mobile, embedded, and ubiquitous - all of
which are severely constrained by variability.