* 1453724
* SBE-RCUK: Experimental and Descriptive Investigations of Welsh (cym) Consonant Mutation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2021
* Michael Hammond, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2021
* USD 362,428.00

Most human languages are conveyed through the medium of sound, and thus
understanding the way language sound works is central to understanding human
language. This project addresses an unusual language sound phenomenon, initial
consonant mutation: the initial consonant of a word varies to express
grammatical information about that word, for example the possessives in Welsh,
e.g. cath 'cat', fy nghath 'my cat', dy gath 'your cat', ei chath 'her cat'. In
order to address big questions like "How do such systems evolve historically?",
"How can children learn initial mutation?", and "Why does this not occur in a
language like English?", it is important to first fully understand the
properties of the mutating consonants for speakers of a language with initial
consonant mutation. This is the research goal, with respect to Welsh, a language
with a rich and productive system of initial consonant mutation. In addition,
many Americans are of Welsh descent. The primary heritage language of this
community is Welsh, a medium for a rich culture of literature, song, poetry,
history, etc. It also provides an important window into the world-view and
culture of the ancestors of the Welsh-American community. Sadly, the Welsh
language is endangered. There are no monolingual speakers. In Wales, the number
of speakers is now less than 20% of the population and there is a real danger
that the language will decline below critical mass and no longer be viable. The
potential loss to the understanding of the culture and background of so many
Welsh and Welsh-Americans is tragic. The research to be conducted here will both
help document extraordinary aspects of the grammatical system and provide
resources for pedagogical materials essential in the revival of the language.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary and international team will apply a
diversity of investigative tools: perceptual studies using masked priming,
production studies using acoustic analysis and ultrasound for articulatory
study, traditional field work involving elicitation, judgment tasks, statistical
corpus work, and two acquisition studies (one with adults; one with children).
These heterogeneous methodologies allow the team to approach the investigation
of consonant mutation from a variety of directions, thus providing a uniquely
comprehensive view of the phenomenon. The sub-projects are diverse, but focus on
two central questions: i) whether mutations are best viewed as lexical or
phonological phenomena; and ii) what the precise phonological properties of
mutations are. These studies will also impact linguistic theory, including our
understanding of lexical access in a language where a lot of morphological
information is concentrated in the beginning of the word and in our
understanding of the organization of phonological systems and alternations. The
core of the team has done similar work on Scottish Gaelic and done logistical
and descriptive advance work on Welsh, and so is uniquely positioned for this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was made possible by the SBE-RCUK Lead
Agency Agreement.