* 1453084
* CAREER: From Perception to Action: What Songbird Mate Choice Can Teach Us About Decision Making
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2023
* Jonathan Prather, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 04/30/2023
* USD 852,839.00

Decisions define the course of a person's life, profoundly impacting health,
safety and economic prosperity. The process of decision making involves two key
components: assessing the value of a sensory stimulus or anticipated outcome,
and taking action based on that evaluation. In humans and other mammals, neural
networks involving the association cortex and reward centers have been
implicated in stimulus evaluation, while other networks have been implicated in
motor planning and initiation. What remains unknown is the circuit through which
evaluation directs selective motor activation. Defining this link is essential
to understand decision making, and this project will investigate natural social
behaviors in a new animal model of decision making to reveal how the nervous
system forges that link between perception and action. An improved understanding
of decision making and social behavior will advance many fields including
neuroscience, psychology, and economics. Furthermore, this research will also
guide understanding of how decision making can go awry, yielding the promise of
mechanistically-targeted treatments for behavioral pathologies such as
compulsive behavior and addictive relapse. Such advances will vastly improve not
only quality of life but also national economic competitiveness. This broadly
relevant and appealing research will be integrated with the educational goal of
engaging high-school students and teachers in laboratory research, developing
the next generation of professional scientists, and communicating these and
other findings to the public through an educational series of relaxed and
informal Science Cafes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In female songbirds studied in
this project, songs that they hear performed by males are the most important
factor influencing the female's mate choice. A female's preference for a
specific song and the behavioral indicators of that preference are easily
quantifiable and consistent over time, providing a context in which to
investigate how the brain encodes preference and uses that information to direct
selective expression of behavioral responses. In these experiments, the
researchers will (Aim 1) identify how subjective value of male song is encoded
in specific populations of neurons in the female brain. Additional experiments
will (Aim 2) identify circuits through which sensory processing of subjective
value directs motor behavior. In those experiments, focally applied, low-
intensity light will be used to activate or inactivate those circuits to discern
the causal relation between activity in those pathways and performance of
specific behavioral responses. Together, these experiments will reveal the link
between perception and action.