* 1453474
* CAREER: Improving Software Quality using Dynamically Inferred Models
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2022
* Yuriy Brun, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2022
* USD 597,780.00

Software has become an integral part of our society and it is hard to imagine
many aspects of our lives, including the economy, healthcare, and communication,
functioning without software. However, software is rarely perfect and software
defects can have serious consequences, such as security breaches and the
compromise of private information. While these high costs of defects are well
known, the software industry has been unable to remedy the problem because the
inherent complexity of software is so high that even the best, most careful
developers still make mistakes. As a result, defects are not only common but new
defects are typically reported faster than developers can fix them. This makes
the problem of improving software quality one of the most critical challenges
facing our society today. It is this challenge that is the central goal of this
project. The focus of the project is to develop techniques and tools that help
developers understand the complex software behavior and the behavioral
implications of software changes. These techniques and tools aim to improve the
quality of software by helping developers do their jobs better and make fewer
mistakes. Improving software quality in such a way will reduce the negative
effects of buggy software, positively affecting the many aspects of society that
rely on software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One significant cause of defects and poor
software quality is the inconsistency between what developers think their system
does, and what the system actually does. This project focuses on reducing this
inconsistency by helping developers visualize, explore, and understand the
runtime behavior of their systems, and how the behavior changes when the
developers change the code. Today, common ways to reduce this inconsistency are
to study the source code directly, to observe executions via a runtime debugger,
and to instrument key locations in the code and use logging to peek into an
implementation's runtime behavior. But these processes are highly manual and
labor intensive, and often force the developer to think of a single execution at
a time, rather than consider the system behavior as a whole. Instead, this
project creates techniques and tools that help developers reduce this
inconsistency by inferring precise, concise, predictive behavioral models from
system execution logs, aiding developers in comprehension and debugging tasks by
comparing, visualizing, and querying such models, and generating tests from such
models. The broader impact of this work is the advancement of techniques that
improve software quality, which, in turn, reduces the negative economic and
societal effects of software defects.