* 1454455
* SusChEM: CAREER: High-Resolution X-ray Spectroscopic Studies of Base Metal Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Kyle Lancaster, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2020
* USD 561,000.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program of
the Chemistry Division is funding Professor Kyle M. Lancaster of the Department
of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Cornell University to use cutting-edge
X-ray spectroscopies to explore the reactivity of earth-abundant transition
metal catalysts. The goal of this research is to determine the mechanisms by
which these catalysts effect remarkable chemical transformations including the
breakdown of biomass to simple sugars for biofuels and the conversion of natural
gas to transportable liquid forms. Understanding the reactivity of catalysts
incorporating earth-abundant metals is key to a sustainable chemical future. The
proposed work incorporates elements of biochemistry, synthesis, spectroscopy,
and theory, affording interdisciplinary training for undergraduate and graduate
researchers. The interaction between light and matter that forms the basis of
spectroscopy is the foundation for outreach efforts under this project;
specifically, hands-on "lab kits" are to be developed for K-12 students to
explore properties of light.

Valence-to-core X-ray emission spectroscopy, high-energy-resolution
fluorescence-detected X-ray absorption spectroscopy and resonant inelastic X-ray
scattering are emerging, versatile methods to characterize coordination
environments and ligand electronic structures. These methods are being used to
probe copper catalysts, defined here as either enzymes or coordination
complexes. One such catalyst to be studied is a mononuclear copper enzyme that
oxidatively cleaves polysaccharides in biomass such as chitin and cellulose.
Stopped-flow kinetics and rapid freeze quench methods are being used to trap
reactive copper-oxygen species for X-ray spectroscopic characterization.
Nature's copper catalyst for conversion of methane to methanol is a focus of
this study. This catalyst is an integral membrane protein whose reactive copper-
oxygen species have eluded study by conventional methods. Efforts are to be
extended to an abiotic system: copper-catalyzed aerobic alcohol oxidation. This
study could demonstrate that the methods to be employed do not necessarily
require precise knowledge of precatalysts in order to characterize reaction
constituents.