* 1454248
* CAREER: 3D Printing of Heart Muscle Using Soft Hydrogels
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Adam Feinberg, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award supports
fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development of a novel
additive manufacturing process using soft, tissue-like hydrogels. Additive
manufacturing for biological applications, also called 3D bioprinting, has the
potential to revolutionize the fabrication of medical devices and engineered
tissues by making custom shapes that can integrate with a person's unique
anatomy. However, additive manufacturing processes that work well for metal or
plastic parts are unable to print with hydrogels and living cells at high
fidelity. This new process will enable deposition of hydrogels and cells in
complex 3D structures and will be used to bioprint heart muscle. Scaffolds and
parts made from biological hydrogels are preferred for interfacing with living
cells and tissues and are needed in the healthcare and biomedical industries.
Therefore, results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy and society
and spur growth in biofabrication. This research involves several disciplines
including manufacturing, biology, mechanical engineering, and materials science.
This multi-disciplinary approach will help to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research. The research team will positively impact
engineering education by integrating 3D bioprinting into undergraduate
curriculum and creating low-cost bioprinting kits for K-12
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new hydrogel additive manufacturing process
has advantages over existing additive manufacturing techniques because it can
support deposition of hydrogels and cells in complex 3D structures that would
collapse under their own weight if 3D printed in air. However, there are
scientific barriers that need to be overcome to realize the full potential of
this process and improve resolution, fidelity, and cell viability. This research
is focused on understanding fundamental mechanism(s) of hydrogel formation
within a thermo-reversible support bath composed of microparticles that acts as
a viscoplastic during the print process and then is non-destructively removed
using a thermal trigger. The objective of the research is to determine (1)
effects of hydration and size of the microparticles on rheological properties of
the support bath; (2) effects of support bath's rheological properties on
resolution, fidelity, and pore size of the 3D printed hydrogel structure; and
(3) effects of process parameters on cellular integration and the ability to
print functional heart muscle.