* 1454139
* CAREER: Cooperative Control and Decision-Making for Human-Agent Collaborative Teams
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Yue Wang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 569,999.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant addresses control
and decision-making for human-robot collaborative teams. The project has two
main research thrusts. The first thrust examines a team consisting of a skilled
human with knowledge of a certain manufacturing or sensing task, and a partially
trained robot assistant that is capable of endless repetition without boredom or
fatigue. The workload balance between the human and robot is governed by the
trust that the human has for the robot, which is modeled mathematically as a
function of the rate of improvement in performance and the rate of decrease in
number of mistakes. Innovative trust-based algorithms will provide a balanced
human experience and guaranteed team performance. The second research thrust
will create novel planning strategies incorporating mathematical models of
regret, an emotion central to human rational decision-making. Regret-based
automatic decision-making aids will provide more human-like decisions for more
natural human-robot interaction. Results from both thrusts of the project will
ultimately enable transformative human-robot interaction technologies
benefitting the U.S. economy and quality of life. The educational initiatives of
this project will broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
manufacturing and robotics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach
entails the integration of trust into cooperative control and regret into
decision-making for human-agent collaborative teams. To explore new fundamental
understanding of trust and realize effective control allocation, the first
thrust will develop new dynamic trust models based on qualitative results from
human factors research, and novel trust-based control strategies for human-agent
collaborative teams modeled by switched systems. Non-conservative multiple
Lyapunov functions based analysis will be developed to provide state-dependent
switching control of the manual and autonomous modes. The second thrust features
the development of a regret-based Bayesian sequential decision-making framework
that selects between the manual and autonomous mode in a way such that
suboptimal decisions will be made to avoid the possible regret of making a wrong
decision. Both thrusts include experimental validations using a heterogeneous
multi-robot test bed and a humanoid manufacturing robot with human-in-the-loop.
Results from this research will foster a new interface between control theory
and human factors.