* 1454299
* CAREER: Molecular Catalysis for Waste Valorization
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Yuriy Roman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2020
* USD 572,471.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yuriy Roman&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
1454299&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Massachusetts Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at advancing the use of
abundant domestic energy sources for liquid transportation fuels and chemicals
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by improving the utilization of renewable
carbon. The PI proposes to valorize biomass-derived waste streams, a long-
standing challenge in the chemical/biological conversion of lignocellulosic
biomass. The approach uses a coupled synthetic and reaction engineering approach
to develop catalytic materials capable of selectively upgrading waste biomass
fractions and links advanced synthesis and characterization techniques with
rigorous reactivity measurements. Catalyst design efforts are focused on
reducible and tunable metal oxides that feature the appropriate properties
required to upgrade complex macromolecules at scale. Prior results from the PI's
group have shown that such catalysts are capable of breaking targeted C-O bonds
of oxygenates with high specificity without saturating C-C double bonds. The PI
aims to bridge the existing gap between model compounds and real streams by
studying macromolecules of increasing complexity. The proposed work is based on
the analysis of numerous scenarios for the integration of waste products into
various fuel and chemical streams in a biorefinery with maximum economic
benefit. Ultimately, the goal is to devise a catalytic toolbox that can be used
to maximize carbon efficiency, product yields, and catalyst longevity during
waste conversion, thereby improving current state-of-the-art valorization
methods. When taken together, these solutions represent a tipping point in the
prospects for specific biomass waste as a viable, commercially relevant
sustainable feedstock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the growing interest in the use
of renewable carbon sources for the production of chemicals, polymers, and
fuels, lignin conversion into value-added chemicals has been of high interest in
biorefining. Lignin is the most abundant source of aromatic carbon in nature and
the most abundant natural macromolecule after cellulose and hemicellulose. The
U.S. Energy Security and Independence Act of 2007 mandates the development of 79
billion liters of second-generation biofuels annually by 2022. Assuming a yield
of 355 liters per dry ton of biomass, 223 million tons of biomass will be used
annually, producing about 62 million tons of lignin. The amount of lignin from
an industrial cellulosic ethanol plant will potentially increase to ca. 100,000
to 200,000 tons per year. The scale disparity existing between lignin output and
the low-market volume of chemical additives currently derived from lignin will
shape the outlook on lignin valorization towards an accelerated development
effort for new conversion strategies. Cleavage of lignin's primary ether
linkages leads to several monomeric and oligomeric aromatic compounds that are
highly functionalized with alcohol, aldehyde, ether, or acid substituents. These
monomeric compounds are susceptible to an extensive array of reductive or
oxidative transformations to generate paraffinic, olefinic, aromatic
hydrocarbons, or aromatics with increased or targeted functionality. A monomer
yield as small as 7 wt.% could provide revenues ranging from $0.14 to $0.21 per
kg of lignin based on the value of the "green chemicals" produced during
depolymerization. Leftover oligomer-rich fractions comprised of oxygenated
dimeric and trimeric compounds may serve as fuel additives after hydroprocessing
to produce commodity products, including jet fuel. Despite its perceived
potential, lignin is usually burned as a low-grade fuel. In select cases,
unprocessed lignin is used commercially as a dispersant, emulsifier, adsorbent
or chelating agent. Therefore, the mandated production of 79 billion liters of
second-generation biofuels annually by 2022 will inevitably generate massive
amounts of carbonaceous waste streams (e.g., lignin). One route to the effective
processing of such streams into value-added products hinges on the development
of an efficient catalytic system capable of selectively depolymerizing and
activating targeted C-O and C-C bonds. To address this challenge, the PI
proposes an integrated research plan that focuses on reducible metal oxides as a
platform to create a catalytic toolbox that can be tailored to perform targeted
depolymerization and deoxygenation sequences. Ultimately, he aims to provide
guidance for the development of disruptive catalytic technologies to valorize
waste streams while also establishing a comprehensive fundamental framework for
molecular catalyst design and mechanistic understanding of C-O/C-C bond
activation. The implementation of earth-abundant, redox active catalysts that
operate under mild conditions in bio-refining processes is consistent with a
vision of an integrated biorefinery that combines biological and thermochemical
technologies to produce a range of value-added fuels and chemicals from non-food
agricultural feedstock. This research could contribute to the long-term national
scientific progress, economic growth, and improved international competitiveness
in the development of sustainable technologies. The research and educational
activities conceive an integrated strategy to train students, including
undergraduates from underrepresented communities, in subjects related to
sustainable energy, materials science, catalysis, and reaction engineering,
while also disseminating the results and approaches to the broader community
through outreach programs and curriculum development.