* 1454476
* CAREER: Using Field Experiments to Identify Barriers to Labor Market Success and Human Capital Accumulation
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Amanda Pallais, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 450,850.00

Abstract: Using Field Experiments to Identify Barriers to Labor Market Success
and Human Capital Accumulation

This project aims to identify barriers preventing workers from succeeding in the
labor market: in particular, barriers that prevent workers from demonstrating
their skills to potential employers and barriers that prevent workers from
gaining important skills. The first project examines a Catch 22 that new labor
market entrants face: it's difficult for them to get a job without prior
experience, but it's difficult to get experience without a prior job. This
project tests whether providing more information to employers about workers'
aptitudes can improve their labor market outcomes by making employers more
willing to hire them. The second project examines a Catch 22 that displaced
workers face. Because employers use unemployment as an adverse signal of worker
ability, the longer workers are out of work, the harder it becomes for them to
find a job. This project tests whether helping workers fill in their resume gaps
with short-term, part-time employment or volunteering can improve their labor
market outcomes. While the first two projects test for the importance of
information barriers in labor markets, the third tests the importance of a
simple resource barrier. Despite the fact that advanced high school classes have
been linked to better subsequent outcomes, many low-income high school students
do not have access to advanced classes at their high schools. Online classes
have been proposed as one way to fill this resource gap. This project examines
whether providing students with access to advanced online classes can improve
their subsequent educational outcomes. It also analyzes how the effects of these
online classes compare to the effects of in-person versions of the same classes.

The intellectual merit of this agenda lies in applying rigorous experimental
evidence to answer these questions. All three projects utilize randomized field
experiments. These projects should improve our understanding of labor markets
and educational settings. For example, there is a long theoretical literature on
employer learning about worker abilities, but less empirical evidence on how
different signals affect employers' beliefs and worker outcomes. Similarly,
there is a lot of speculation about the ability of online classes to improve
students' access to high-quality education, but less empirical evidence on this
topic. The broader impacts of this agenda lie in identifying policies and
practices that can improve the labor market outcomes of disadvantaged groups. A
priority of this agenda is to disseminate the results of the research to
practitioners and policy-makers and to train students to conduct high-quality
research.