* 1454544
* CAREER: Investigate 3D Extracellular Potential Distribution at Single Cell Level
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Jin He, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2022
* USD 520,672.00

1454544&lt;br/&gt;He&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Common cells in the human body
generate electrical voltage and as a result electrical current. Such signals
represent biological activity and function such as growth and differentiation.
Although scientists have measured such signals in a general way, this research
project attempts to measure in different parts of a cell surface and such
measurement is believed to enable us to better characterize cell behavior and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioelectric signals are ubiquitous in biological
systems and are very important for many biological activities. In applications,
they can be used as physical biomarkers for diagnostic purposes or can be
modulated for therapeutic purposes such as cancer cure or wound healing.
Membrane potential, the voltage across the plasma membrane of cells, is a key
bioelectrical signal for important cellular activities, such as proliferation,
migration and differentiation. Recent studies have revealed that the membrane
potential of cells has far more complicated spatial distributions even at single
cell level. The role of these fine structures is still not clear and needs to be
explored. One hypothesis is that these potential fine structures contain
important information to guide essential cell activities and behaviors. This
project will develop advanced scientific instruments using nanotechnology and
study these fine potential structures at single molecule and single cell level.
This research will help to decode the biological meaning of these fine
structures and enable us to develop unprecedented diagnostic and therapeutic
methods for public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
CAREER proposal is to investigate long-lasting extracellular potential
microdomains of individual living cells with high spatial and temporal
resolution using multifunctional scanning ionic conductance microscopy (SICM)
techniques. The PI's long term goal is to understand bioelectricity at single
cell and single molecule level using innovative nanopipette and SICM based
integrated techniques that can achieve single molecule and single cell analysis
and imaging under physiological conditions. Bioelectric signals are ubiquitous
and play very important roles in biological systems. Steady extracellular
potential microdomains around individual non-excitable cell have recently been
revealed and they may carry instructive information in signaling pathways. To
understand this newly discovered phenomenon, it is very important to
quantitatively map the potential distributions around the periphery of one or a
cluster of living cells with high spatial resolution in an extended time period.
Conical-shaped glass or quartz nanopipettes have attracted increased attentions
in recent years. They can be directly used as nanopores for single molecule
biosensing. In addition, it can be used as sharp probes for an emerging scanning
probe microscopy technique, SICM, to reveal the morphology of living cells with
a high spatial resolution. To achieve the research objective, systematic
approach will be used and three highly interrelated research tasks are planned:
1. Develop multifunctional SICM techniques for extracellular potential mapping.
2. Characterize the system using model samples in well-controlled environment.
3. Investigate extracellular extracellular potential microdomains of living
cells with submicron resolution. These techniques are potentially transformative
for bioelectricity studies at single cell level and can also be applied to a
wide variety of areas, including biosensing, drug delivery and screening and
cytotoxicity. The research outcomes will significantly impact the fundamental
understanding of the complex bioelectric signaling networks and will result new
types of biosensors and therapeutic methods for cancer, wound healing and
developmental diseases.