* 1454240
* CAREER: Two-Dimensional Heterostructures Based On Transition Metal Dichalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2015
* Humberto Rodriguez Gutierrez, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 10/31/2015
* USD 95,363.00

Nontechnical Description: Single layers of materials, also called 2-dimensional
(2D) materials, are atomically thin materials that present an unusual
combination of mechanical, optical and electronic properties; thus they are very
attractive candidates for new-generation opto-electronic devices. Hetero-
structures, i.e., stacking layers of different 2D materials, can be created to
achieve new functionalities; by altering the local chemistry of a single layer,
one can integrate different local properties in the hetero-structure. Although
it is an essential step, the fabrication of such 2D hetero-structures still
remains a technological challenge. The main goals of this project are to
establish reliable methods and procedures to fabricate these complex 2D
structures, and to acquire a clear understanding of the chemistry-structure-
properties relationship by performing a comprehensive characterization of the
heterostructures and related devices. The study is expected to impact future
directions of 2D materials research through identifying and overcoming critical
technical barriers, and facilitating the next generation, energy efficient,
portable and flexible electronics. The project also includes genuine efforts
oriented to raise the awareness of science among young students from
underrepresented groups, and to motivate them for STEM disciplines. The research
activities integrate with the educational plan, including involving
undergraduate students early for research experiences, expanding the
international collaborations with Mexico and Brazil, and increasing the
participation of minority students in graduate studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project aims to advance the
fundamental knowledge on the physical properties of two-dimensional crystals,
e.g., atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenides with a higher degree of
complexity, and their heterostructures. Innovative synthesis approaches,
including multistep masking and thermal evaporation/deposition by alternating
sources, and, lithographic and laser writing techniques in controlled
environments, are used to create uniform and reproducible arrays of two-
dimensional hetero-structures, both in-plane and vertically stacked. State-of-
the-art optical, structural and electrical characterization techniques are
applied to explore both the formation mechanisms of the hetero-junctions at the
atomic level, and the effects of local chemistry and atomic arrangement on the
overall physical properties of the heterostructures. In addition, the effects of
doping and alloying on the optoelectronic properties, band gap tuning and
electronic band alignment at the hetero-junctions, are also investigated.
Furthermore, the project comprises the fabrication and testing of a variety of
new optoelectronic devices such as photo-sensors, photovoltaics and light-
emitting sources that use the two-dimensional hetero-structures as the active
elements.