* 1454931
* CAREER: Theory of Optomechanical Nanorotation Sensing - Approaching the Quantum Regime
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Mishkatul Bhattacharya, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Modern society is critically reliant on rotation sensing technologies, as
evidenced by gyroscopes which regulate cellular phones, ships and airplanes, and
global positioning system satellites. This CAREER project aims to meet the
continuing demand for better optical sensing of mechanical rotation currently
posed by a variety of fields such as nanoscience, precision measurement, remote
sensing, and quantum computing. The activity addresses these demands by
combining powerful sensing paradigms from the field of linear motion detection
with the ability of light to carry orbital angular momentum. It will provide
theoretical solutions which can be implemented using available technologies. The
ultimate objectives of this research are to develop techniques for measuring
mechanical rotation at the quantum level, and thus to identify and to circumvent
the limits placed by quantum mechanics on the sensor capabilities. These
activities are concomitant with strong technological impact on society, since
they aim to establish the route for taking rotation sensor technology to its
limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will investigate the sensing
of nanomechanical rotation in the quantum regime. The proposed sensors will find
hitherto undetected torques created by the electromagnetic vacuum, characterize
rotational quantum states of macroscopic mechanical systems, allow the
nondestructive study of quantized superflow in quantum gases, and measure the
rotation of single atoms. The main ideas will combine the established techniques
of vibrational optomechanics with the capabilities of optical beams carrying
orbital angular momentum. The specific methods will draw on the toolbox of
quantum optics and atomic physics techniques. The research program will be
integrated with an education plan which includes collaborative visits for
students to the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, introduction of the
orbital angular momentum of light into the undergraduate Quantum Optics
laboratory at the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), and exhibition of
rotational toys to the public vis-Ã -vis the yearly Imagine RIT event as well as
the Science Saturdays at the Rochester Museum and Science Center.