* 1454608
* CAREER: Ultrasensitive Point-of-Care Diagnostics using Magnetic Biosensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Drew Hall, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 12/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Brief Description of Project Goals&lt;br/&gt;This research effort explores
ultrasensitive magnetic sensing technology to enable applications such as point-
of-care disease diagnoses and wearable medical sensors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this research is to enable a
new generation of ultrasensitive biomolecular sensors for mobile health
(mHealth) and wellness applications. The proposed project will have a
transformative effect on the healthcare ecosystem by: 1) Empowering individuals
and trained professionals with the necessary equipment to quantitatively
diagnose diseases at the point-of-care. 2) Allowing diseases to be diagnosed
earlier due to the ultrasensitive nature of the device, which will ultimately
lead to better treatment outcomes and reduced costs. 3) Providing a means for
preventative healthcare with increased portability and wireless infrastructure,
as well as the ability to track therapy and disease progression. 4) Enabling
low-cost diagnostic platforms for resource-limited settings, such as developing
countries, helping to democratize healthcare. This CAREER proposal describes a
synergistic research and education plan that will support the PI in progressing
towards his career goals. The education plan includes components that target
pre-college, both undergraduate and graduate students, and emphasizes inclusion
of students from underrepresented minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
past fifteen years, several different types of magnetic sensors have been used
to detect biomarkers (proteins, nucleic acids, and cells) labeled with magnetic
tags. The most sensitive of these are the same sensors used in nearly every hard
disk drive today, magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) sensors. While MTJ sensors
surpassed giant magnetoresistive (GMR) sensors in hard disk drive read heads
nearly a decade ago, they have yet to make a substantial impact as biosensors
due to manufacturing challenges and substantially higher noise, despite the
increased transduction efficiency (10-50x higher than GMR sensors). The proposed
research addresses these issues and makes progress towards mHealth point-of-care
medical diagnostic and monitoring platforms by addressing the underlying
research challenges. Namely: 1) Integration of MTJ biosensors with the
associated electromagnet on the same chip, 2) Transduction based on temporal
magnetic signatures afforded by the tight integration of the magnetic biosensor
and electromagnet, and 3) Development of a novel flicker noise and temperature
dependence removal scheme. The results from this research will provide a pathway
towards ubiquitous, wearable and point-of-care biomolecular sensors. To
demonstrate the advancements, two mHealth platforms are proposed: one for point-
of-care diagnosis of cardiac biomarkers for acute myocardial infarctions in an
ambulatory setting, and the other a wearable biosensor for continuous, long-term
wound monitoring.