* 1454107
* CAREER: Ultrasonically-Powered Smart Medical Implants for Monitoring and Modulating Local Physiology
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Amin Arbabian, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This CAREER project integrates research, educational, and outreach components to
overcome current scientific limitations to achieving effective smart electronic
sensor miniaturization. The main societal benefits will be realized in the
healthcare sector, where a medical chip can be implanted in the human brain or
heart tissue to diagnose and treat patients with physical, neurological and
psychological disabilities and diseases. By enabling large-scale neuro-
modulation, the miniaturized sensor could lead to new solutions for neurological
diseases such as Alzheimer's, memory loss or pain management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's multi-faceted educational plan will
incorporate class and online teaching and outreach to educate a broad
international audience of academics, students, and the general public about the
project's research theories, designs and experiments. High school students from
underrepresented groups will participate in laboratory research, and an online,
open-access course will be developed to broadly disseminate results to the
larger community. Emerging online teaching and learning platforms and techniques
will be utilized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensor
size reduction is essential for a variety of next generation smart sensor
applications including medical implants that can monitor and modulate local
physiology, and diagnose and treat disabilities and diseases. Current
methodologies cannot deliver sufficient power to millimeter (mm) or sub-mm scale
sensors, and functionally-acceptable sensors are either too large for their
intended application or, if scaled, have extremely limited operational
capability and range. These limitations are fundamental, and further
optimization of the same techniques and methodologies cannot meet application
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project seeks to overcome those
limitations by using acoustic waves in the ultrasonic range - a new wireless
power delivery technique for implantable devices to substantially improve the
overall efficiency, sensor dimensions and depth of operation.