* 1454435
* CAREER: Robust Modeling and Predictions of Stream Water Quality and Ecosystem Health
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2015,10/31/2015
* Omar Abdul-Aziz, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

1454435 (Abdul-Aziz). The goal of this research is to investigate and robustly
predict the dynamics of stream water quality and ecosystem health in complex
urban-natural basins (e.g., coastal urban centers). The central research
hypothesis is that urban stream biogeochemical and ecological processes follow
emergent similitude, scale-invariant patterns and organizing principles, which
will lead to spatiotemporally robust predictions of water quality and ecosystem
health. Specific research objectives are to (1) identify the dominant controls
and quantify relative linkages of stream water quality and ecosystem health
variables in relation to the hydro-climatic, watershed and land use, in-stream,
and coastal drivers/stressors; (2) investigate the similitude (parametric
reductions), scaling laws (emergent patterns), and organizing principles for
stream water quality and health variables; and (3) formulate informatics based
empirical (i.e., data-driven) and mechanistically based behavioral models as
ecological engineering tools to obtain spatiotemporally robust predictions of
urban stream water quality and ecosystem health. The integrated educational
objective is to develop an inductive-learning based interdisciplinary Ecological
Engineering Pedagogy (EEP); in order to (1) increase retention of undergraduates
and graduation of minority students in relevant STEM majors, (2) increase
graduate students specializing in the emerging paradigm of ecological
engineering, and (3) increase the number of K-12 students actively pursuing STEM
educations/careers. The research will be primarily conducted in South Florida, a
living laboratory and hot-spot for climate change and sea level rise;
considering the region a prototype, case study of complex urban-natural
environments around the world. The research will also utilize nationally
available data for other coastal urban centers (e.g., New York, Los Angeles,
Houston), incorporating hydro-climatic, biogeochemical and ecological gradients
across the U.S. coasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will employ a data-
analytics and informatics framework to achieve mechanistic understanding on the
dominant controls of urban stream water quality and ecosystem health processes.
It seeks to unravel the biogeochemical-ecological similitude and scaling laws
for urban streams by deriving and utilizing appropriate dimensionless functional
groups, which will identify the different environmental regimes and organizing
principles of water quality and ecosystem health. The scale-invariant patterns
and emerging organizing principles will help to formulate parsimonious empirical
and mechanistic behavioral models that, with nominal calibrations, can provide
spatiotemporally robust predictions of stream water quality and health
indicators. The effort will utilize inductive learning methods to develop EEP
case studies, involve minority undergraduates in research, and formulate simple
Excel tools for K-12 students. It will utilize inductive learning methods to
develop EEP case studies, involve minority undergraduates in research, and
formulate simple Excel tools for K-12 students. Research outcomes will be shared
with relevant agencies (e.g., Cities, County, NGOs) to improve their stream
water quality and health management strategies. The EEP case studies will be
utilized to teach two new interdisciplinary courses (developed by the PI):
Ecohydrological Engineering (undergraduate) and Ecological Engineering
(graduate). Research and educational outcomes will be broadly disseminated
through journal publications, conference presentations, graduate
theses/dissertation, reports, YouTube, and a project website. Local and regional
high school students and teachers will be involved with the research-education
by leveraging current and developing new collaborations.