* 1454384
* CAREER: Theory-guided design of a novel chemical looping process for methane coupling using hydrogen storage materials
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Lars Grabow, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 04/30/2020
* USD 550,000.00

1454384 - Grabow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An economically viable process to
transform abundant natural gas, primarily composed of methane (CH4), to higher
value products (e.g. ethane or ethylene) could revolutionize the chemical
industry. The prevailing challenge in all processes using CH4 feedstock is
activating the strong C-H bond, which is typically done in the presence of an
oxidizing agent and requires high temperatures for activation coincidentally
leading to unselective reaction pathways. The primary goal of this project is to
develop a new chemical looping process for selective CH4 coupling in the absence
of oxygen using hydrogen storage materials. First principles calculations will
guide the selection of promising hydrogen storage materials and subsequent
reaction/diffusion modeling will further narrow down the group of candidate
materials. Laboratory scale experimental testing is used to verify the model
predictions and to optimize the operating conditions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Recent technological developments in hydraulic fracturing (fracking)
to produce shale gas provide a huge incentive to develop commercially viable
methane conversion processes to benefit the U.S. economy. Utilization of large
shale and tight gas reservoirs in the U.S. and many other parts of the world
have led to an increased interest in its main component, methane (CH4). As of
2011 the proven natural gas reserves total 208.4 trillion cubic meters
worldwide, of which 7.72 trillion cubic meters are located in the U.S. Natural
gas is also a significant byproduct during oil production and an estimated 150
billion cubic meters are being flared annually.Traditional uses of methane
include electricity generation (combustion) and conversion to syngas, a mixture
of CO and H2, using steam reforming over Ni-based catalysts.However, the
potential for methane as a feedstock for the production of liquid hydrocarbons
and useful chemicals has not yet been fully realized and an economically viable
methane to higher value chemicals upgrade process could revolutionize the energy
sector and chemical industry. The pervasive challenge of using CH4 as feedstock
is activating the very strong C-H bond (435 kJ/mol). Currently implemented
processes utilizing CH4 require high temperatures and the presence of oxygen-
containing species (e.g. O2, H2O, CO2). These processes work well for the
generation of syngas, which can subsequently be converted to higher hydrocarbons
in a Fischer-Tropsch synthesis reactor. However, the direct conversion of CH4 to
C2+ species remains one of the grand challenges in the chemical industry.
Oxidative coupling of methane (OCM), could potentially address this challenge,
but decades of intensive research have not been able to solve the issue of
carbon selectivity. The competing combustion reaction consumes a large fraction
of the CH4 feedstock and the high reactivity of the CH3 intermediates in the
presence of O2 presents an insurmountable obstacle. In this research project a
new process for methane coupling is proposed, which uses chemical looping and
hydrogen storage materials to separate the carbon and oxygen atoms in order to
avoid the formation of undesired carbon monoxide (CO) or carbon dioxide (CO2).
The proposed research activities will be integrated with broad-reaching
educational efforts at the K-12, undergraduate, graduate and professional level
to broaden the participation of minority students and increase the retention of
at-risk students. Partnerships with Marlo Diosomito and two economically
disadvantaged Title-1 high schools in the Cypress Fairbanks ISD that the PI
supervises will be leveraged to generate more interest in STEM disciplines and
increase the representation of students from low-income families. UH is a
designated Hispanic-Serving Institution and has the most ethnically balanced
student body of all major research institutions in the U.S.