* 1454310
* CAREER: Data to Operational Decisions: A Predictive Analytics Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Srikanth Jagabathula, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 11/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will develop data-
driven modeling and learning techniques to improve the accuracy of decision
making in operations. The focus will be on easy to implement techniques that
work "out-of-the-box" for a wide-range of decisions faced by businesses and
society: the right products to design, the right products and prices to offer to
customers, the right quantity of each product to carry, and even the right
policy mix (taxes, subsidies, etc.) to offer to individual industries or
demographic groups. The existing approach to this problem is to select an
appropriate model, learn model parameters from data, and then solve the decision
problem under the model. The focus is mainly on either learning the model
(typically, independent of the specific decision context) or efficiently solving
the decision problem given the model, leaving model selection to an expert. In
contrast, this research will take an end-to-end approach: starting with a type
of data (purchase transactions, click-streams, marketing studies, choice of
insurance policies, etc.) and ending with an operational decision. The
integrated approach will work "out-of-the-box" by automatically selecting a
model customized to the data and the decision. By limiting the need for expert
input, the research will significantly increase access to data-driven decision
methodologies to a wide-range of industries - greatly benefiting the U.S.
economy and society. For the end-to-end approach, the research will develop
modeling techniques that not only have high predictive power, but are amenable
to efficient optimization (solving of the decision problem). The challenge
however is that complex predictive models lack structure for efficient
optimization, whereas parsimonious models that can be efficiently optimized lack
predictive power. In order to balance this tension, the research will focus on
the model class of distributions over preference (ranked) lists. This model
class is very general (is rooted in the classical economic utility theory) and
captures a wide range of responses of individuals to product or policy
offerings. Despite its generality, the model class also possesses rich
transitivity structure. The research will develop algorithmic solutions that use
data to identify an instance of the general model class and then exploit the
transitivity structure to efficiently optimize. Further, the research will
develop novel analysis techniques to quantify the performance of the algorithms.
Performance analysis is challenging because it requires quantifying "model
complexity" and "data complexity". The research will develop novel "complexity"
metrics using traditional engineering techniques such as compressive sensing and
Boolean function analysis.