* 1454083
* CAREER: Conformal Field Theory and Quantum Gravity from the Bottom-Up
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Jared Kaplan, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award funds the research activities of Professor Jared Kaplan at
Johns Hopkins University. Strikingly diverse topics in physics, ranging from the
study of magnets to the dynamics of the strong force to the mysteries of quantum
gravity, have been unified within a single framework: Conformal Field Theory
(CFT). Roughly speaking, CFTs are quantum theories that combine special
relativity with scale invariance, or invariance under the uniform stretching of
space and time. The research funded by this award will use foundational
principles to study CFTs and apply these discoveries to phenomenology, quantum
gravity, and black hole physics.

By applying the bottom-up methodology of effective field theory (EFT)and the CFT
Bootstrap to the study of holography, the PI will uncover the robust features of
quantum gravity. He will expand on nascent programs characterizing general
holographic dualities in terms of bulk EFT, and universal long-distance Anti de-
Sitter (AdS) physics in terms of the large spin CFT bootstrap. He will adapt his
expertise from the study of scattering amplitudes and the bootstrap to make
previously intractable computations simple. The relationship between CFT and
canonical gravity in AdS will be investigated to develop a deeper understanding
of the emergence of bulk dynamics. New discoveries will also have significant
payoffs for phenomenological models and for the broader understanding of Quantum
Field Theory (QFT). The study of EFT in AdS has motivated new techniques for the
solution of approximately conformal QFTs, and these methods will be deployed in
order to study theories of relevance to phenomenology and condensed matter.

Specific goals are to understand the space of well-defined local quantum
theories of gravity in AdS, to perform new non-perturbative studies of
physically interesting CFTs, to study the robustness of black hole thermality
and the CFT data that encode non-thermal corrections, and to build concrete
connections between the holographic CFT and older descriptions of canonical
quantum gravity, such as the Wheeler-DeWitt equation, in order to understand the
interior of black holes.

Broader Impacts: With help and input from students, the PI will develop his
materials on the "AdS/CFT from the Bottom-Up" into extensive published course
notes. The PI will also develop footage leftover from the documentary "Particle
Fever" into short films for the education of high school students and the
general public. This will provide the public and STEM teachers with pedagogical
videos that convey the excitement and complexity of the scientific enterprise.