* 1454012
* CAREER: Sensor-based Modeling and Control of Nonlinear Dynamics in Complex Systems for Quality Improvements in Manufacturing and Healthcare
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Hui Yang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 01/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will create a
sensor-based nonlinear dynamics methodology for real-time system informatics,
monitoring, and control. Nonlinear dynamics arise whenever multifarious entities
of a system cooperate, compete, or interfere. In order to cope with system
complexity and dynamic environments, modern industries are investing in a
variety of advanced sensing systems. Effective monitoring and control of
nonlinear dynamics will increase system quality and integrity, thereby leading
to significant economic and societal impacts. For example, advancing sensing,
measurement and process control in manufacturing industries will improve the
overall quality and productivity, which is essential to achieving competitive
advantage in advanced manufacturing. However, there is a critical gap in the
knowledge base that pertains to integrating nonlinear dynamics research with
quality engineering. This award supports fundamental research for new
methodological development and curriculum innovation to vertically advance the
scientific base of sensor-based modeling and control of complex systems.
Integrated with the research is an ambitious education plan aiming at training
the next generation of engineers to bring nonlinear thinking into advanced
sensing, system informatics and control. Broad impacts will also be generated
through developing curriculum modules, creating a museum exhibit, developing
outreach workshops, as well as actively recruiting and involving under-
represented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear dynamics in complex systems
pose significant challenges for quality engineering. Real-time sensing of
complex systems gives rise to big data. Realizing the full potential of big data
for quality control requires fundamentally new methodologies to harness and
exploit complexity. Many industries, including manufacturing and healthcare,
have identified the urgent need to harness and exploit nonlinear dynamics for
creating new products (or services) with exceptional features such as
adaptation, customization, responsiveness, and quality in unprecedented scales.
The success of this research project will advance the scientific base of
modeling and control of complex systems by contributing new "nonlinear dynamics"
concepts, methods and algorithms. In addition, this research will enrich the
theory of nonlinear dynamics and expand its research domain to interdisciplinary
applications in both manufacturing and healthcare. The research methodologies
are also generally applicable to a wide variety of complex systems exhibiting
nonlinear dynamics such as heart, brain, precision machining, biomanufacturing,
and nanomanufacturing.