* 1454881
* CAREER: Probing Fundamental Physics and Cosmic Structure by Maximizing the Impact of Next Generation Microwave Surveys
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2022
* Michael Niemack, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 04/30/2022
* USD 720,565.00

The researcher will build a new instrument to study the most distant signals
arriving on Earth, the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB). These faint radio
signals are thought to originate from the Hot Big Bang at the beginning of the
Universe. The expansion of the Universe has shifted these signals from the very
hot initial conditions down the faint and cold signal we observe today. The
researcher plans to design and construct a new, much more sensitive, instrument
for investigation of the CMB. With students, the investigator will mount this
instrument on a radio telescope and address the most important questions in
cosmology and physics, measuring special features of the radio signals and
comparing the data to predictions of quantum gravity and general relativity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's plan also includes activities aimed at
educating the public, with activities for community members with diverse
backgrounds and education levels. The outreach effort includes adding
experiments to a high-school level lending library and creating videos showing
their instrument under construction and in use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of
the high sensitivity instrument to be built, the efforts funded by this award
may also eventually have application to a number of technological areas,
including manufacturing, remote sensing and medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument will help answer a number of critical questions: 1) probing modified
gravity via galaxy cluster velocities that could dramatically alter our view of
general relativity; 2) probing the early universe inflation in new regimes,
which have the potential to transform our understanding of high-energy physics
and quantum gravity; 3) make high signal-to-noise measurements of the neutrino
mass sum and cosmological parameters via CMB polarization, gravitational
lensing, and galaxy clusters; and 4) stronger constraints on dark energy via
cross-correlations with next generation optical surveys (such as the Large
Synoptic Survey Telescope).