* 1454451
* CAREER: SusChEM: Synthesis and Characterization of Disulfonated Poly(arylene ether sulfone 2,4,6-Trichloro-1,3,5-triazine) Hybrid Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Natalie Arnett, Fisk University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2020
* USD 547,465.00

NON-TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER project is to
develop novel membrane materials for fuel cell applications and integrate this
research into polymer education through appropriate courses and laboratory
experiences. The research and education plan for this project will be achieved
by: 1) Designing and preparing new fuel cell membranes for transport of electric
charges; 2) Evaluating the properties and performance of the novel materials; 3)
Modifying the materials to improve their properties; and 4) Merging polymer
chemistry with general chemistry concepts by designing an "Introduction to
Polymer Chemistry: General Chemistry Concepts" lecture and lab course for
freshman students. The proposed research significantly enhances Fisk
University's current and future research capabilities in polymer science through
the introduction of this course that is deeply imbedded in the research
objectives of this proposal, but simple enough to arouse student's interest and
learning. Furthermore, the proposed two-semester introductory polymer
course/inquiry-based lab experience, which is a student-selected alternative to
traditional General Chemistry, will facilitate the enhancement of learning and
research skills for undergraduate students. Introduction of authentic research
beginning in the freshman year should also increase the retention of
undergraduates (including underrepresented minorities) in STEM
(science/technology/engineering/mathematics) and increase the pipeline of
underrepresented talent for STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the proposed research is to synthesize hybrid copolymers of
disulfonated poly(arylene ether sulfone)s (PAESs) by incorporating a post-
modifiable unit, 2,4,6-trichloro-1,3,5-triazine (TT), into the polymer backbone.
The significance of this approach is that the properties of the proton exchange
membrane for fuel cells could be engineered for precisely tailored performance
by tuning the microstructure of the copolymer backbone using varying and
distinct structural/functional features. The disulfonated poly(arylene ether
sulfone- 2,4,6-Trichloro-1,3,5-triazine) (PAES-TT) hybrid copolymers will be
prepared to form linear, high molecular-weight materials after optimizing the
required synthetic steps. Subsequently, PAES-TT membranes will be prepared and
characterized to evaluate their structure-property relationships and performance
in proton-exchange-membrane fuel cell applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational component of this proposal is centered on developing an
"Introduction to Polymer Chemistry: General Chemistry Concepts" lecture and lab
course for freshman students as a means to incorporate student research
experiences into the regular academic-year curriculum. Exposure of students to
research, mentoring of students, broadening participation of underrepresented
groups in science, and increasing the pipeline of underrepresented talent for
STEM careers are other major components of the broader impacts of this project.