* 1454293
* CAREER: Fabricating Free-Standing Three-Dimensional Graphene Nanostructures through Functionalization, Folding, and Self-Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Jeong-Hyun Cho, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 11/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will build a methodology
for the fabrication of free-standing, three-dimensional (3D), functionalized,
graphene structures. 3D graphene structures have been of great interest in the
last few years because of their unique properties and behaviors, which are
different from two-dimensional (2D) graphene nanosheets. 3D graphene structures
can lead to applications in optics, electronics, optoelectronics, and biomedical
devices, which cannot be realized with 2D graphene structures. One of the useful
characteristics of graphene-based materials is tunability of their physical and
chemical properties through functionalization. Currently, functionalization of
3D graphene-based materials does not exist, because conventional lithographic
techniques such as electron beam lithography, photolithography, and nanoimprint
lithography are 2D methods which allow patterning and functionalizing only on
planar substrates. This research plan seeks to develop nanomanufacturing
processes and demonstrate that 3D polyhedral graphene structures can be realized
with individually functionalized graphene nanosheets on each face of the 3D
structures. The impact of the proposed work is the discovery of knowledge that
can be harnessed in developing next-generation 3D nanoelectronics, 3D multi-
channel filtering devices, and nanomedical sensors beneficial to human health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this award is to demonstrate the unique
properties of 3D graphene materials not observed in 2D graphene nanosheets. The
heterogeneous 3D functionalization will be accomplished through doping and
surface patterning on the 3D structures, which will alter the physical and
chemical properties of the 3D nanostructures, leading to a new generation of 3D
devices. The specific research interests and CAREER objectives encompass the
following: (a) develop a self-assembly and folding processes to transform 2D
structures into 3D devices, overcoming the limitations of the conventional
lithographic processes and allowing for the creation of free-standing 3D
graphene-based (graphene and graphene oxide) polyhedral and nanotube arrays; (b)
realize heterogeneous functionalization on the 3D graphene structures, with each
graphene-based membrane defining each face of the 3D polyhedron structure and
functionalized for specific functionalities; (c) apply the self-assembly process
in the development of 3D graphene-based sensors and devices. This work will
contribute to solving major problems with using 2D materials and bring
significant advances in the development of next-generation nano-enabled devices.