* 1454426
* CAREER: Multifunctional Nanostructured Electrodes for Closed-Loop Control of Neural Activity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Erkin Seker, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2021
* USD 526,045.00

PI: Seker, Erkin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1454426&lt;br/&gt;A complex network
of chemical and electrical signals is the basis of how the brain works. Medical
devices that can be implanted into the brain, commonly referred to as neural
interfaces, are emerging as powerful tools for treating neurological disorders
as well as understanding the complex network underlying the brain's operation.
These devices need to be engineered with attributes to minimize adverse tissue
response, enhance fidelity in recording electrical signals, and controlling
brain activity by precise delivery of electrical and chemical signals.
Miniaturization technology used by the microelectronics industry has shrunk the
dimensions of neural interfaces down to a few hair-widths. However, the demand
for integrating multiple functions on these devices requires innovations in even
smaller dimensions, where novel device coatings have shown promise. The
overarching goal of this project is to engineer multifunctional devices that can
monitor electrical signals that precede an epileptic seizure and in response
deliver anti-epileptic drugs to prevent a full-blown seizure. To that end, the
investigator will develop advanced device coatings that enhance the sensitivity
in monitoring electrical signals and can deliver pharmaceuticals. The engineered
materials and devices will be tested on brain slices from rats, which mimic
tissue response to implanted devices and epileptic activity. The scientific
knowledge and technology around the novel multifunctional materials will benefit
a wide-range of fields, including vascular stent and orthopedic implant
coatings, catalytic fuel cells, and biosensors for pathogens. In order to train
a continuum of engineers and scientist conversant across engineering and life
sciences, the investigator will engage undergraduate students in a "write and
execute your own research proposal" style learning experience, deliver workshops
for high school teachers on lesson plan development, and prototype an online
course that merges miniaturization technology and life sciences for a diverse
audience. This proposal is co-funded by the Biomedical Engineering Program in
the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Division, and
by the Metals and Metallic Nanostructures Program in the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An essential component of a neural interface is
the electrode, which couples the neural tissue and the electronics. A critical
step in engineering materials that interface with neural tissue is to understand
the relationship between material properties, electrode performance, and
biological responses. Nanoporous metals, with their highly-tunable properties,
are promising candidates for systematically studying these fundamental
relationships. One such material is nanoporous gold (np-Au), a nanostructured
metal that is synthesized by self-assembly. Np-Au offers a tunable
nanostructure, a large surface area-to-volume ratio, ease of integration with
miniature devices, electrical conductivity, and drug-delivery capabilities. The
central goal of the project is to employ a novel material screening platform to
investigate material-tissue interactions simultaneously on both histological and
electrophysiological levels. This in turn will reveal the relationship between
tissue response and recording fidelity as a function of systematically-tuned
topographical and soluble cues. Specifically, the investigator will develop an
essential framework around selective promotion of specific cell types via
soluble and topographical cues, as well as on demand delivery of neuromodulator
pharmaceuticals. The project will finally employ organotypic brain slices as an
epilepsy model to assess the capability of the multifunctional electrode coating
in monitoring and pharmaceutically modulating neural electrophysiology in a
closed-loop fashion. This will establish a unique, monolithically-manufacturable
technology that can be easily scaled up and integrated into implantable neural
interfaces for fundamental studies of neural circuitry.