* 1454414
* CAREER: Building Chemical Synthesis Networks for Life Cycle Hazard Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2022
* Matthew Eckelman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 542,379.00

1454414 (Eckelman). Industrial chemicals are fundamental to nearly every aspect
of modern society and technology but also present potential hazards to the
environment and public health. Robust data on both direct and indirect impacts
from chemical production and transport are essential for reliable sustainability
assessment of products and policies. Current practices suffer from generic
empirical data, lack of statistically validated estimation tools, and poor
integration with standard industry and government practices in tracking chemical
hazards. This research will enable the next generation of chemicals life cycle
assessment (LCA) while providing educational experiences to inspire the next
generation of interdisciplinary chemical and environmental scientists. Through
carefully structured project tasks, this effort will (1) Create a chemical
synthesis network for environmental analysis and data generation, (2) Integrate
green chemistry principles into a new computational structure for LCA, and (3)
Apply LCA's network structure to inform national assessments of chemical supply
chain resilience and vulnerability of critical water and wastewater
infrastructure. The associated integrated education and outreach program will
provide cutting-edge research opportunities, new courses, online educational
materials, and demonstrations. Video modules will connect participants to the
physical logistics of our chemical infrastructure, providing a bridge between
traditional chemistry instruction and chemical and environmental engineering.
Project research will be integrated into the PI's teaching, while new courses
will include group projects relevant to research
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will create a science-
based, spatial, and dynamic modeling platform to enable next-generation
sustainability assessment of chemicals. High-quality inventory data for hundreds
of chemicals and validated estimation tools for thousands more will constitute
an open toolkit for the global modeling community. Mechanistic process models
will offer unprecedented accuracy in modeling chemical unit processes for LCA
while still maintaining a conserved, network structure of energy and material
flows upstream to resource extraction. New algorithms and metrics will integrate
the inherent hazard approach of green chemistry with the systems approach of
LCA. Research activities will leverage existing computational and modeling
facilities at Northeastern and Sandia National Laboratory. The research tasks
are anticipated to advance modeling and assessment capabilities in evaluating
chemical technologies for public and private decision-making. Data, models, and
results will be disseminated widely and structured to enable interoperability
with existing modeling platforms. The integrated research and education plan
will directly engage local students, teachers, and the public, potentially
affecting thousands of students and citizens. The project will broaden
participation in science and engineering by recruiting and mentoring student
researchers from under-represented groups for high school (Young Scholars, Step-
Up Programs), college (REU), and science teachers (RET). Design, delivery, and
assessment of education and outreach activities will leverage existing
capabilities and expertise from Northeastern's highly successful Center for STEM
Education, the Graduate School of Engineering, and the Center for Teaching and
Learning through Research and will build on the PI's experience in K-12 science
instruction, teacher training, and online education.