* 1454260
* CAREER: Origins and Applications of Optical Anisotropies in Organic Photonics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Jon Schuller, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 04/30/2020
* USD 525,702.00

Non-technical Description: Semiconductor materials are the foundation of modern
photonics, or light-manipulating technologies (e.g. lasers, solar cells).
Conventional semiconductors such as silicon form crystals, often with isotropic
optical properties. Organic materials, such as plastics, provide an alternative
low-cost, light-weight, and flexible semiconductor system. These materials
comprise highly asymmetric molecules that assemble into complex structures. As a
result, they often exhibit highly anisotropic optical properties. The research
component of this CAREER award is to study the origins and applications of these
optical anisotropies. Novel measurement methods of optical anisotropies help to
provide fundamental insight into the complex optical properties of organic
materials. In turn, this project exploits optical anisotropies to enhance the
performance of organic photonic devices. These scientific investigations are
complemented by a variety of integrated education and outreach objectives. A new
outreach initiative, The Art of Science, explores intersections between art and
science. Students turn the products of their research into works of art for
exhibition in public venues, including the Santa Barbara Museum of Art. This
initiative encourages science literacy and appreciation through aesthetics, and
promotes science as a creative endeavor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: Organic materials used in photonic devices often self-assemble into
highly oriented morphologies, leading to huge optical anisotropies. The
objective of this CAREER project is to elucidate the origins and applications of
these anisotropies. The approach is to (1) develop new optical methods for
characterizing anisotropies based on resolving the photon momentum vector; (2)
identify distinct temporal and spectral signatures of intra- and inter-molecular
luminescence; (3) quantify absorption anisotropies that challenge currently
prevailing models of organic optical constants; and (4) integrate oriented
organics with photovoltaic light-trapping architectures that exploit
anisotropies to enhance thin-film absorption. Fundamental materials studies
provide new understanding of inter-molecular excitations - critical, but poorly
understood intermediaries in organic light emitting diodes and photovoltaics.
Investigations of photonic architectures delineate new approaches for enhancing
oriented light-matter interactions through electromagnetics coupling.