* 1454518
* CAREER: Building empathy through social psychological processes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Jamil Zaki, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2021
* USD 713,618.00

Empathy - sharing and understanding of others' emotions - serves as a social
"glue" that produces generosity, strengthens social ties, and reduces prejudice.
Despite its importance, empathy is also fragile, and often breaks down just when
it is needed most. This is especially true in interactions between different
social groups. People often dismiss the opinions of individuals with whom they
disagree, fail to engage with the emotions of outgroup members, and avoid
others' suffering. Empathic breakdowns have severe and wide-ranging
consequences: producing polarizing ideological stalemates, fomenting conflict,
and driving bullying in schools. Empathy is often considered a relatively stable
characteristic that is not amenable to change. In contrast, Jamil Zaki (Stanford
University) and colleagues have developed a novel theoretical approach, which
proposes that empathy is a motivated process; thus, it could be modified by
shifting the motives that may drive one towards or away from engaging in
empathetic responses. This project will test two theoretical approaches that
could shift motivational processes and "expand" individuals' empathy, especially
in challenging intergroup situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
leverages two social psychological concepts - mindsets and social influence - to
shift empathetic responses. Mindsets describe people's beliefs about
psychological phenomena such as intelligence and personality. Whereas some
people believe these characteristics are stable and unchangeable (so-called
"fixed mindsets"), others believe these phenomena are malleable and under their
control ("growth mindsets"). This project will test whether encouraging a growth
mindset of empathy will cause shifts in motivation to engage in empathetic
responses. The second concept, social influence, draws on findings that people
are motivated to change their behavior, beliefs, and opinions to match those of
others; therefore, providing a norm that others value empathy could consequently
promote empathetic responses. This project will measure the effects of shifting
mindsets and social norms on (i) individuals' ability to understand others'
emotions, (ii) their willingness to take the perspective of people who differ
from them, and (iii) the strength and diversity of their social relationships.
Additionally, the research will test whether motivational shifts towards
empathetic responses increase generous behaviors and decrease bullying among
high school students. Overall, this work stands to make key advances both in the
basic science of empathy and in how this science can be applied to critical
social settings. With respect to basic science, this work will improve
understanding of the process and mechanism through which empathy can be
expanded, and also test a novel theory of empathy as a motivated process. With
respect to application, this work can help to remedy some of the harmful
consequences of empathic breakdowns including intergroup discrimination,
bullying, and selfishness in the context of charitable giving.