* 1454735
* CAREER: Testing a Biobehavioral Cyclic Model of Weight Stigma
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2023
* Janet Tomiyama, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 622,442.00

Understanding societal stigma is foundational to the science of social
psychology. In an era of historically high obesity prevalence rates, one of the
most pervasive and socially acceptable forms of societal stigma is weight
stigma. What happens to an individual who experiences such stigma? The proposed
research will examine a comprehensive trio of consequences: increases in
psychological stress, increases in comfort eating, and increases in cortisol, a
stress hormone that itself can cause eating and fat storage. One crucial
implication of this research is that these consequences could hinder weight loss
efforts, or even result in weight gain - thereby sustaining the originally
stigmatized condition. The proposed research will test this premise, and
investigate weight outcomes as they relate to experiencing weight stigma.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research by A. Janet Tomiyama (University of
California, Los Angeles; UCLA) will investigate the consequences of weight
stigma in daily life, as well as across the timespan of one year. In the first
study, overweight and obese participants will use a specially developed text-
messaging platform to report real-life instances of weight stigma as they
experience them in daily life. They will then provide cortisol samples and
report on their eating behaviors. Over the course of one year, the second study
will test whether experiences of weight stigma are followed by increases in
stress and cortisol, whether those increases in turn predict unsuccessful weight
loss efforts or weight gain, and finally whether those weight outcomes are
followed by ever more experiences of weight stigma. This research will be
conducted while promoting an educational objective of bringing research to
populations underexposed to science. The education plan is deeply integrated
with the research plan, and involves underrepresented minority undergraduate
students at UCLA and 2-year/community colleges. Using evidence-based teaching
and mentoring practices, an intensive summer program will provide dual training
in scientific skills and career development.