* 1454047
* CAREER: Interplay of metal coordination and ligand-based reactivity in complexes of oligopyrrolic fragments
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Elisa Tomat, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2022
* USD 627,621.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Synthesis program is supporting fundamental
research of Professor Elisa Tomat at the University of Arizona. Professor Tomat
will employ selected oligopyrrolic compounds to investigate the interplay of
metal coordination and ligand-based redox chemistry in transition metal
complexes. This work focuses on the synthesis and ligand properties of
oligopyrroles. These new substances are inspired by naturally occurring
compounds derived from bacterial biosynthesis and from the oxidative metabolism
of heme. The investigation of ligand systems which act as electron sources or
reservoirs offers new avenues for the engineering of reactivity pathways,
thereby creating a conceptual framework for the development of versatile tunable
catalysts of potentially high impact in the chemical and pharmaceutical
industry. Professor Tomat will integrate the research and educational components
of this project within Chemistry Discovery, a new outreach program for middle
school students. Through a series of workshops aimed at highlighting the
connections between everyday experience and chemistry advances, Chemistry
Discovery provides middle school students with a discovery-based experience that
captures the creativity of the STEM fields through experiments. Professor Tomat
has established partnerships with local school districts and charter schools.
Chemistry Discovery reaches an underprivileged community which is
underrepresented in the sciences. In addition to the production of novel
educational resources, Chemistry Discovery engages undergraduate students in the
development of outreach workshops through a one-unit undergraduate course
offering. The program promotes the pursuit of higher education in the STEM
fields by providing an opportunity for middle-school students to discuss
scientific observations while interacting with college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, new methods are to be developed
for the synthesis of dipyrrolic and tripyrrolic ligands. Because the electronic
structure of oligopyrroles is highly tunable by synthetic manipulations, a range
of coordination and redox properties will be accessed. This research seeks to
facilitate the design of complexes which enlist both the ligand platform and the
metal center as sites of electron exchange. The coordination and redox chemistry
of these classes of oligopyrrolic ligands will be investigated, in particular
with respect to late transition metals of potential interest for catalytic
applications. Trends in redox properties will be correlated with reactivity
profiles involving ligand-based one-electron exchanges.