* 1454942
* CAREER: Next Generation Functional Methods for the Analysis of Emerging Repeated Measurements
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Ana-Maria Staicu, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

This project will develop new statistical methods for the analysis of data
structures that are correlated. A motivating example is a longitudinal
neuroimaging clinical study of Multiple Sclerosis, where the focus is to study
the natural evolution/dynamics of the disease over time. Patients are observed
at multiple hospital visits, and the disease status is measured through a brain
measurement, such as a one-dimensional brain summary or a three-dimensional
brain scan. This work will be used: (i) to predict specific brain measurement at
a future time; (ii) to assess the dependence between the brain measurement and
age, and (iii) to quantify the association between a cognitive assessment and
the specific brain measurement. The new statistical methods will be relevant to
many other applications, including medicine, economics, environmetrics, and
agriculture; they will allow scientists to analyze such data structures using
methods that are theoretically sound, interpretable, and easily accessible. The
proposed methods make major contributions to the area of functional data
analysis and will impact other areas of statistical applications, such as brain
imaging and dynamic treatment regimes. The integration of the research with
education will impact society at various levels. The investigator will implement
an educational initiative to increase exposure of middle-school and high-school
students to exciting statistical methods, through hands-on project-related
activities, and will increase exposure of undergraduate students to cutting-edge
research in statistics. The investigator's outreach initiative to developing
countries through teaching of functional data techniques is valuable for the
advancement of all societies through the sharing and dissemination of knowledge.

The development of the next generation statistical methods for the analysis of
correlated data structures is necessary because of a longitudinal-based design:
each subject is observed at repeated time visits and for each visit we record a
functional variable, in addition to other scalar or vector variables. The
project meets the growing demand for pragmatic and data efficient statistical
methods for such complex data. Two situations are studied: a) the functional
variables are the response of interest and b) the functional variables are
predictors and another scalar variable is the response. In both cases,
accounting for the dependence within the subject as well as for the longitudinal
design is crucial for modeling and inference. However, current methods either
ignore the dependence or are too complicated and computationally intensive. The
specific research goals of this project are: 1) to introduce novel parsimonious
modeling framework for the repeatedly observed functional variables, which
allows to extract low dimensional features and use them to study the process
dynamics; 2) to develop significance tests to formally assess the effect of
covariates; and 3) to develop association models and inferential procedures when
the functional variables are predictors and another scalar variable is the
response observed in a longitudinal design.