* 1454829
* CAREER: Seismic Anisotropy, Symmetry and Structure - Translating Laboratory Measurements into Seismic Interpretations
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2022
* Sarah Brownlee, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2022
* USD 527,248.00

The research objective of this project is to determine the factors controlling
the magnitude and symmetry of lower crustal seismic anisotropy - directional
dependence of seismic velocity - from cm- to km-scale. The ability to interpret
seismic data based on the elastic properties of rocks is critical to
understanding the composition and structure of the middle and lower continental
crust, yet there remains a distinct gap in our understanding of the causes of
seismic anisotropy in the crust vs. anisotropy in the mantle. These results will
have a significant impact on our ability to interpret seismic observations of
crustal anisotropy, and will lay the groundwork for improving seismic methods
for measuring crustal anisotropy. The knowledge gained by this work has the
potential to transform the way we think about crustal seismic anisotropy, and
the resulting improved understanding of the middle and lower crust will
ultimately lead to improved models of seismic hazard. The proposed work also
includes development of an innovative, tiered peer-mentoring approach to
undergraduate research that can be applied in any discipline, and will have
significant broader impacts related to undergraduate education and research, as
well as participation of underrepresented minority students in a STEM discipline
at an urban university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to improve our
understanding of the causes of seismic anisotropy in the crust by developing a
predictive framework linking mineralogy, texture, and structure to seismic
anisotropy using middle and lower crustal rocks exposed at gneiss domes in the
northeastern United States. The approach combines laboratory measurements of
intrinsic, or cm-scale, elastic properties using electron backscatter
diffraction (EBSD) with field measurements and mapping of 0.5-10 km-scale
structures in two gneiss domes. Field and laboratory measurements will be used
to model and predict the observed seismic anisotropy - magnitude and symmetry
-resulting from middle and lower crustal structures at wide-ranging length-
scales. Coordinated with the scientific goals of this project, she proposes to
develop and implement an innovative teaching approach, Team Research, to
increase the number and diversity of undergraduate students participating in
research at an urban university. Team Research will be built around a tiered
peer-mentoring system, where equal proportions of introductory, intermediate,
and advanced undergraduate students work in teams, during a semester long
course, to design and implement a field research project relevant to the
scientific objectives of this study. Team Research will provide quality field
and research experience in a STEM field to 60 undergraduate students from an
urban university (12 per year). The anticipated increase in undergraduate
students participating in research, in particular related to this project, is
likely to contribute to increased diversity of undergraduate geology majors that
are qualified and interested in pursuing a graduate degree.