* 1454839
* CAREER: Quantification of Ionosphere/Thermosphere System Drivers, State Parameters, and Fundamental Coupling Mechanisms
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Lara Waldrop, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,996.00

The goal of this project is to obtain the first unambiguous quantification of
the temperature-dependent cross section for charge exchange between neutral and
ionized atomic oxygen which mediates momentum and energy exchange between the
terrestrial ionosphere and thermosphere (IT system). Historical uncertainty in
these parameters has limited the quantitative accuracy of numerous aeronomical
calculations, such as ionospheric temperatures and density distributions,
diffusion coefficients, and plasma drift speeds, effectively precluding reliable
prediction of both steady-state and dynamic behavior of the coupled IT system.
The research program will involve hardware development and deployment, inverse
and tomographic analysis development, physics-based model development, and
scientific data analysis and interpretation. &lt;br/&gt; The methodology to
obtain the crucial quantification of these parameters will utilize a nested
configuration of passive optical and incoherent scatter radar (ISR)
instrumentation at Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico, including a novel
photometric imaging system (Photometer Array for Tomographic Hydrogen Sensing;
PATHS) that will be designed and built by undergraduate students at the
University of Illinois through a capstone project course. The resulting data,
together with the development of realistic radiative transport models of optical
emissions and advances in the estimation of light ion velocity from ISR spectra,
will enable the height- and time-dependent quantification of neutral, ion, and
electron temperatures; distinct proton and oxygen ion velocities; neutral
meridional wind speed; ionized oxygen, hydrogen, and helium density; and, for
the first time, the neutral oxygen and hydrogen density distributions throughout
the upper thermosphere. Quantification of the charge exchange coupling between
the ionosphere and thermosphere (via parametric momentum balance) as well as
between the exosphere and plasmasphere (via parametric continuity balance) will
enable advances in understanding how mass, energy and momentum are transported
throughout the coupled regions. The project will involve graduate and
undergraduate students, and include outreach activities targeting pre-college
girls in order to promote the future gender diversity in this discipline.