* 1454498
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Morphological integration between the face and dentition throughout ontogeny
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* William Jungers, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2017
* USD 8,679.00

Differences in the size and shape of the face and teeth are often used to
determine the relatedness of species. Modern humans, for example, have flatter
faces, wider mouths and smaller teeth compared to chimpanzees and our early
human ancestors. What is not fully understood is whether the face and teeth are
two separate units that can evolve independently or if they are tightly
correlated during evolution. In this project, the investigators will study
morphological (shape) integration between the face and teeth in humans,
chimpanzees and bonobos to test whether specific changes in the size and shape
of the face during growth are associated with particular dental developmental
events, such as the formation or eruption of the adult molars. The findings from
this project will contribute to our understanding of the evolutionary history of
humans, and data will be made available for other studies. The results are more
broadly applicable for the planning of orthodontic treatments and craniofacial
surgeries, and the project will also support minority undergraduate and graduate
training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this two-year project, the investigators
will use medical computed tomography (CT) and high resolution microCT scans to
generate three dimensional (3D) virtual models of the crania and teeth of over
400 humans, chimpanzees and bonobos from existing skeletal collections. Data
will be quantified with 3D landmarks and linear, angular and volumetric
measurements, and then binned into five grades of dental development to address
specific hypotheses about covariation of the face and dentition. The findings
will be relevant to primate systematics, craniodental evolution and ontogeny,
and may have clinical implications for understanding craniofacial disorders. The
microCT and CT data generated by this project will be compiled into an open-
access database for other scientific research, thereby increasing virtual access
to museum specimens and preventing further damage to fragile skeletal
collections. The project will also promote diversity in biological anthropology,
as the co-PI is a female, minority graduate student.