* 1454616
* CAREER:  Mechanochemical signaling during somatic cell reprogramming
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Kristopher Kilian, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

1454616 &lt;br/&gt;Kilian, Kristopher &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Somatic cells were
recently shown to revert to a primitive 'embryonic-like' pluripotent state upon
forced expression of only four genes (2012 Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine). This technique could revolutionize medicine by enabling a patient's
own cells to be reverted back and modified to correct mutations and regenerate
injured tissues; however, the process in which cells reprogram is not well
defined or understood, is very inefficient and takes considerable time. In this
CAREER proposal, designer cell culture materials will be used to study how cells
revert to pluripotency in order to develop a system that can quickly and
efficiently reprogram a patients cells. The combination of approaches employed
is expected to dramatically reduce reprogramming time, increase efficiency, and
reduce the need for exogenous factors (e.g. lentivirus), which will prove
transformative to commercial and clinical ventures that need to reproducibly
generate induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) for regenerative therapies. The
emerging view of how materials influence cellular reprogramming that is
supported by this research will be integrated into education and outreach
activities by establishing a Stem Cell Engineering Training Institute (SCETI).
In this institute, laboratory videos with senior undergraduates, and high school
educators will be developed for use in an annual summer camp for high school
girls - Girls Adventures in Mathematics Engineering and Science (GAMES) - and to
augment the curriculum of a senior undergraduate course: Design and Use of
Biomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most somatic cell reprogramming methods are
performed on rigid plastic which leads to heterogeneity in cellular organization
and proliferation. These conditions foster a slow stochastic process with rare
reprogramming events initiated by a mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET).
The process of MET in vivo is regulated by microenvironments with defined
biochemical and biophysical properties. Motivated by natural MET processes that
occur during development, and the architecture of the early embryo where
pluripotency is first established, the proposed work aims to control matrix
composition, substrate mechanics and tissue geometry on the cell culture
substrate,to more closely recapitulate in vivo architectures and to promote MET
and accelerate somatic cell reprogramming. The success of this work will provide
mechanistic insight into the de-differentiation process and yield a suite of
commercially viable cell culture materials and reagents for somatic cell
reprogramming. In addition to reprogramming to iPSCs, other explorations of
reprogramming will benefit from the tools and methods developed in this work
such as directed differentiation, trans-differentiation and intermediate de-
differentiation events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER Award by the
Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program in the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems Division is co-funded by
the Biomaterials Program of the Division of Materials Research.