* 1454285
* EAGER: Bluetooth Open-Source Stack (BOSS) - A Flexible and Extensible Bluetooth Research Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Tamer Nadeem, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 05/31/2018
* USD 298,522.00

Bluetooth technology continues to evolve and expand, taking advantage of the
desirable attributes and features it possesses in comparison to other wireless
technologies. With the latest update to the Bluetooth specification (version
4.1), Bluetooth devices are expected to become major players in the much-hyped
Internet of Things market. A large body of the research community, utilizing
this technology, will require modifications to the lower layers of the Bluetooth
protocol. Given the lack of an open-source implementation of Bluetooth stack,
the community efforts will be limited in validating and verifying their research
under realistic scenarios. This ambitious project aims to design, develop, and
disseminate a flexible and extensible open-source Bluetooth platform (BOSS) that
will enable new research opportunities for the wireless and mobile computing
community. The platform will enable development and evaluation of schemes,
services, and applications across all layers of the Bluetooth stack, through the
creation of a community-maintained, open-access repository. These goals will be
accomplished by: 1) developing a complete Bluetooth open-source platform, by
implementing lower layers of the protocol stack as firmware on an existing open-
source Bluetooth hardware platform, and extending existing open source upper
layers of the stack; and 2) creating and maintaining an open-access repository,
where the community will play a key role in generating novel open-source
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will empower the network community
with a tool-set facilitating the development and evaluation of new Bluetooth
protocols, applications and services. These new protocols and services could be
used to contribute to future Bluetooth standards. BOSS project will have an
impact on multiple areas in wireless networks and mobile computing research,
such as protocol design, security, wireless network coexistence, and multi-
interface smart devices, among others. The project will expose students to
cutting-edge research in wireless networks, mobile computing, and computer
architecture. In addition, the project?s outcome will be utilized in lectures
targeting high school students to educate them about Bluetooth technology and
its application as an example of wireless technology as well as Internet of
Things. Results from this work will be disseminated through presentations at
conferences, journal publications, and reports. An open-access repository, which
includes all the designed and developed tools within this project as well as
source code and documentations, will be created and made available on-line to
the community through a dedicated website. In addition, the research community
will be encouraged to upload their modifications and extensions on BOSS to the
repository.