* 1454311
* CAREER: Real-Time Fault Diagnosis and Failure Prognosis of Next Generation Power Electronics Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Bilal Akin, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 03/31/2020
* USD 500,714.00

Advancements in wide band-gap (WBG) power semiconductors will play a critical
role in a wide spectrum of power electronics systems and applications. Compared
to their current counterparts, WBG devices are capable of higher blocking
voltage, switching frequencies, power handling capacity and thermal
conductivity, which can motivate migration toward electrification of
transportation and a highly automated modern grid, among other applications. In
harsh operating environments, these components are subjected to various
mechanical and electrical stresses, wear out, and vibration that contribute to
increased equipment failure potential, where a failed component can cause
unexpected interruptions, serious safety issues, or easily lead to millions of
dollars in repair costs. The proposed research plan will help achieve self-
monitoring reliable WBG power electronics systems by providing condition
monitoring tools that broaden understanding of the WBG device degradation
process, incipient fault diagnosis and remaining useful lifetime prediction.
Establishing an advanced reliability framework will lead to new scientific
tools, accelerating deployment of WBG systems in grid integration, electric
transportation and defense systems. The long-term vision and career plan of the
PI is to integrate several thrusts relevant to this program, namely: WBG power
semiconductors, power electronics systems, and fault diagnosis/prognosis theory
as core disciplines. On the educational side, the goal is to develop educational
materials that provide an integrated view of relevant fields for training the
next generation of power electronics engineers. The PI will continue to reach
out to high school students with tangible, project centric experience in his
laboratory. The technologies and tangible applications developed as a result of
the proposed plan will serve as instruments to inspire and encourage students to
pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the proposal aims
to investigate incipient faults of wide band-gap semiconductor devices and
create online fault diagnosis / failure prognosis tools to establish early
warning systems for future power electronics systems. The rapid and widespread
deployment of wide band-gap semiconductors raises significant reliability
concerns, particularly for mission and safety critical systems due to limited
field data and potential uncertainties. Continuously monitoring these systems is
essential to prevent unexpected shutdowns and catastrophic failures that could
result in fatal accidents or significant loss in operations. However, current
diagnostic engineering tools are not mature enough to detect or identify failure
precursors in real time, leading to a major reliability gap in WBG-based power
conversion systems. In order to reliably move WBG technologies forward, this
proposal investigates: (i) WBG device degradation processes under various
accelerated aging conditions and failure precursors for use in early warning
systems; (ii) novel online degradation monitoring tools to improve overall
reliability using readily available system components; (iii) new analytical
insights for fault growth model derivation to dynamically evaluate the fault
severity level, obtain an adaptive fault threshold, and predict the remaining
useful lifetime; (iv) an integrated framework enabling autonomous incipient
fault diagnosis and health assessment for self-monitoring smart-energy
conversion systems; and (v) secondary control/modulation schemes which minimize
electrical and thermal stresses on faulty WBG components for lifetime extension.
These tools will provide a foundation for self-monitoring, smart-energy
conversion systems that can recognize failure precursors at an early stage and
thus help prevent catastrophic failures.