* 1454508
* CAREER: Cellular reprogramming to transform human fibroblasts into diverse and specific neuronal subtypes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,10/31/2017
* David Colby, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 10/31/2017
* USD 49,677.00

1454508&lt;br/&gt;Colby, David W. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will
identify approaches to transform easily obtainable cell types from living people
into neurons, which are dangerous to obtain by biopsy of the brain in living
humans. Sources of live human neurons are needed for use as model systems to
study and to discover cures for neurological diseases such as Alzheimer's, to
facilitate the development of brain-machine interfaces for enabling the blind to
see, enable disabled soldiers to mentally control prosthetic limbs or to send
thoughts 'telepathically' across the world, directly from brain to brain over
the internet. This project will develop approaches to derive specific neuronal
subtypes rapidly and in high yield using genetic engineering approaches which
have gained acceptance within the medical community, thereby broadly
accelerating the rate of progress across both medical and technological fields.
The research team is also committed to educating the public about the importance
of Bioengineering research and inspiring the next generation of researchers.
During the summer months, a local public high school teacher from Wilmington,
DE, will be immersed in the research environment as they prepare a high school
level course that will introduce students to Bioengineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research advances have enabled the ability to
reprogram commonly available human cell types, like skin and blood cells, into
stem cells, neurons, and other cells that are more difficult to obtain. Such
transformed cells may eventually be useful for cell-based therapies, and are
already finding use as in vitro models of human disease, which can be used to
derive more conventional therapies. However, the field of cellular reprogramming
has made limited progress toward generating the hundreds of different neuronal
subtypes that make up the brain, impeding progress in neuroscience and
neurological disease research alike. The objective of this project is to design
a high throughput approach for the identification of transcription factors
capable of carrying out desired cellular trans-differentiations. The research
team will apply this approach to the reprogramming of fibroblasts into specific
neural subtypes. Altering expression levels of specific transcription factors
that direct and maintain cell identity has been the most successful approach for
cellular reprogramming. The research team will create a library of transcription
factors associated with neural development and screen the library to identify
factors that can transform human fibroblast cells into two specific neuronal
subtypes, characterize their function, and iteratively apply the process for
enhanced function and yield; this approach has been highly successful in the
field of protein engineering.