* 1454575
* CAREER: Toward a mechanistic and quantitative understanding of oxidative conversion of biorefinery lignin to open chain hydrocarbon fuel - a new approach to dispel lignin myth
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Xiao Zhang, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 12/31/2020
* USD 516,000.00

PI Name: Xiao Zhang&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 1454575&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
bioeconomy of the future will be realized by industrial biorefineries which
produce sustainable biofuels, bioproducts, and biopower from renewable plant
biomass resources such as grass, agricultural residues, and forest residues. In
most current cellulosic biofuel operations, the cellulosic fractions of plant
biomass are converted to sugars and then fermented into biofuels. The residual
lignin is burned for biopower. Liginin is typically the second most abundant
material in plant biomass next to cellulose. Conversion of the lignin into
liquid fuel, as opposed to burning it, can significantly increase biofuel
production from biomass, and reduce the carbon footprint of biorefinery
operations. However, lignin is a complex material which is very difficult to
convert to products of value. This research award seeks to develop an innovative
chemical reaction pathway to selectively convert lignin to open chain
hydrocarbons similar to those that make up jet fuel. If successful, the results
from the research will lead to new processes to produce sustainable fuel, and
improve the economics and environmental sustainability of biorefinery
operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conversion of the lignin to liquid fuel
can significantly increase biofuel production from biomass. However, current
lignin conversion technologies are mostly based on hydrogenation/
hydrodeoxygenation reaction pathways that require high temperatures, pressures,
and substantial hydrogen (H2) consumption. The technical goal of this CAREER
award is to develop a fundamental understanding of the reaction mechanisms and
kinetics of a new, atom-efficient chemical pathway to selectively convert lignin
residue from cellulosic biofuel production to open-chain hydrocarbon fuels
through sequential oxidative aromatic ring opening, olefin metathesis, and diene
oligomerization reactions. Towards this end, the research plan has three
objectives. The first objective is to prepare and characterize representative
biorefinery lignin samples that reflect the breadth of variations in lignin
properties, structure, and the functionality resulting from various biochemical
conversion processes. The second objective is to determine the key reaction
kinetic parameters of oxidative depolymerization of biorefinery lignin, and
establish a quantitative relationship between lignin structural properties and
dicarboxylic acid product selectivity under different reaction conditions. The
third objective is to elucidate reaction mechanisms and gain an understanding of
reaction kinetics in olefin metathesis of lignin-derived dicarboxylic acids and
oligomerization of branched conjugated dienes to jet fuel precursors. The
results from this research will provide the foundation for a systems-level
understanding of biorefinery lignin conversion chemistry, leading to new
processes for large-scale lignin utilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
education and outreach programs associated with this award seek to train future
scientists and engineers in biomass conversion technologies to help provide a
trained workforce for the biorefineries of the future. Educational programs will
be developed in conjunction with industrial partners to proactively recruit high
school and undergraduate and graduate students, especially those from
underrepresented groups, and provide students with practical and research-based
experiences in biomass conversion technologies that support current and future
biorefinery operations. Specific activities include the Future Scientists and
Engineers for Biorefinery program, the Biorefinery-Oriented Summer Practicum,
and the Industrial Leadership Seminar Series.