* 1454443
* CAREER: Probing the Role of Environmental Organics in Deposition Dynamics of Aquatic Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Boris Lau, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2021
* USD 579,378.00

1454443 (Lau)

This project is about advancing the understanding of the fate and transport of
metal nanomaterials in water. While increasing applications of both natural and
engineered nanomaterials posit a technological panacea, they constitute a
potential health threat. The behavior of metals, many of which are toxic even in
trace quantities, is an important topic as population growth puts pressure on
the world's drinking water resources. Relatively little is yet known about the
interdependencies between the biotic and abiotic aspects of metal transport.
This study hypothesizes that the extent and kinetics of nanoparticle deposition
are a function of the surface characteristics of organics. The project will use
a combination of state-of-the-art microgravimetric, spectroscopic, and
microscopic tools to extend current knowledge of deposition of nanoparticles on
solid surfaces. Understanding nanoparticle deposition is a critical step in
developing contaminant sequestration strategies. The results will provide
insights for the water industry, so treatment processes and technologies can be
improved to provide safe drinking water. The results of this study would also
provide greater knowledge of the behavior of nanoparticles that is ultimately
crucial to the development of robust geochemical models for better
predictability and management capability.

To increase awareness of the connection between nanomaterials and the
environment, broader impact activities will target students at different levels
(K-12, undergraduate and graduate) as well as STEM teachers and industry
practitioners. Results of this research will be disseminated by engaging the
general public through a hands-on activity at the annual NanoDays organized by
The Discovery Museum in Acton, MA. This hands-on activity will depict what could
happen to nanoparticles when they are released into different aquatic
environments. Findings of this study will inform consulting engineers, utility
personnel, and regulators on its relevance to water sustainability. Despite
improvements over the past decade, underrepresented minorities still face
significant institutional and cultural barriers pursuing STEM. By increasing
their participation in STEM education and careers, America will be better
equipped to lead the world in science and innovation. This study will recruit
and train students from underrepresented groups through UMass' STEM Diversity
Institute. Findings from this study will not only be learned by students
enrolled at UMass but also available to other college students around the world.
An educational article on environmental behaviors of nanomaterials will be
submitted for publication in the Knowledge Project of Nature Education, a new
division of Nature Publishing Group. The Knowledge Project is an online, openly
accessible library of peer-reviewed educational science content for college
students.