* 1454431
* CAREER: Toward a New Paradigm in Evaluating and Mitigating Urban Liquefaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Shideh Dashti, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 532,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will create a new approach
for evaluating the behavior of clusters of buildings on liquefiable ground
during earthquakes, and pave the way toward designing mitigation measures that
improve building performance at a system level. Earthquake-induced soil
liquefaction can cause substantial damage to urban areas where multiple
buildings and infrastructure systems are clustered. Previous studies have shown
that buildings located in close proximity to one another can interact during
earthquakes affecting ground motions, settlement patterns, and building damage
potential. The parameters that control the seismic performance of building
clusters are poorly understood. As a result, mitigation measures that are
currently designed perform poorly, particularly when the performance of a
building is evaluated in the context of its surroundings. This award supports a
systematic study of the impact of adjacent buildings on the effectiveness of
liquefaction remediation techniques. In doing so, this award contributes to the
resilience of cities globally. In its outreach plan, this effort will improve
production and dissemination of knowledge on infrastructure performance during
urban disasters through a pilot, community reconnaissance platform. In its
educational plan, the grant aims to improve retention among engineering students
through pedagogical innovations and an international post-disaster
reconnaissance program for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER grant will advance the science and practice of disaster mitigation in
urban areas by enhancing the fundamental understanding of how building clusters
respond during earthquakes. The primary objectives of this research are to: 1)
study the impact of multiple structure-soil-structure-interaction (SSSI) on the
seismic performance of buildings on liquefiable soils and on the effectiveness
of mitigation techniques; and 2) identify the fundamental predictors of building
performance individually and as a cluster. This will be done through a
combination of centrifuge experiments and numerical simulations. This study sets
the groundwork for the future development of a probabilistic liquefaction
mitigation methodology that relies on mechanistically validated models. The
development of validated numerical models and knowledge of the key predictors of
the performance of building clusters will enable an effective mitigation of the
liquefaction hazard at a scale beyond one isolated building. This effort will
enable designing future mitigation measures that dissipate seismic energy and
deformation simultaneously to improve performance at a system level.