* 1454334
* CAREER: Biofluid Dynamics of the Human Breast: Characterization and Fluid-Structure Interaction
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Fatemeh Hassanipour, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 558,019.00

1454334&lt;br/&gt;Hassanipour&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER
proposal is to study lactation in the human breast from a fluid dynamics point
of view, considering the flow of milk as flow through a porous medium with
flexible structure. Despite the scientific importance and impact on public
health, bio-transport processes in the human breast have not been
comprehensively studied, and are currently not well-understood. This is the
white space that the current proposal aims to cover, with potential impact on
the lives of millions of people. Success of the project can enable biomedical
devise design and diagnosis of health conditions related to the female breast.
This project has the potential for high rewards, since it can open up a
completely new area of research. The societal and economic impact of
understanding fundamentally the fluid-structure interaction in the human breast
can be very significant, ranging from effective drug delivery to health
condition diagnosis and the design of medical devises resolving lactation
difficulties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is proposing to use state-of-the-art
experiments and simulations to understand the bio-transport behavior of the
ductal system of the human breast. Advanced imaging and 3D printing techniques
are going to be used to obtain realistic images of the pore structure within
human breasts and then to manufacture prototypes for laboratory and
computational investigation of the flow. The breast-infant interaction and the
boundary effects of infant suckling will also be investigated. The proposed
research activities are further integrated with an educational component
including course development, and K-12 outreach activities that are a
continuation of PI's past work with high-school students.