* 1454425
* CAREER: Functional annotation of mitochondrial carrier proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Christian Metallo, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2020
* USD 542,000.00

1454425&lt;br/&gt;Metallo, Christian M.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
proposal applies engineering approaches to generate fundamental knowledge
describing how mitochondria function within intact mammalian cells. Mitochondria
serve as both the powerhouse and chemical processing plants in virtually all
higher organisms on earth, supplying the energy and building blocks necessary
for life. Defects in mitochondria contribute to numerous diseases that include
diabetes, cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, and aging. Despite their central
importance in energy metabolism and physiology, several aspects of mitochondrial
function remain unknown. For example, we still do not know how many important
nutrients and chemicals enter and exit the mitochondria where they are broken
down or synthesized. Control of such processes using drugs could treat numerous
diseases. This proposal will address such questions by engineering and modeling
advanced cell systems to study mitochondrial metabolism. This research will
generate fundamental knowledge that can be used to improve human health, disease
outcomes, drug development, and nutrition. The metabolic physiology research
will also be integrated with an educational program that stimulates student and
educator interest in biochemical engineering, biochemistry, and medicine. To
accomplish this goal development of a lab-based program with a local high school
is proposed to expose students to bioengineering research and its application to
human physiology, relating yeast metabolism to human diseases such as cancer and
diabetes. In addition a web-based interactive tool will be developed to enhance
the ability of higher level students and researchers to learn biochemistry and
metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to identify new targets for
selectively controlling substrate utilization in eukaryotes in the context of
human disease and metabolic engineering applications. The interplay between
mitochondria and eukaryotic cells is one of the most important symbiotic
relationships on earth. Despite the extensive studies on mitochondrial structure
and metabolic activity conducted over the last century, the identity and
function of numerous mitochondrial components remains a mystery. Stable isotope
tracing and systems-based metabolic flux analysis (MFA) provide the most
effective means of quantifying cellular physiology in lower organisms, but
application to more complex species is complicated by compartmentalization. The
investigator developed a new approach for tracing metabolic pathways in specific
subcellular compartments such as the mitochondria and cytosol. In the first
objective within the proposed project this technique will be exploited to
develop a comprehensive, compartmentalized model of eukaryotic metabolism and
cellular redox potential. Cellular engineering strategies will be applied to
functionally annotate the genes/proteins that transport metabolites into and out
of mitochondria. These engineered cells will ultimately be characterized using
the model developed in the first objective. These results will significantly
advance the functional understanding of eukaryotic cell metabolism and improve
the ability of clinicians and engineers to control mitochondrial function. This
research program will be integrated into a broader educational theme that aims
to educate students, teachers, and the public on biochemistry and metabolism.
This educational plan includes efforts to (i) highlight the impact of STEM
fields and in particular engineering approaches on human health, industry, and
the environment; (ii) initiate a lab-based program with a local high school to
expose students to bioengineering research and its relevance to human
physiology; (iii) develop a web-based learning tool as part of our senior design
course to promote and accelerate the learning of metabolic pathway
interconnectivity by students and researchers. These research and education
activities will also provide training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the
Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-
funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biology.