* 1454691
* CAREER: Short-Wavelength Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Laser Arrays Using Nonpolar and Semipolar GaN
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Daniel Feezell, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 02/29/2020
* USD 500,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to demonstrate the first short-wavelength (blue and green) vertical-
cavity surface-emitting laser (VCSEL) arrays with stable and predictable light
polarization. The approach will use an innovative fabrication process to address
issues with GaN-based materials that have previously limited the output power,
wavelength range, and functionality of short-wavelength VCSELs. Fundamental
challenges that have prevented systematic control of light polarization in
VCSELs will be overcome with novel materials growth processes. The realization
of short-wavelength VCSELs with stable and predictable light polarization will
enable unique applications in high-density optical data storage, high-resolution
printing, lighting, displays, projectors, miniature atomic clocks, and
chemical/biological sensing that are not easily accomplished with conventional
edge-emitting lasers. To address a variety of polarization-sensitive
applications that require higher-power light emitters, the devices will be
formed into polarization-pinned arrays. The educational and outreach components
are aimed at promoting interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines and developing scientific literacy at the
undergraduate and K-12 levels. These activities are focused on working with
underrepresented students, including Native Americans, Hispanics, and women.
Specific educational objectives are to collaborate with the Southwestern Indian
Polytechnic Institute on an education and outreach program, continue mentoring
activities for underrepresented populations and local K-12 teachers, and develop
a combined undergraduate/graduate course in fabrication techniques for
optoelectronic devices.

The unique material properties of nonpolar and semipolar orientations of Gallium
nitride (GaN) will be combined with a novel flip-chip fabrication scheme to
enable the first polarization-pinned GaN-based VCSEL arrays and the first
semipolar GaN-based green VCSELs. The novel fabrication scheme utilizes band-
gap-selective photoelectrochemical etching to remove the growth substrate,
enable high-reflectance dielectric distributed Bragg reflector mirrors, and
provide fine control of the cavity length. The nonpolar and semipolar GaN
platform exhibits large and highly anisotropic optical gain, which provides a
simple method to achieve polarization pinning in short wavelength GaN-based
VCSELs. When combined, these approaches enable blue and green VCSEL arrays that
are applicable to polarization-sensitive optical systems and provide orders-of-
magnitude higher output powers than single VCSELs. An output power of 50 mW from
a 10x10 element nonpolar blue VCSEL array is set as an initial target. The
thorough study of nonpolar and semipolar VCSELs will generate new fundamental
knowledge about the correlations between polarization-pinning with band
structure, higher-order modes, gain-cavity resonance offset, and operating
conditions. The polarization, spectral purity, and noise properties of
individual devices as well as arrays will be investigated with confocal
microscopy and correlated to the material and device properties. Finally, the
first investigation of band-gap-selective photoelectrochemical etching on
semipolar GaN may reveal new fundamental materials phenomena and be applicable
to other semipolar light-emitting devices.