* 1454218
* CAREER: Optimization Based Methods for Robust Pattern Recognition in Time-Series Data
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Vishal Monga, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This research proposes new mathematical and algorithmic tools for identifying
patterns in and effectively mining time-series data, i.e. a sequence of data
points, measured typically at successive time instants spaced at uniform time
intervals. A large variety of real-world data sources such as speech and audio,
biomedical signals, health care records, network-traffic and stock market data
etc. manifest as time-series and their analysis is of significant interest to
both government and industry. The explosion of such data sources has only been
exacerbated by the digital revolution, viz. the generous amount of audio-video
streams on the internet, the storage of large amounts of chronological health
care records in electronic databases and the continuous generation of new time-
series data from advances in sensing. Automated software tools that can find
patterns in a large time-series sequence, help in fast and scalable retrieval,
and categorize large time-series collections are hence highly desirable. The
proposed research is in developing such software (algorithmic)tools with a
particular focus on robustness and scalability. The problem of robustness refers
to the fact that time-series that may have the "same appeal" to a human
consumer, e.g. different versions of the same song/video, may not necessarily be
digitally identical. Hence, robust techniques are needed that can withstand
distortions which do not change the essence of the time-series content.
Scalability requires that the pattern-matching techniques be fast and easy to
implement, so that the solutions can be deployed to mine large collections.
Further, to prepare the next generation of engineers in electrical engineering
and computer science, the project includes a strong educational component. At
the heart of this educational component is an edutainment game where a human
player, i.e. students with varying levels of academic preparation (high-school,
undergraduate and graduate), compete against a computer algorithm in a video
piracy challenge. The game is aimed at making the learning process more
interactive, particularly for undergraduate students.

A serious practical challenge in mining time-series data for emerging
applications is the ability to withstand distortions - that is often instances
of the "same underlying" time series are observed under noise, amplitude and/or
time scaling and other miscellaneous operations. Many existing techniques for
time-series comparisons do not enable distortion robustness and the ones that
do, often come at a substantial computational cost. Further, existing
algorithmic techniques enable control of key properties of time-series features
such as robustness and uniqueness only at an intuitive, often heuristic level.
The proposed research advocates judicious selection of time-series extrema and
aims to break the classical trade-off between computational efficiency in time-
series feature extraction and comparison vs. enabling robustness to distortions.
Unlike existing methods, which employ pre-processing time-series filters
"inspired" from intuition, explicit optimization of the filter is proposed in
the sense of cost functions that capture key feature attributes such as
robustness and uniqueness of the extracted extrema. Optimal extrema extraction
will be investigated in two different setups: a.) a deterministic framework
where example training time-series are used in the optimization, and b.) a
statistical framework where stochastic models on time-series are used. A variety
of related sub-problems also emerge, namely: a.) connections to edge detection
problems in image processing and vision, b.) encoding and comparisons of time-
series extrema, and c.) extensions to finding robust extrema under non-linear
operations on the time-series. The research plan is to juxtapose the development
of the algorithmic tools with two real-world applications: 1.) multimedia
fingerprinting, and 2.) bio-medical time series analysis. Additionally, software
tools namely edutainment games will be developed based on these applications
which will play a crucial role in enhancing the PI's research and classroom
teaching. Dissemination of research results will be done via articles in leading
Journals and conferences, and via online MATLAB software toolboxes.