* 1454105
* CAREER:  Ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy of chemical dynamics in ionic liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Sean Garrett-Roe, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2020
* USD 698,152.00

In this CAREER award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Sean A. Garrett-Roe of
the University of Pittsburgh and his post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate
student colleagues are conducting experimental studies of the unique ways that
substances behave when they are dissolved in ionic liquids. Ionic liquids are a
unique class of materials, essentially a salt that is molten at very low
temperatures. These ionic liquids show promise as replacements for organic
solvents, but their molecular behavior remains poorly understood. These studies
help to inform scientists who are using ionic liquids, and may eventually lead
to industrial solvents with improved properties. Post-doctoral, graduate and
undergraduate students working on this project receive world-class training in
ultrafast laser science, while working on a compelling chemical problem with
real-world impact. Part of this CAREER program is also focused on a number of
education projects, including the development of guided-inquiry curriculum
materials and actual hands-on research to introduce undergraduates to an
authentic research experience in the first two years of College. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Sean A. Garrett-Roe and his research group uses ultrafast, two-
dimensional infrared spectroscopy to probe the transient structures that are
present in interactions between solute molecules and ionic liquid solvents. The
specific studies include: (1) carbon dioxide uptake in ionic liquids; (2)
partitioning between nanoscopic domains of organic and organic azides; (3) the
measurement of solvent friction in intramolecular proton transfer reactions. The
young researchers working on this project receive excellent technical training
in laser science and cutting edge optical methods. In the educational projects
of this CAREER award, Prof. Garrett-Roe and his students develop curriculum
materials on the structure and dynamics of simple liquids for incorporation into
the undergraduate (guided inquiry) curriculum, a structured way of introducing
early-career undergraduates to scientific research. Prof. Garrett-Roe also
participates in the University of Pittsburgh's FER (First Experiences in
Research) Program, which recruits from first- and second-year undergraduates.