* 1454077
* Emphasis Year in Geometric Analysis at Northwestern University
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Aaron Naber, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2015
* USD 48,950.00

Emphasis Year in Geometric Analysis at Northwestern, April 1, 2015 - March 31,
2016, Northwestern University, Evanston IL. This grant is for a four-day
workshop and a seven-day summer school at Northwestern University on the topic
of geometric analysis, with the goals of training junior mathematicians in the
field and stimulating new research. Geometric analysis is the study of
differential equations on geometric spaces, such as the equations of Einstein
which describe gravitation in terms of the curvature of space-time. The four-day
workshop, to be held in May 2015, will feature 18 talks by experts on the topic
of Ricci curvature, a central object in geometric analysis. The summer school,
to be held in July 2015, will include six introductory mini-courses on various
topics within geometric analysis, aimed at graduate students and recent PhDs.
Grant funds will be used primarily for the travel costs of attendees who are
graduate students or postdoctoral scholars at US institutions. The organizing
committee will seek broad and diverse participation in these activities, and
will especially encourage the participation of women mathematicians and members
of other under-represented groups. More information on these events, which are
part of an Emphasis Year in Geometric Analysis at Northwestern, can be found on
the website: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.math.northwestern.edu/emphasisGA/
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last few decades, Ricci curvature has emerged as a
central concept in several branches of geometric analysis, including: Riemannian
geometry and geometric flows; limits of Riemannian manifolds; complex geometry
and Kahler-Einstein metrics; metric measure spaces and optimal transport. The
four-day Workshop on Ricci Curvature will bring together experts on all of these
topics, in order to educate the next generation of geometric analysts, stimulate
new ideas and create new research collaborations. The seven-day Summer School in
Geometric Analysis will feature mini-courses on six important and overlapping
areas of geometric analysis: the mean curvature flow; the Ricci flow; Ricci
curvature; the Kahler-Ricci flow; the complex Monge-Ampere equation; and
geodesics in the space of Kahler metrics. These courses will be given by experts
in the field and will be aimed at graduate students and postdoctoral scholars
with the goal of bringing them up to the forefront of research in geometric
analysis.