* 1454379
* CAREER: Rational Engineering of an Ionic Liquid Tolerant Cellulase Cocktail
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Joel Kaar, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2021
* USD 579,996.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Joel L. Kaar&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
1454379&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Colorado at
Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of various renewable biomass materials as
an alternate source of energy is an important focus of research today. Cellulose
is an organic compound, a polysaccharide consisting of a linear chain of several
hundred to many thousands of linked D-glucose units. Cellulose is an important
structural component of the primary cell wall of among others, green plants and
many forms of algae. For example, the cellulose content of wood is 40 to 50%.
Cellulase is any of several enzymes produced chiefly by fungi, bacteria, and
protozoans that catalyze cellulolysis, the decomposition of cellulose and of
some related polysaccharides. Cellulases break down the cellulose molecule into
monosaccharides ("simple sugars") such as beta-glucose, or shorter
polysaccharides and oligosaccharides. The emergence of ionic liquids (ILs -
salt-like substances that melt at ambient temperature) as alternative solvents
for the dissolution of biomass presents considerable opportunities for the
conversion of cellulosic materials. Of particular interest, with the appropriate
selection of cation and anion, ILs can be rationally tuned to dissolve high
concentrations of untreated crystalline cellulose. The formation of hydrogen
bonds between the IL and cellulose disrupts the internal hydrogen bonding
network that causes cellulose chains to pack tightly together. In addition to
lowering the degree of crystallinity of cellulose, select ILs can loosen the
matrix components within biomass that add to the overall recalcitrance of
cellulose. Furthermore, due to the thermal stability and non-volatile nature of
ILs, ILs constitute and environmentally attractive solution to the need for
cleaner media for cellulose processing. Conventional solvents used to dissolve
cellulose, which contain inorganic salts, acids, bases, and metal complexes, are
largely toxic and environmentally polluting. However, the attractive properties
of ILs are negated by the broad inactivation of cellulases in these solvents.
Consequently, for ILs to be fully exploited for processing whole biomass, the
solvent effects of ILs on cellulases needs to be
mediated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this integrated research and teaching
project is to develop an approach to enhance the tolerance of cellulases to
ionic liquids (ILs) for biomass processing via engineering enzyme charge. The
research will specifically test the hypothesis that changing the surface charge
of cellulases by site-directed mutagenesis can mediate interactions with ILs,
which impact cellulase stability. As solvents for cellulosic materials, ILs
present considerable opportunities due to their auspicious properties, including
the unique capacity to solubilize large amounts of biomass. In this project, the
impact of altering enzyme charge on the denaturation of cellulase by ILs will be
directly probed by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations with unprecedented resolution. This impact will be
investigated while using site-directed mutagenesis to alter the charge of the
well-characterized endoglucanase EI from Acidothermus cellulolyticus,
exoglucanase CbhA from Clostridium thermocellum, and beta-glucosidase JMB19063
GH3. Additionally, the role of surface electrostatics on the prevention of
cellulase inhibition by insoluble matrix components in the conversion of whole
biomass will be elucidated. The specific research objectives are to: 1) identify
sites in EI, CbhA, and GH3 that are structurally perturbed by ILs by NMR and MD,
2) rationally design and test EI, CbhA, and GH3 variants with altered surface
charge for improved tolerance to IL-induced inactivation, and 3) characterize
the effect of site-directed charge mutations on non-productive lignin adsorption
to EI, CbhA, and GH3. The educational objectives are to: 1) promote research
opportunities for local high school students through involvement in Boulder
Valley School District Research Seminar Program, 2) create opportunities for
undergraduate research via growth of iGEM program, and 3) create and implement
laboratory modules on biocatalysis for undergraduate curriculum.