* 1454166
* CAREER: Enabling clean energy: assessing criticality of byproduct metals
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2021
* Gabrielle Gaustad, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 541,083.00

1454166 (Gaustad). Global fossil fuel dependence and unprecedented greenhouse
gas emissions have led to increasing attention on alternatives for electricity
production, energy storage, and personal transportation. However, while there is
promise in a variety of clean energy technologies for reducing these burdens, it
is critical to fully comprehend supply chain risks for new clean energy
technologies and the criticality of their materials in order to ensure that new
issues are not being substituted for old ones. One specific challenge in
understanding the criticality of several clean energy technologies arises from
the prevalence of byproduct mining in these materials systems. Specifically, key
materials are mined and produced only as a byproduct of another material system,
also historically referred to as "daughter mining" in minerals extraction and
metallurgical processing literature. Many of these byproduct material systems
have relevancy to the clean energy sector via their use in thin-film
photovoltaics, as magnets in wind turbines, and within batteries for electric
vehicles. This research will focus on three representative case studies: the Cu-
Te system, the Al-Ga system, and the Fe-Nd system. The systems modeling
methodological framework to be developed can be applied to other byproduct
material systems as well. The overarching goal of the educational activities is
to feed a pipeline from elementary to graduate school with underrepresented
students who will have an interest in the STEM disciplines. This will be
accomplished by targeting specific age groups of female and minority students
and engaging them in research. The broader impacts from this work include: 1)
reducing the environmental impacts of energy use by enabling clean energy
technologies, 2) promoting diversity in the STEM disciplines, 3) supporting
multi-disciplinary research, and 4) enhancing public, K-12, and graduate
education and awareness in broader sustainability and criticality issues.
Specific public outreach events are planned (Imagine RIT and Greentopia). This
grant will provide funding for two K-12 educational activities: a research
internship for a disadvantaged high school junior via the ACS SEED program and
to demonstrate research findings for a middle school girls camps (WE@RIT).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will focus on supply-demand complications of
byproduct mining and understanding the overall criticality of material systems
impacting clean energy technologies. Dynamic material flow analysis and scenario
simulation will be used to understand how byproduct mining impacts the supply
chain. Current supply-demand modeling methods are unable to include carrier
metal-byproduct metal material system interactions. Integration of demand
forecasts and supply projections will be used to pinpoint supply gap onset
conditions. These results will be used to assess dynamic criticality metrics.
Current criticality metrics focus on physical scarcity quantification; they do
not take into account supply disruptions that may be caused by the carrier
system. A fundamental change in these metrics will be developed by broadening
them to include economic and environmental implications as well. These enhanced,
novel metrics will be used to inform policy that can incentivize strategies for
mitigating supply disruption issues.