* 1454737
* CAREER: Driving the Future: Models and Control Methods to Coordinate Fleets of Self-Driving Vehicles in Future Transportation Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Marco Pavone, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project advances
scientific knowledge on the modeling, analysis, and control of robotic networks
consisting of unmanned vehicles autonomously operating in a coordinated fashion
to fulfill service requests such as the transportation of people or goods. To
work efficiently, such systems must overcome allocation and scheduling
challenges that, in practice, can create backups, unacceptable wait times, and
detrimental cascade effects. This project will cast the problem within the
framework of spatial queuing theory, and investigate theoretical models and
real-time control methods to optimally allocate vehicles to service requests.
Theory and control algorithms will be applied for the design, system-wide
control, and economic assessment of autonomous mobility-on-demand systems. Such
systems represent a transformative, rapidly developing mode of transportation
where electric, self-driving shuttles transport urban passengers and provide a
mobility option to people unable or unwilling to drive. The results of this
project will benefit the U.S. economy by fostering clean and efficient future
transportation systems and addressing 21st century mobility needs. More broadly,
this research is applicable to a large class of robotic coordination problems
and will positively impact several critical sectors including automated supply
chains and logistics and national security. Experiments on full-scale autonomous
shuttles will help broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
research and catalyze engineering education on cyber-physical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current methods for controlling robotic networks are
limited, particularly with respect to predictive accuracy and control synthesis
with formal performance guarantees. Spatial queuing theory considers dynamic
systems consisting of (i) spatially-localized queues that collect service
requests generated by an exogenous dynamical process, and (ii) robotic service
vehicles traveling among queues in a given network topology. As such, spatial
queuing theory models a large variety of robotic coordination problems, with
autonomous mobility-on-demand systems as a relevant example. The project will
advance knowledge in the field by leveraging recent algorithmic techniques from
stochastic network optimization to generate provably-correct tools for the
modeling, analysis, and control of spatial queuing systems of increasing
complexity and realism. Specifically, this award supports fundamental research
to 1) advance the theory of spatial queuing systems, by devising methods for
tractable analyses in complex setups, 2) generate control methods with
performance guarantees for the optimal assignment of robotic vehicles to service
requests, and 3) apply theory and control methods to the control of autonomous
mobility-on-demand systems, through case studies and the deployment of
algorithms on full scale test beds.