* 1454304
* CAREER: A Multifaceted Approach for Manipulation and Investigation of Quantum Phases and Phase Transitions in Prototypical 2-D Metallic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2022
* Utpal Chatterjee, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 528,507.00

Non-Technical Explanation: Commonly, materials undergo phase transitions due to
change in temperature. A typical example is the transformation of water into ice
at zero degrees Celsius. There are also examples of phase transitions, which are
controlled solely by non-thermal parameters such as pressure, magnetic field,
and compositional disorder. A complete characterization of the key principles
behind quantum phase transitions (QPTs) is yet to be accomplished in two-
dimensional (2-D) metallic systems, which is believed to be crucial to the
realization of intriguing behaviors in various materials of fundamental interest
and potential technological import such as cuprate and pnictide high temperature
superconductors, ruthenates and heavy fermions. This research project aims at
fundamental studies of QPTs in model systems by incorporating a set of
complementary experimental techniques. In accordance to its strong commitment to
the development of world-class science, technology, engineering and mathematics
workforce in the country, this project, in addition to supporting the PhD
studies of a graduate student, provides hands-on, research-based, education to
undergraduate students at an early stage and local high school students through
summer internship. The synergy fostered by this project's integration of
education into research is also anticipated to accomplish an important task:
preparing the next generation of scientists in the field of synchrotron-based
research in the United States. Further education and outreach endeavors of this
project comprise development of web based educational materials pertaining to
advanced materials characterization techniques for non-experts and broader
dissemination of the research activities of the PI's group through lecture-
demonstrations, targeted at local non-scientific
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Comprehensive
experimental investigations of quantum phase transitions (QPTs) in the phase
diagrams of two-dimensional (2-D) metallic systems, in general, are rather
intricate. This is mostly because the subtle interplay of competing interactions
in these systems often shrouds the relevant quantum critical points stymieing
direct experimental access to their quantum criticality. In order to address
this issue, this research project adopts a straightforward approach: (i) finds a
simple model system with a well defined ordered state, (ii) continuously tunes
critical temperature of this state to zero by changing certain non-thermal
parameter, and (iii) directly measures changes in various physical properties
along with the pertinent order parameter through the quantum critical point. The
systems of interest for the current studies are a set of layered transition
metal dichalcogenides, namely 2H-NbSe2, 2H-TaS2 and 2H-TaSe2, which possess
simple crystal and electronic structures. Each of these compounds exhibits a
well defined phase transition via the formation of waves in space with
alternating regions of higher and lower density of charges, known as a charge
density wave (CDW). Moreover, their CDW transition temperatures can continuously
be tuned to zero through various non-thermal processes. In the first avenue of
research, CDW orders of these compounds are to be melted quantum mechanically
via methodical introduction of electronic and structural disorders in single
crystal samples of these materials. In the second line of research, the
thickness of single crystal samples are to be gradually diminished transforming
them eventually into few- to single-layer thick crystals. Using a combination of
Angle Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction and electrical
resistivity measurements, critical insights into quantum criticality and quantum
phase transitions in 2-D systems are to be attained by (a) unveiling evolution
of structural, electrical and electronic properties of these materials along
with their CDW order parameters through quantum critical points in temperature-
disorder phase diagram, and (b) investigating the impact of quantum confinement
on CDW instability and phase transition in few- to single-layer thick samples.
In this context, exact theoretical treatment of quantum criticality in metals is
highly challenging because one needs to take into account both single particle
excitations and order parameter fluctuations in the same footing. The proposed
integration of structural, spectroscopic and transport probes in this project
provides a unique opportunity to do so experimentally. Furthermore, this project
provides a well-defined methodology to investigate the role of complex disorders
on electronic and structural properties of a physical system. This is at the
heart of developing materials, which exhibit strongly enhanced responses to
external stimuli, useful in energy as well as in device applications.