* 1454559
* CAREER: Envisioning Integrated Wastewater Management through the Lens of Reverse Logistics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Qiong Zhang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 501,886.00

1454559 (Zhang). Increasing water demand, accompanied by water scarcity and the
likely impact of climate change on water supplies, has created complex
challenges for sustainable water management, demonstrating the need for
integrated wastewater management that promotes and facilitates resource
recovery. This research aims to determine the optimal sustainable configurations
for integrated wastewater management under a given context through an innovative
decision framework that integrates multi-discipline methods and tools and
context-based learning. The objectives of this research are to (1) innovate a
decision framework, WasteWATER, that integrates methods and tools from multiple
disciplines including reverse logistics, life cycle analysis, and economic
valuation; (2) examine the impact of demographics, geography, climate, and urban
form on the optimal degree of decentralization; and (3) create context-based
learning to train future practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WasteWATER
framework considers wastewater systems as a reverse supply network in which
nodes are treatment facilities, pumping stations, and pipe junctions and links
are pipelines. The framework uses compact model formulation through unique
process and distribution pipeline mode representation. Triple bottom line
sustainability indicators (specific net present value, carbon footprint,
eutrophication, and social value of recovered resources) are formulated in the
objective function to optimize the trade-off and identify the most sustainable
configuration of integrated wastewater systems. Placement-based and hypothetical
scenarios will be generated and simulated to identify the factors impacting the
optimal degree of decentralization. The Conceive-Design-Implement-Operate (CDIO)
approach will be used to develop a web application of the WasteWATER framework
and redesign two existing engineering courses using microblogging and utility
partnerships as a stakeholder communication platform. The CDIO learning outcomes
will be evaluated using several assessment methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past
research has identified that a primary challenge for integrated wastewater
management is the lack of a planning and design methodology to evaluate and
identify the most sustainable solution under a given context. This project
addresses this critical challenge and will advance knowledge in (1) quantifying
the sustainability of integrated wastewater systems driven by resource recovery;
(2) understanding factors that impact the degree of decentralization; and (3)
effectiveness of context-based learning environment for students' proficiency in
disciplinary knowledge, interpersonal skills, and product, process, and system
building skills. The project also will develop a new framework through the
perspective of reverse logistics, a web tool, and a microblogging communication
platform for stakeholder participation. Realization of integrated wastewater
management will provide societal benefits that enhance community well-being in
terms of reliable water supply, resource conservation, environmental
restoration, and regional and local economic development. The project will
leverage support from the Alfred P. Sloan Minority Ph.D. program to recruit and
support under-represented minority graduate students. The research and education
activities will be woven together to provide a context-based learning
environment to train postdoc, graduate and undergraduate students. Stakeholder
participation and wide dissemination of research and education findings and
products will be achieved through microblogging, a web tool, and utility
partnerships.