* 1454365
* CAREER: Structure-Functional Imaging of the Atrial Myocardium
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Christine Hendon, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 500,000.00

PI: Hendon, Christine Proposal: 1454365

Atrial fibrillation (AF), the most common type of arrhythmia, is characterized
by quivering of the atria due to unorganized electrical activity. Those with AF
run the risk of stroke due to blood clots developed in the atria or heart
failure from lack of pumped blood. This proposal focuses on improving ablation
techniques used to treat atrial fibrillation through the addition of optical
imaging systems. If successful, this would be the first real time imaging tool
capable of assisting in this very common surgical procedure. The Educational
Plan emphasizes activities designed to recruit more women and minority students
into graduate level engineering program. The PIs will integrate this platform
into their signal processing and instrumentation courses.

The proposal focuses on improving ablation techniques used to treat atrial
fibrillation through the addition of an optical imaging system using Optical
Coherence Tomography (OCT) and near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) to characterize
fiber orientation and tissue composition, measure ablation depth, and determine
if such information, along with functional electrical analysis, can be used to
produce more efficacious lesions, i.e., ones that are not unnecessarily large or
do not have to be redone. The PI will bring her expertise in optics and signal
processing to bear on assessing therapy of atrial fibrillation using
radiofrequency ablation. Using NIRS should provide a highly useful method for
assessing RFA lesions. Preliminary data confirm that polarization sensitive OCT
can detect fiber orientation, a key physiological parameter in assessing tissue
functionality. The results show good potential for distinguishing healthy
myocardium from fibrotic tissue.

This award is co-funded by the Biophotonics program (CBET) in the Engineering
Directorate and the Communications, Circuits, & Sensing Systems (ECCS) in the
Engineering Directorate.