* 1454104
* CAREER: Modeling Materials Across the Length Scales to Achieve Enhanced Thermomechanical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Julian Rimoli, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will focus on the
formulation of efficient models and numerical schemes for understanding the
length-dependent thermomechanical response of materials with rich
microstructures. While extensive research has been conducted on the impact of
characteristic microstructural length scales on thermal and mechanical
properties of materials, little is known about the effect that length scale
could have on the combined thermomechanical response. This research effort will
provide modeling and computational capabilities for the analysis of next-
generation materials with improved thermomechanical performance as needed for
the most demanding engineering applications, including but not limited to,
thermal barrier coatings for energy generation and propulsion, wear protection
systems, and packaging of microelectronic devices. The educational component of
this project will focus on promoting interest in STEM careers among Latino K-12
students through the development and implementation of a summer camp introducing
participants to engineering and mechanics. The camp will adopt an interactive
learning approach through the use of a simulation-based educational game for
mobile platforms developed by the PI, and allow the realization of structures by
3D printing. The effectiveness of this educational approach will be evaluated,
and the curriculum developed for the camp will be widely
disseminated.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research is to
elucidate the connections between microstructural length scales and material
inherent length scales in relation to the thermomechanical response of
engineering materials. The model consists of (i) a sub-micron scale model for
the thermal conductivity based on the Boltzmann transport equation under the
relaxation time approximation, (ii) a Fourier heat transport model at the
mesoscale, (iii) a continuum model of mechanical deformation that explicitly
resolves the microscopic geometric features of the material, and (iv) a cohesive
model that accounts for the nucleation and propagation of quasistatic and
dynamic cracks in the material. The model will then be utilized to study the
following fundamental questions: How does grain size and grain size distribution
affect the nucleation of thermal cracks for the steady state and dynamic
thermomechanical problem? In the latter case, how is the nucleation of thermal
cracks affected by applied temperature rates and length scale? What is the
effect of length-scale and thermal cracks on macroscopic material strength,
thermal conductivity, and thermal expansion? How does grading of the
characteristic length scale of the material affect thermal conductivity and
crack nucleation? This project will enable the PI to perform sustained research
in this new area, creating the basis for a long-term career success.