* 1454411
* CAREER: Mixed-Signal Photonic Integrated Circuits for Energy-Efficient High-Speed Data Interfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Vishal Saxena, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 02/28/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal No.: 1454411 CAREER: Mixed Signal Photonics Integrated Circuits for
Energy-Efficient High-Speed Data Interfaces Vishal Saxena (Boise State
University)

Abstract: This research harnesses photonics to satisfy ever-growing government,
industry, and consumer needs for data bandwidth, while significantly reducing
the increasingly voracious energy footprint that accompanies Internet cloud use.
Photonics uses light instead of electronics to perform a variety of functions
such as information processing and transfer. While most of us still work in
offices and meet friends in person, mobile and networking device capability has
enabled massive online business and social transaction growth. The Internet and
its cloud-based services are used for production systems, banking,
entertainment, social interaction, information distribution and research.
Resulting information accumulation is fueling the rise of "big data," as well as
the powerful correlation tools that help analysts spot financial trends, prevent
diseases, combat crime and improve quality of research. More and more, we put
content in the cloud for easy access from anywhere and at any time, with data
growing exponentially. All this data transfer uses a surprising amount of
energy. To reduce data center energy consumption while increasing data capacity
by over ten fold, this research will investigate novel hybrid data communication
interfaces, using light rather than electrons to process and transfer data at
higher speeds. The potentially explosive increase in data rates enabled by these
hybrid photonic interconnects could lead to several transformative applications,
such as future exascale data centers, terabit speed local area networks, and
massively-parallel computing for big data applications. These hybrid photonic
interconnects will not only have a broad impact on the semiconductor industry,
but also US energy sustainability and security, as more energy-efficient
computing systems would reduce carbon footprint of the Internet cloud. Further,
to prepare students for the workforce with the necessary skills to drive future
technology, the project includes a strong educational component. Interactive
learning methods will be employed to teach electronic circuits and to bring
photonics to integrated circuit design. The project also incorporates a high
school outreach program, with an annual Smart Environments for Sustainability-
themed one-week summer camp for high school students that commits to fostering
women and minority group representation in integrated circuit design.

Technology development leveraging integrated photonic circuits and optical
interconnects has thus far largely focused on binary communication using silicon
photonic modulators. To enable future optical interconnects for higher data
rates and energy-efficiency, researchers must reconsider the hybrid integrated
circuit paradigm. An important technology enabler is the high-speed signal
processing capability of integrated photonic devices. The research approach will
first be to develop a photonic design kit with standard cell libraries and
compact models to enable large scale integration of photonic devices into hybrid
integrated circuits. Researchers will employ photonic device high-speed optical
domain signal processing into novel circuit configurations, exploit synergistic
interaction between electronic and photonic components, and form a mixed-signal
photonic architecture. Next, to exploit photonics beyond binary interconnects;
researchers will develop novel mixed-signal photonic data converters, which they
will use to demonstrate an advanced modulation transceiver architecture that is
scalable to terabits per second data rates with order-of-magnitude lower energy
consumption. Research outcomes will empower integrated circuit researchers by
equipping them with a new photonics expertise to tackle nano-scaled technology
design challenges, where data transfer bottlenecks constrain system performance.
The photonic design kit will lower industry barriers to help facilitate
photonics adoption into integrated circuits; resulting mixed-signal photonic
data converter architectures will set a new paradigm by achieving greater than
10 GHz sampling rates with significantly reduced energy consumption over
existing complementary metal?oxide?semiconductor (CMOS)-only architectures.
Researchers will broadly disseminate project results by developing online
educational material for a new CMOS photonics integrated circuit design graduate
course, and through international journals and conferences.