* 1454089
* CAREER: Hydroclimatic Response to Natural and Anthropogenic Land Cover Change over South America: A Focus on the La Plata River Basin
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Francina Dominguez, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2021
* USD 574,123.00

This research is an effort to understand the influence of land cover change on
the hydroclimatology of the La Plata River Basin (LPRB). The LPRB is the second
largest hydrological basin in South America after the Amazon, at about a third
the size of the continental US. The weather and climate of the region is
dominated by the South American monsoon system (SAMS), in which summer (December
to February) rains are fed by moisture which enters the continent in the
equatorial trade winds, crosses the Amazon, and is transported to the LPRB by
the South American low level jet. Over the course of this route the moisture can
fall as rain and be returned to the atmosphere through evapotranspiration
multiple times, a process referred to as moisture recycling. Previous work by
the PI and others suggests that 60 to 70 percent of the mean annual
precipitation over the LPRB comes from evapotranspiration from the South
American landmass, with about 24 percent coming from local evapotranspiration
over the LPRB. Since the land surface is an important source of moisture for
precipitation, soil moisture anomalies can become persistent as they lead to
further reductions in precipitation. In addition, land surface conditions can
affect precipitation through their influence on the thermodynamic structure of
the lower atmosphere, which can modulate atmospheric circulation and stability.
The key role of land-atmosphere coupling in the LPRB suggests that changes in
land cover could have significant impacts on the local hydroclimate. The PI
notes that there has been intensive deforestation in the region, with perhaps
the highest deforestation rate in the world for the period 2000 to 2012, thus it
is of interest to understand how deforestation is affecting the monsoon system
in the region. More specifically, the PI seeks to understand the relative
impacts of moisture recycling and thermodynamic/dynamic land-atmosphere
feedbacks on South American precipitation patterns. One hypothesis to be pursued
is that the strongest land-atmosphere interactions occur during the late spring
and early summer season in association with the SAMS, with a spatial pattern
that highlights the transition regions linking the tropics and subtropics.
Another is that the thermodynamic/dynamic effects are more important than
changes in precipitation recycling in determining the interannual variability of
LPRB precipitation. But the PI also hypothesizes that projected future
deforestation in South America would change the relative importance of moisture
recycling and thermodynamic/dynamic effects, and the shift would be accompanied
by significant reductions in LPRB precipitation. The research will also examine
the extent to which deforestation changes the frequency and intensity of
precipitation. In addition, the project will consider how these feedbacks may
change under projected future changes in land surface
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda is built around three
tools, a statistical approach known as the generalized equilibrium feedback
assessment (GEFA) and two enhanced versions of the Weather and Research Forecast
(WRF) model. The statistical method is a multivariate lagged regression
technique developed to quantify feedback strength, which can be used to
determine the strength of moisture recycling on a spatially varying basis. One
version of the WRF model (WRF-WVT, previously developed by the PI) has been
augmented to include tracers used to track water vapor transport, and this
configuration can be used to determine the source regions of water vapor and
hence the contributions of transport and local evaporation to precipitation. The
model has also been modified to use ecosystem functional types (EFTs) which can
be adjusted to represent forested and agricultural land, and the model is able
to simulate the mesoscale convective systems which account for much of the
rainfall in the LPRB. The other version of WRF is WRF-hydro, a community model
which represents the subsurface component of the hydrological cycle, which the
PI claims is " particularly important over South America, as ground- water
dynamics can completely change the atmospheric fluxes".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is accompanied by an education effort in which three new courses would
be developed to give students a thorough grounding in hydroclimatology One
course focuses on hydrometeorological observations, and will give selected
students an opportunity to perform fieldwork during a 2-week period in the
summer. The fieldwork program is developed in partnership with the Center for
Western Weather and Water Extremes (CW3E) at the Scripps Istitute of
Oceanography. For the period 2015-2018 students will participate in the
Calwater2 field campaign to observe atmospheric rivers, taking measurements of
precipitation, stream flow, and soil moisture. A second course introduces
students to numerical modeling using the WRF-hydro model, and in this class
selected students travel to the National Center for Atmospheric Research during
the summer to participate in model development. A third course is developed to
teach basic hydrology to students with an atmospheric science background. This
course replaces traditional hydrology courses, in which the subject is taught
from an atmospheric science perspective. The course is intended as an
alternative to typical hydrology courses in which the focus is on issues
relating to the construction and operation of waterworks. The course attempts to
develop a unified language for the description of surface and subsurface
processes, which is analogous to the conceptual framework used for atmospheric
processes and helps students to work with models which incorporate atmosphere,
surface, and subsurface components.