* 1454543
* CAREER: Real-time Convex Optimization for High-Performance Control of Autonomous Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Behcet Acikmese, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 01/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will build
innovative mathematical and computational methods of decision making for control
of next generation high-performance autonomous systems. A broad range of
emerging technologies utilize autonomy, including self-driving vehicles,
quadrotors for delivery, search and rescue robots, mobile sensors for
environmental monitoring, climate control systems for warehouses and buildings,
automated drug dispensing, and next-generation power networks. Large-scale
deployment of autonomous systems is a critical technological leap that will
fundamentally transform our lives. Autonomous systems will maximize efficiency
and reliability. Furthermore, they will improve safety by reducing or removing
direct human involvement in hazardous tasks. However, autonomous systems present
fundamentally difficult technical challenges to go beyond the limitations of the
current state of the art in automation. This project lays the mathematical and
computational foundations for a transformative approach to autonomy, one that
makes previously impractical calculations tractable, and provides guaranteed
levels of performance and stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet fundamentally
new and distinctly challenging performance and reliability requirements, future
autonomous systems must make best possible decisions to control their actions
without a human operator in the loop. They must utilize their full performance
envelopes, while simultaneously satisfying critical mission and environmental
constraints. Consequently, mathematical optimization problems are ubiquitous in
autonomous control. Though optimization provides a powerful formulation
framework, thus far real-time optimization based control has not transitioned to
common practice due to shortcomings in the current algorithmic capabilities. To
enable real-time optimization based control, this CAREER grant will develop a
comprehensive theory of convexification -- formulation of control problems as
tractable convex optimization problems -- enabling high performance control that
is currently not achievable in many applications. Specifically, it will develop:
accurate formulations of autonomous control problems as convex optimizations;
customized numerical optimization algorithms that exploit problem structure for
extremely fast and reliable onboard computations; and rigorous verification
methods to certify the performance and robustness of the resulting autonomous
control algorithms. These advances and resulting insights will also benefit
systematic systems engineering and design for autonomous systems, high-level
autonomous mission planning, and control of autonomous multi-agent systems.
Collectively the theoretical and algorithmic products will form a strong
technical foundation allowing the transition of real-time optimization-based
control for autonomous systems into practice.