* 1454767
* CAREER: Subfactors, Tensor Categories, and Local Topological Field Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Noah Snyder, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2021
* USD 455,281.00

One of the main threads in mathematics is the study of the symmetries of an
object. Another is the study of groups, which are very important throughout
mathematics and science. The collection of all classical symmetries of an object
forms a group, and in quantum settings, a similar role is played by a
generalized version of groups called quantum groups or tensor categories. These
again appear both in science (e.g. phases of matter) and mathematics (e.g. knot
theory). One of the earliest appearances of groups was in the study of Galois
theory, where one looks at symmetries of a number system that do not move a
subsystem, and in parallel one of the earliest appearances of quantum groups was
in a similar Galois theory for von Neumann factors. The research portion of this
project focuses on the study of quantum groups and subfactors. One important
technique used to study such quantum groups is called "higher dimensional
algebra." The education and outreach portion of this project extends the
investigator's decade-long involvement in high school education at summer math
programs and more recently in education of high school math teachers. He will
develop new courses and research projects for high school students at the
Canada/USA Mathcamp based on his research, he will start a program for awarding
dissertation writing fellowships for graduate students with an established
record of extraordinary education and outreach, with a particular emphasis on
underrepresented groups, he will start a math club for mathematics education
majors, and he will supervise undergraduate research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses techniques from higher category
theory and topology to better understand the theory of tensor categories and
specific examples coming from the theory of subfactors. This will be done
through two major research programs. The first is to study the structure of
small index subfactors that the investigator classified in prior work and to
prove other classification results related to bimodules and intermediate
subfactors. The second program is to understand local topological field theories
with values the 3-category of tensor categories and related higher categories
using the insight given by the Baez-Dolan-Hopkins-Lurie cobordism hypothesis.