* 1454430
* A high-precision U-Pb age model for the Deccan Traps
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Blair Schoene, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 03/31/2017
* USD 89,136.00

A high-precision U-Pb age model for the Deccan Traps &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Asst. Prof. Blair Schoene, Princeton Univ.,
bschoene@Princeton.EDU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International and
Integrative Activities/International Science co-funded the proposal with
Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on an
international collaboration with U.S. faculty and students travelling to India
to work with their Indian collaborators, conduct fieldwork, and engage in
subsequent analysis of samples to attempt high-precision eruption dates for the
Deccan Traps and compare those dates with the independent timeline provided by
biostratigrpahy. The ~66 Ma end-Cretaceous mass extinction is the most recent
and publicly visible catastrophe in Earth history, encompassing the demise of
dinosaurs and other large animals. Despite widespread scientific consensus that
the extinction was caused solely by the Chicxulub asteroid impact (Yucatán,
Mexico), additional evidence suggests that large, contemporaneous volcanic
eruptions may have contributed significantly to this ecological disaster. These
volcanic rocks are exposed in India and known as the Deccan Traps and comprise
&gt;1.3 km3 of basalt. This proposal focuses on providing high-precision
eruption ages for the Deccan Traps in order to better compare them with the
independent timeline of extinction and recovery across the Cretaceous-Paleogene
boundary (KPB). By determining rates of volcanic eruptions through the Deccan
stratigraphy, the investigators will estimate the volume of volcanic gasses
emitted as a function of time. These estimates can be incorporated into models
of late-Cretaceous climate change and compared with geochemical proxy and fossil
records to better understand the potential contribution of the Deccan Traps to
biologic turnover at the KPB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the
investigators will apply chemical abrasion-isotope dilution-thermal ionization
mass spectrometry (CA-ID-TIMS) to zircons extracted from within the Deccan
basalts and from volcanic ashbeds between basalt flows. Their initial results
show this approach to be successful, producing uncertainties on flow deposition
to ±20-30 thousand years. These initial data include estimates of the onset and
termination of the main phase of Deccan volcanism and show it to bracket the KPB
with a duration of ~750 kyr; their new data will include a high-resolution
timeline for the eruptions throughout the entire 3 km thick volcanic sequence,
which is critical for assessing volatile release through time. These dates can
be compared to recently published estimates for the timing of the KPB extinction
and Chicxulub impact, and further compared to increasingly bolstered records of
ecological and environmental change both leading up to and following the main
extinction event. The resulting age model for the Deccan Traps will be an
essential component of a holistic approach towards understanding late-Cretaceous
ecological change and the subsequent rebuilding of Earth's biosphere.