* 1454188
* CAREER: Engineering Plasmonic Nanoantenna Architectures for Efficient Nuclear Delivery &amp; Advancing Awareness in Nanotechnology
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2022
* Somin Eunice Lee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 01/31/2022
* USD 552,252.00

This CAREER plan aims to develop configurable nanostructures for gene delivery.
Gene therapy&lt;br/&gt;ultimately relies on corrected genes to be efficiently
delivered across cell membranes and ultimately&lt;br/&gt;to the cell nucleus
without exposing neighboring cells. This plan configures nanostructures
to&lt;br/&gt;deliver genes efficiently and specifically to the cell nucleus. In
particular, asymmetric&lt;br/&gt;configurations, displaying unique optical
properties, will be developed to optically penetrate&lt;br/&gt;membranes,
optically transport genes through the crowded intracellular space, and deliver
genes&lt;br/&gt;directly to the nucleus. Efficient and specific delivery of
corrected genes should lower required&lt;br/&gt;dosages and minimize unwanted
side effects. This strategy also offers a new class of gene
delivery&lt;br/&gt;systems which can be optically removed post-delivery,
eliminating potential side effects from the&lt;br/&gt;gene delivery system
itself. As part of broader impacts and outreach activities, this plan aims
to&lt;br/&gt;advance awareness in nanotechnology, and to increase
underrepresented participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;Drawing from this proposed
research, laboratory course modules will be designed at the
graduate&lt;br/&gt;level, research career series will be implemented at the
undergraduate level, and nanotechnology&lt;br/&gt;capstone workshops will be
designed to engage K-12 students in STEM. These combined
activities&lt;br/&gt;serve to form a framework integrating research, education
and outreach over the PI's career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER plan aims to
address the challenge facing gene delivery systems to deliver
genes&lt;br/&gt;efficiently and specifically to the cell nucleus. The proposed
work will develop plasmonic&lt;br/&gt;nanoantenna architectures - consisting of
asymmetrically configured nanoparticles - capable of&lt;br/&gt;optical
transport, membrane penetration and nuclear gene release for efficient nuclear
delivery. The&lt;br/&gt;intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in the
configuration of plasmonic nanoantenna&lt;br/&gt;architectures, displaying high
degrees of asymmetry and coupled longitudinal modes, to
spectrally&lt;br/&gt;decouple the gradient force from the radiation pressure.
Spectral decoupling of the gradient force&lt;br/&gt;from the radiation pressure
allows, for the first time, optical forces at reasonable light
irradiances,&lt;br/&gt;minimized photothermally induced Brownian motion, and
multi-functional capabilities where&lt;br/&gt;optical transport is conducted at
one wavelength and optical activation of gene release is conducted&lt;br/&gt;at
another wavelength. The following tasks support the attainment of the research
goal: (1) Identify&lt;br/&gt;operation conditions for optical transport of
plasmonic nanoantenna architectures. (2) Assess&lt;br/&gt;whether optical force
penetration compared to optical destabilization improves
penetration&lt;br/&gt;efficiency. (3) Investigate whether spatial modulation of
gene release modifies resulting gene&lt;br/&gt;expression. As part of broader
impacts and outreach activities, this plan aims to advance
awareness&lt;br/&gt;in nanotechnology and plasmonics at the K-12, undergraduate
and graduate level, and to increase&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented participation in
STEM. The following tasks support the attainment of the&lt;br/&gt;educational
goal: (1) Lead capstone workshops to expose K-12 students to nanotechnology.
(2)&lt;br/&gt;Implement research career seminar series to educate undergraduate
students interested in research&lt;br/&gt;as a career path. (3) Expand
plasmonics graduate course curriculum to include laboratory
modules.&lt;br/&gt;These combined activities serve to form a framework
integrating research, education and outreach&lt;br/&gt;over the PI's career.