* 1454835
* EAGER: Spectrum Situational Awareness-Understanding the Data
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Magdy Bayoumi, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2017
* USD 180,832.00

The key resource shared by all wireless systems is the electromagnetic spectrum,
which is challenged by temporal and spatial congestion, interference, and
increasing security threats. This project investigates the hypothesis that
building a resilient always-on wireless network, capable of meeting ever-
increasing performance and security requirements, necessitates not only
innovations in radio design but also innovations in the management and
exploitation of vast amounts of radio spectrum knowledge. Such knowledge is
referred to as spectrum situational awareness - the amount of actionable
intelligence and understanding that a wireless network (or individual radio) has
about its RF spectrum environment. This research work formally studies the
nature of big spectrum data and investigates several critical issues, e.g., how
should data from heterogeneous sources be prioritized or weighted, and what are
the effects of inaccurate or sparse data measurements.

The scientific goals of this project are to provide foundational principles and
insights for developing innovative and scalable spectrum situational awareness
architectures, and to enable more efficient and effective uses of the data as
well as the improved protocol and system designs. Using formal statistical
methods (e.g., regression analysis and response surface methodology) and new big
data analytics tools, the research team fully characterizes big spectrum data,
its potential impact on spectrum utilization and system performance, and its
interaction with the plethora of influential radio, network, and environmental
factors. The empirical work is based on experimental scenarios that reflect
realistic networking environments, comprising multiple wireless access
technologies, interconnected high-speed backhaul networks, and distributed
cloud-based technologies. Two testbed instruments are used to design and execute
large-scale simulation and emulation experiments: the Distributed Computing and
Visual Analytics Sandbox for High Volume Data Streams combined with the Wireless
Systems and Performance Engineering Research (WiSPER) laboratory. Additionally,
the research team develops a multilayer spectrum situational awareness framework
and is deriving performance indices that can be used to quickly quantify and
compare the spectrum situational awareness capabilities of network systems. The
project engages students from underrepresented groups via ongoing partnerships
with Historically Black Colleges and Universities.