* 1454276
* CAREER: A Design Methodology for Bio-Inspired Soft Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Girish Krishnan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 01/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will pioneer a
systematic synthesis, analysis and manufacturing framework to realize soft
mechanical systems. Soft mechanical systems are static and dynamic structural
embodiments that do not contain rigid components made of metals or plastics,
conventional actuators such as motors, or interfaces such as joints and
couplings. They are instead made up of stretchable skins, tissue-like
appendages, fibers and fluids, and are inspired by around 90% of nature's animal
species that lack a rigid backbone, such as an octopus arm. The unique feature
of these systems is that they are flexible yet strong enough to bear large
loads. Unfortunately, these systems have so far not been widely used, because a
systematic design framework that can guide their physical realization does
currently not exist. This award supports fundamental research that enables such
a design framework, in which a soft mechanical system can be synthesized through
a systematic combination of simple building blocks with pre-determined
attributes. The resulting devices are adaptive, lightweight, energy-efficient
and inherently safe for human interaction. They will directly impact the
emerging fields of rehabilitation robotics, manufacturing automation, space
exploration, and surgery. Furthermore, the award will build on the overarching
theme of drawing analogies between nature and engineering to increase creative
thinking and enhance problem solving abilities in future engineers, while
emphasizing broadening participation of underrepresented groups in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key challenge in formulating a generalized
design framework for soft mechanical systems involves negotiating the coupled
nonlinear interactions among its structural constituents, namely, fluids,
stretchable envelopes, and reinforced fibers. The design framework relies on
reduced order models to capture these interactions and characterize the
kinematic and kinemato-static behavior of a generalized soft mechanical building
block. The models can be extended to any structure or mechanism under
quasistatic interaction with enclosed fluids. Using these models, a design
framework will be developed to synthesize a system, where several building
blocks with varying attributes are combined in a series or parallel architecture
based on rules and guidelines adapted from traditional machine design, such as
constraint matching and geometrically exact kinematics. The design framework
will also incorporate optimization methods to refine the system based on novel
robustness metrics. Successful realization of the design framework will lead to
a reconfigurable stiffness system for use in orthotic braces and a self-knotting
active rope for use in surgical suturing and active tethering applications.