* 1454125
* RAPID: The GNSS Instrument System for Multistatic and Occultation Sensing (GISMOS) for Future Application to Precipitation Processes in Atmospheric River Events
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2015
* Jennifer Haase, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 10/31/2015
* USD 85,515.00

Atmospheric rivers are responsible for bringing large quantities of moisture to
the arctic, Pacific Northwest, and California coastlines, leading to heavy
precipitation. It is not fully understood how the vertical distribution of
moisture and aerosols affects precipitation processes, especially in terms of
precipitation efficiency and the flux of moisture that reaches northern
latitudes and is available for interaction with cold fronts. It would be
advantageous to be able to use direct information on the vertical distribution
of moisture and precipitation to investigate the sensitivity of the models to
the physics parameterizations during this type of event. While the model tuning
approach has in general been successful for the current climate, it is not
necessarily expected that as climate changes, the same will be true. Therefore,
to make simultaneous measurements of the large-scale vertical distribution of
hydrometeors and moisture in these regions of high moisture flux to have a more
reliable basis for predicting precipitation is crucial. Airborne measurements of
moisture using GPS radio occultation can be used as a targeted method of
observation to provide data to address this scientific question, in concert with
other airborne and satellite observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
simulations indicate the possibility of detecting the presence of large
raindrops from forward scattering effects measured on left-hand circularly
polarized (LHCP) GPS signals. If this can be shown to be feasible, then airborne
GPS radio occultation measurements could not only provide refractivity profiles
from normal RHCP signals, but also provide indications of the presence of heavy
precipitation and precipitation rates from differential LHCP minus RHCP signals.
As a first step in this direction, some preliminary measurements during heavy
precipitation events will be made using the existing GISMOS instrument. A NASA
DC-8 flight operation in October-November 2014 on flights from California to
Chile, then transects across the Drake Passage will provide such an opportunity,
which would test data collection with alternate antenna configurations, on the
transect over the inter tropical convergence zone where heavy precipitation is
likely. Flight tests during August 2014 would also provide a means for
performing some needed maintenance on the GISMOS instrument, to prepare it for
future work on missions dedicated to atmospheric river events, and for use by
the larger NSF community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The
attempt to develop this original and innovative use of GISMOS for precipitation
sensing simultaneously with moisture sensing with high vertical resolution will
advance effective modeling of precipitation processes. The project will focus on
the physical phenomenon of atmospheric rivers, an important process of moisture
transport from the tropics to mid-latitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The refurbishing and preparation of the GISMOS
instrumentation for continued use by the NSF community as part of the HIAPER
suite of instrumentation enhances infrastructure for research by contributing to
the Lower Atmospheric Observing Facility. The modifications make it possible to
use the GPS/INS component of GISMOS separately from the GPS remote sensing
components, and directly benefit any researcher using the GV aircraft by
substantially increasing the accuracy over the existing instrumentation.