* 1454060
* CAREER: Oxygen Reduction Catalysis at Tunable Metal Sulfide Nanofilms
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Yogesh Surendranath, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 02/29/2020
* USD 675,000.00

Renewable energy sources such as solar and wind will play an increasing role in
meeting the growing energy demands of the future. However, these sources are
intermittent, having reliable energy when the sun doesn't shine or wind doesn't
blow requires storage in an energy dense form such as a chemical fuel. The fuel
energy can then be released to produce electricity on demand in a fuel cell.
Currently, fuel cells are expensive and unsustainable due to the high cost and
scarcity of the platinum-based catalysts needed to convert fuel to electricity.
This project aims to develop low-cost, non-toxic, earth-abundant catalysts to
replace platinum in future fuel cells. The work will allow graduate and
undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows to learn the modern techniques
in chemistry for renewable energy science and to collaborate to discover new
catalysts. The research work will also be integrated with a broad-based outreach
effort, The Catalyst Genome Project, which will allow amateur researchers of all
ages to discover, evaluate, and collaborate in the search for new catalysts for
renewable energy storage.

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Dr. Yogesh Surendranath of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to
systematically investigate the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) mediated by late
transition metal sulfide (MSx where M = Ni, Co, Fe) nanofilm electrocatalysts.
Late transition metal sulfides (LTMSs) represent an attractive class of low-
cost, earth-abundant ORR catalysts for low-temperature fuel cell cathodes but
their development and optimization have been hampered by a lack of mechanistic
understanding and an absence of fundamental design principles. The project will
utilize a recently developed layer-by-layer chemical electrodeposition method
for preparing nanometer-thick crystalline LTMS films to probe the active site
structure and mechanism of ORR on these materials. From these studies, the work
aims to extract broad periodic trends and overarching design principles that
will be used to synthesize high-performance nanoparticulate LTMS ORR catalysts
primed for integration into advanced fuel cell cathodes