* 1454698
* CAREER: Coherent Understanding of Magnetic Resonance in Controlling Radiative Transport from Far to Near Field
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Liping Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 01/31/2021
* USD 504,542.00

1454698 - Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy conservation is important especially
when reserves of conventional energy sources are now fast depleting and
environmental impact of conventional energy use have resulted in an urgent need
for high-efficiency renewable energy sources and energy-saving materials. The
success of this project will ultimately lead to wide applications of energy
harvesting systems to convert solar energy and recover waste heat to power using
"smart" coating materials for cooling by radiation. These smart materials are at
the nano-scale sizes and efforts of this project are to address the fundamental
challenges in nanoscale radiative transport. Both graduate and undergraduate
students will be involved in this research project. Two educational kits will be
developed to facilitate the outreach activities with local K-12 students,
through various programs at Arizona State University, in understanding materials
radiative properties and the working principle of conventional AFM (atomic force
microscope). The aim is to spark their interests in science and engineering as
well as desires for higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
gain a coherent understanding of magnetic resonance in controlling radiative
thermal transport across different length scales from far to near field. First,
Radiative properties of fabricated metamaterials will be characterized with
advanced spectrometric techniques at millimeter to micrometer scale from
cryogenic to high temperatures. Second, novel far-field radiative properties of
metamaterials will be numerically studied, while near-field radiative transport
between metamaterials will be theoretically analyzed with fluctuational
electrodynamics and experimentally probed at nanometer scale by advanced thermal
metrologies. Third, nanoscale energy transport due to plasmonic local heating
will be investigated with multi-physics simulation. Near-field energy transfer
will be measured and experimentally probed at nanometer scale with advanced
thermal metrologies and the origin of magnetic resonance. Besides advancing the
fundamental understanding in nanoscale radiative transfer, the spectrometric
platform enables the systematic study of radiative properties over a wide
temperature range. The novel metrology of nanoscale infrared spectroscopy will
provide unperceived spectrometric information at nanometer scale, while the
novel nanostructures with novel radiative properties will be demonstrated for
various applications in energy, thermal management, and optical data storage.
The success of this CAREER program will ultimately lead to a wide range of
civil, military, aerospace, and industrial applications. The research outcomes
will be quickly disseminated through journal publications, conference
presentations, and course teaching.