* 1454405
* CAREER: Highly-Efficient Dynamic Prediction Models for Quality Improvement in Cold Rolling
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,10/31/2015
* Arif Malik, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 10/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award supports
fundamental research to lay the foundation to significantly improve the quality
of aluminum, steel, copper, and brass sheets manufactured on cold rolling mills.
These metal sheets are important raw materials for many products, including
aircraft, automobiles, ships, refrigerators, computers, electric motors, and
buildings. Rolled metal sheets of poor geometric quality need to undergo costly
additional processing. Results from this research will lead to new mill control
strategies that improve rolling quality and productivity for these metal sheets
in important emerging markets. The research will benefit the economic
competitiveness and security of the United States. The direct involvement of
engineering students from the under-represented groups (including women and
persons with autism) in manufacturing will provide positive benefits to
education and society.

Geometry defects in cold rolling of thin aluminum, steel, copper, and brass
sheets arise from the mismatch of incoming strip thickness profiles with mill
roll-bite profiles. Detailed roll-bite behavior stems from complex transient
effects of mill structural deflection, thermal expansion, roll grinding, and
roll wear, and is difficult to predict. The highly-efficient dynamic models to
be created in this work will integrate structural, thermal, and wear patterns
using a novel, mixed finite element approach to determine three-dimensional,
high-frequency nonlinear dynamic responses of rolling mills. The models will
allow for more efficient and accurate multi degree-of-freedom prediction of mill
dynamics than is possible with single degree-of-freedom or full-scale finite
element models. The efficient nonlinear, multi degree-of-freedom dynamic models
will also be combined with Bayesian/Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo control approaches,
to yield a better understanding of mill behavior in spite of significant random
process variations. The understanding gained may lead to new on-mill roll
grinding methods to correct geometry defects, novel two-dimensional (instead of
centerline-only) gauge control, and probabilistic approaches to improve
geometric quality of rolled metals.