* 1454547
* CAREER: Mesoscale Modeling of Defect Structure Evolution in Metallic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Avinash Dongare, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 05/31/2021
* USD 599,999.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project focusses on
research in advanced computational mechanics for the virtual analysis of
structural metallic materials for use in extreme environments. It supports
research on advancing the understanding of the factors that control the
evolution of defects and their structure, the micromechanisms for their
evolution, and their collective influence on material performance. Understanding
the links between the evolution of defect structures during operation and
material performance and survivability is a key question in the mechanics of
materials. The research will define a clear rationale for why a particular
material results in improved toughness or improved strengths or both
simultaneously. Such insight would support the development of materials for next
generation automotive, aerospace, and defense applications. The virtual analysis
contributes to the goals of the Materials Genome Initiative by supplementing
physical experiments to reduce costs and time in materials deployment.
Educational initiatives through this award will focus on active involvement of
undergraduate students and the establishment of a field of study specialization
in computational materials science at the University of Connecticut. The
integration of materials science, mechanical engineering, and computer science
in this framework will help to stimulate an interest in the undergraduate
students involved to pursue higher education in science and engineering.
Outreach activities will introduce mechanics of materials into pre-college
education through leadership roles in local chapters of professional societies
and encourage active participation of underrepresented groups to promote
diversity in science and engineering education. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to establish insight into the effects of
microstructure and loading conditions on the micromechanisms responsible for the
nucleation, accumulation, and interaction of defect structures (dislocations,
twins, interfaces) as well as nucleation, growth, and coalescence of voids to
form cracks (damage). The research employs a newly developed quasi-coarse-
grained dynamics (QCGD) method that is able to retain the atomic scale physics
of processes involved during deformation and failure but extends the time and
length scale capabilities of molecular dynamics simulations. This approach
bridges the gap between the atomistic and continuum simulations, and is located
at the mesoscale. Machine learning algorithms will be used to map the evolution
and distribution of defect structures to the macroscale stress-strain response
and identify the distributions that trigger critical events such as damage
initiation. This will allow direct connections between the microstructural
evolution during deformation and the strength and toughness response for
structural metallic materials. This virtual analysis framework capable of
providing insights into the performance and survivability will lead to
significant advancements in the current state-of-art for materials modeling and
can be extended to other structural materials.