* 1454076
* CAREER: Mid-infrared Intersubband Polaritonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Anthony Hoffman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this program is to develop fundamentally new mid-infrared optical
sources based on strong quantum interactions between light and extremely thin
layers of semiconductors for applications in medicine, industry, and homeland
security. Optical devices operating in the mid-infrared portion of the
electromagnetic spectrum (3-30 microns) enable sensitive imaging and detection
because many molecules exhibit specific and strong absorption spectra at these
wavelengths. One of the primary challenges of developing mid-infrared sources
for these applications is that the physical process that generates light is very
inefficient. Our approach to improving the efficiency of mid-infrared optical
sources is to engineer strong quantum mechanical interactions between light and
matter, creating quantum states that are simultaneously light and matter
excitations, and to study these hybrid states when the device is electrically
pumped. In doing so, our desire is to develop a set of tools for these
optoelectronic devices by demonstrating techniques for engineering, fabricating,
characterizing, and controlling devices that incorporate strong light-matter
interactions. Beyond advancing mid-infrared technologies, this program also
addresses education and diversity in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics by developing and hosting Engineering Days that are built around
hands-on optics-based challenges for students at local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program aims to improve the radiative quantum
efficiency of mid-infrared optoelectronic devices. However, far from incremental
improvements to existing devices such a quantum cascade lasers, our approach
seeks the development of fundamentally new devices based on electrically
injected polariton states that arise from strong light-matter interactions
between the photon field in a resonator and electronic intersubband transitions
between the quantized states of quantum wells integrated into the resonator.
These novel optoelectronic devices will provide a new approach for wide-
bandwidth, high-power incoherent sources needed for applications in mid-infrared
sensing and imaging. Our approach is an integrated theoretical, computational,
and experimental effort to (1) investigate mid-infrared microcavities, (2)
improve coupling of photons with mid-infrared intersubband transitions, and (3)
implement efficient electrical injection of intersubband polariton states. We
will investigate a range of cavity and conduction band designs in both GaAs- and
InP-based material systems. All of our materials will be grown by molecular beam
epitaxy and fabricated into devices in a state-of-the-art nanofabrication
facility. We will characterize the devices using Fourier transform spectroscopy
as a function of temperature, resonator and conduction band design, and
electrical pumping power. Our efforts will lay the groundwork for integrating
mid-infrared intersubband polaritons into optoelectronic devices. Furthermore,
efficient electrical injection of intersubband polariton states will also
benefit the development of ultra-tunable quantum cascade lasers, while the
investigation of the limits of light-matter coupling will be of interest to the
mid-infrared detector and quantum optics communities. The end result of this
program is ambitious: the development of electrically injected intersubband
polariton emitters with more than four orders of magnitude improvement in the
emitted power and efficiency compared to existing mid-infrared intersubband
emitters.