* 1454116
* CAREER: The Bioorganic Investigation of Species-Specific Biofilm Modulators
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2017
* William Wuest, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2017
* USD 669,500.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. William Wuest from Temple University to investigate the
role species-specific natural products play in biofilm communities using an
interdisciplinary approach comprised of synthetic, microbiological, and
proteomic techniques. Bacterial communities are incredibly complex and dynamic.
These communities, commonly referred to as biofilms, adversely impact both
commercial interests and societal health. The inherent complexity of microbial
biofilms and lack of scientific tools to interrogate these systems has limited
both basic research and practical innovations. There is currently great interest
in developing small molecules as chemicial biological tools to specifically
alter such systems to aid in sorting out these processes. The proposed research
will focus on naturally occurring materials that possess exquisite selectivity
for one species of bacteria to better understand how they work. The
multidisciplinary aspects of this program will allow graduate students and
undergraduates to gain expertise in a broad range of modern research techniques.
This project also integrates an outreach program to mentor inner-city
Philadelphia elementary school students in preparation for the George Washington
Carver Science Fair.

Synthetic methods will be used to construct the natural products, analogs, and
affinity probes for biological investigations and target identification.
Affinity-based protein profiling will then be applied to determine the specific
biological targets of these compounds providing insight into their mechanism of
action. Concurrently, compounds will be tested both for their antimicrobial
activity and their ability to specifically perturb bacterial biofilms. The
identification of the mechanistic targets of these biofilm-modulating natural
products seeks to increase our basic understanding of the biochemical processes
of chemical signaling in bacterial biofilms.