* 1454959
* CAREER: Photochemistry at "Dirty" Ice Surfaces: Effects of Solutes on Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Tara Kahan, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 579,340.00

With this CAREER award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the
Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Tara Kahan of Syracuse University to
investigate the effects of environmental solutes on chemical reactivity at
"dirty" ice surfaces; i.e. surfaces which include common environmental solutes.
The project focuses on relating physical properties of ice surfaces to surface
reaction kinetics. Surface properties and reaction kinetics at ice surfaces are
investigated in the presence and absence of common environmental solutes such as
halide salts and organic matter. The results of this research are used to
predict the impact of chemistry occurring at snow and ice surfaces on air and
water quality in cities and in remote regions. A summer workshop being developed
by Professor Kahan teaches middle-school children to be 'science journalists.'
Workshop participants interview atmospheric and environmental scientists, and
display final projects based on these interviews at the Milton J. Rubenstein
Museum of Science and Technology in Syracuse. The broader scientific impacts of
this work include improved predictions of air and water quality in snow-covered
regions, and improved scientific literacy and engagement in middle-school
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kahan and her coworkers have shown that
common environmental solutes can greatly alter the fate of pollutants at ice
surfaces, but the effects of solutes on ice chemistry remain largely unexplored.
The Kahan research team plans to investigate the effects of ice composition on
photochemical kinetics and mechanisms. It is envisioned that these studies will
improve the ability to predict the effects&lt;br/&gt;of photochemistry in snow
and ice on atmospheric composition, pollutant fate, and climate. The specific
objectives are to determine (i) how common solutes such as halides and organic
matter (OM) are distributed at ice surfaces (fluorescence and Raman microscopy),
(ii) how common solutes affect the photolysis kinetics and products of organic
pollutants at ice surfaces (fluorescence spectroscopy and gas chromatography-
mass spectrometry) and (iii) how common solutes affect the photochemical
production and fate of hydroxyl radicals (OH)&lt;br/&gt;at ice surfaces
(chromatography, fluorescence spectroscopy, and laser-induced fluorescence).