* 1454412
* CAREER: Growth and Remodeling of the Uterine Cervix During Pregnancy
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Kristin Myers, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 05/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award will
characterize the biomechanical mechanisms that cause preterm birth (PTB) and
will train the next generation of female engineers with educational activities
geared towards Women's Health. Despite advances in prenatal care, the rate of
PTB (birth before 37 weeks of gestation) in the United States remains high. This
fact underscores how little is known about the causes of PTB, which is a leading
cause of death in children under five. Researchers do know that the cervix, a
cylindrical organ located at the base of the uterus, is a critical mechanical
barrier to maintain the baby to full term. Then, at time of delivery the cervix
is instructed by hormonal cues to remodel, soften, and dilate to become a safe
passage for the baby. If this cervical tissue remodeling timing is off, PTB can
occur due to premature cervical dilation. The understanding of this cervical
remodeling process is limited because there are no engineering tools to
characterize normal and abnormal cervical softening. To address this need, this
study will measure the mechanical and biochemical property changes of the cervix
under various hormonal cues and derive a set of equations that can predict the
mechanical function of the cervix during pregnancy. This study will bring an
improved understanding to the underlying causes of PTB related to cervical
dysfunction, and will be an essential step toward the development of rational
therapies to prevent PTB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER study will derive a
constitutive material modeling framework for the growth and remodeling of the
cervix during pregnancy. The main goal is to determine the driving factors that
cause premature cervical remodeling and the mechanical dysfunction of the
cervix. The modeling framework will be based on the evidence that levels of
estrogen and progesterone play a key role in regulating cervical tissue
composition during pregnancy. Cervical tissue will be modeled as a hydrated
fiber composite porous material where the interstitial pore space allows for the
growth and removal of solid mass. The associated material parameters will evolve
as a function of hormone-mediated extracelluar matrix compositional state
variables. Model functions will be based on mechanical and collagen
characterization of gestation-timed cervical tissue samples taken from
established mouse models of hormone-mediated normal, preterm, and disrupted
cervical remodeling. These equations will be validated by assessing their
predictive capability of the material response to loading and hormonally-driven
tissue changes.