* 1454650
* CAREER: RecovUS - An Agent Based Model of Collective Post Disaster Housing Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Ali Nejat, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will study post-
disaster housing recovery, using the micro-level of households' reconstruction
decisions. It examines how those decisions are affected by a confluence of
quantifiable internal and external control variables and propagated to influence
community recovery. Anticipated exponential increases in future extreme events
coupled with the growing population in disaster-prone regions has created an
urgent need for better understanding of the process of disaster recovery and
more effective strategies to enhance it. While many studies have focused on
assessing the economic impacts of disasters or estimating its losses on a macro-
level, very few, if any, have focused on modeling the collective actions taken
by households which is deemed to be the key to community-wide recovery. The
results from this research will have a broad impact, as they can be instrumental
to the members of recovery assistance framework in prioritizing and integrating
policies to enhance post-disaster recovery. The multidisciplinary nature of this
research and its diversified pedagogy together with its embedded social
interaction protocols will allow for a more effective research, teaching and a
broader involvement of underrepresented groups as well as multiple stakeholders
in related research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is aimed at
contributing fundamental knowledge on the collective nature of households'
community-wide recovery. This research will develop a GIS-enabled agent-based
behavioral model of collective post-disaster housing recovery by capturing the
micro-level dynamics of households' behavior within a broader socioeconomic
context of their community. Both internal and external control variables will be
examined. Internal control variables include households' demographics, social
networks, experience, socio-economic, psychosocial factors, and disaster
exposure. External control variables refer to activities that can influence
households' recovery decisions and include the activities of members of the
recovery assistance framework aimed at restoring economy and lifeline
infrastructure and providing financial incentives along with any housing
recovery activities by neighbors creating spatiotemporal effects. The project
will integrate agent-based modeling, GIS, and game theory to help decipher the
impact of households' interactions on the collective recovery of an affected
community. This bottom-up approach will allow for simulation of interactions
among households to mimic real events. These simulations will enable
policyholders to assess the efficacy of their recovery policies through the
developed model. The behavioral model will be modular, scalable, and can be
easily extended to any type of disaster.