* 1454832
* CAREER: Explorations in Quantum Gravity: Cosmological and Black Hole Spacetimes
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2021
* Parampreet Singh, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 10/31/2021
* USD 422,910.00

In Einstein's theory of general relativity classical spacetime ends at the
singularities. Examples include the Big Bang singularity in cosmological models
and the central singularity of the black hole spacetimes. At these events the
spacetime curvature and tidal forces become infinite. Classical evolution stops.
It has been hoped that quantum gravitational effects will provide insights on
resolution of this fundamental problem. This Faculty Early CAREER award supports
research towards answering various questions related to quantum gravity and
resolution of singularities in cosmological and black hole spacetimes. The
research carried out in this project will use techniques of loop quantum
gravity. A primary objective will be to establish generic properties of quantum
spacetime in presence of anisotropies and inhomogenities, and extract reliable
phenomenological and observational predictions. The educational and outreach
objectives of this project are designed to address a wide audience. The project
aims to enhance the scientific enrichment of K-12 students via a public lecture
series and science exhibitions and demonstrations. Active engagement techniques
will be used to revamp undergraduate and graduate courses. Undergraduate and
graduate students will also receive training through research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed implications of the singularity
resolution on the physics in different models will be explored. The project aims
to significantly broaden and advance our current understanding of the physics of
quantum gravity. Research explorations will include (i) systematically
investigating the quantization and resulting physics of different spacetimes
including anisotropies, inhomogenities in Gowdy models and Schwarzschild black
holes, (ii) extracting phenomenological implications by analyzing effects of
quantum gravity on cosmological perturbations, and (iii) addressing fundamental
issues in quantum cosmology using consistent histories approach. Numerical
techniques developed in this project will also lead to fresh insights on results
in the classical gravity, such as on the structure of spacetime near classical
singularities.