* 1454152
* CAREER: Broadening Contexts to Motivate Participation in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2022
* Morgan Hynes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mehdi Ferdowsi
* 02/28/2022
* USD 555,375.00

The primary goal of this project is to investigate how grades 5-8 students'
engagement in and perceptions of engineering are influenced through
participating in engineering challenges that intentionally integrate their
personal interests. The merit of this work lies in the discovery of whether
appealing to grades 5-8 students' personal interests can improve their
perceptions of engineering and make them more likely to pursue engineering as a
career. The project work involves engaging teachers and students in research-
based engineering education specifically designed to promote inclusivity among
underrepresented groups. The research team will interview and observe students
to better understand how their engineering project work relates to their own
personal interests. The immediate impact of the proposed project is measured in
the numbers of teachers and students (especially those underrepresented in
engineering) that have an opportunity to participate in the interest-driven
engineering activities. Results from the research are potentially transformative
for how engineering activities are presented in pre-college classrooms. More
broadly, the project informs the design and delivery of inclusive engineering
activities throughout the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The working hypothesis
for the research posits that, by presenting engineering in broader contexts,
more students will be able to identify their own personal interests in the
engineering challenge - resulting in a more positive perception of engineering
as a discipline with which they identify. The research involved in the project
will address the following questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Does broadening the
context of engineering activities: &lt;br/&gt;1. Appeal to more students'
personal interests?&lt;br/&gt;2. Empower underrepresented groups (female and
minority) to find personally meaningful connections? &lt;br/&gt;3. Lead to more
authentic engagement in engineering practices for all students?&lt;br/&gt;4.
Improve students' attitudes and perceptions of engineering?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a design-based research methodology, the research
team is developing this interest-based curricular approach to engineering while
investigating how the approach elicits students' interest and authentic
engagement in engineering. The research is comprised of three studies: 1) a
students' interests interview study that creates a baseline for students'
interests, using discourse analysis to identify themes and underlying
similarities in students' interview responses; 2) a classroom simulation study
that investigates students' engagement in the interest-based curriculum through
simulated classroom implementations (in a newly constructed, state-of-the-art
research classroom lab space); and 3) a classroom implementation study that
situates the implementation and investigation of the curriculum in real
classroom settings. Both the classroom simulation and classroom implementation
studies utilize a mixed methods research approach to qualitatively investigate
the observed engagement of the students, and to quantitatively analyze the
relationships between students' demographic/attitudinal data and their
participation in the interest-based curriculum. Findings from all three studies
will inform the iterative design and implementation of the interest-based
engineering curricular approach.