* 1454067
* CAREER: A Research and Education Plan for Advancing Ocean Carbon Research through Laser-Based Sensors
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2022
* Anna Michel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2022
* USD 889,916.00

This research will address critical challenges for oceanographic sensing by
developing a new instrument to measure dissolved inorganic carbon. This will
enhance the study of the ocean carbon dioxide system, which is of global
importance for its role in climate changes, ocean acidification, and in
biological processes. A "Girls in Ocean Engineering and Science Institute," for
5th and 6th grade girls will be developed. A diverse audience of undergraduate
students, middle and high school teachers, and a graduate student will be
included in the research. These efforts aim to contribute to diversifying the
fields of engineering and ocean science/engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall scope of this research is to develop a dissolved inorganic carbon sensor
capable of measurements on a variety of oceanographic platforms. The research
hypothesis is that infrared laser-based spectroscopic techniques traditionally
used for atmospheric sensing can be utilized for highly sensitive, easy to
deploy, yet low cost sensors to fill a critical need in ocean science. A small,
near-infrared laser-based sensor will be designed for the measurement of carbon
dioxide. Through the packaging of this sensor, deployments to depths up to 1000
m will be achieved. Bringing advanced analytical techniques from the laboratory
into the deep sea will help to close critical gaps for in-situ sensing.