* 1454939
* CAREER: Research and training in advanced computational methods for quantum and statistical mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Jianfeng Lu, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

Ab initio simulations have become widely used scientific workhorses with
applications in physics, chemistry, materials science, and many related fields,
but the reach of simulations is limited by computational complexity. To go
beyond current capabilities in realistic and predictive ab initio simulations,
it is necessary to address the current bottlenecks. This project aims to greatly
enlarge the scope of ab initio simulations and open up major new areas for
electronic-structure-theory-based predictive methodologies that are not possible
today. This research lies at the intersection of multiple disciplines. The
project connects advanced state-of-the-art techniques in computational
mathematics to challenging problems arising from chemistry and materials
science. The integrated research program will bring together ideas and
techniques, which will not only help advance the application areas, but also has
the potential to open up new research areas in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to
innovate and analyze efficient algorithms based on advanced computational
mathematics for electronic structure theory and computational statistical
mechanics, which will greatly advance the scope of ab initio simulations with
applications in chemistry, materials science, and many related fields. More
specifically, topics considered include: (1) reduced scaling methods for
electronic structure theory, which will extend the system size of the
simulation; (2) efficient sampling algorithms for metastable systems, which will
bridge the temporal scales; and (3) algorithms that go beyond Born-Oppenheimer
approximation, which will give a more accurate account of quantum effects in
classical dynamics. The educational objectives of this proposal are to prepare
and train students for interdisciplinary research and to disseminate knowledge
from graduate and undergraduate students to high school students and the general
public in the U.S. and abroad.