* 1454688
* CAREER: Ligand Engineering of Structure and Electronic Function in Complex Metal Oxyfluorides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* James Rondinelli, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER project supports
computational materials science research and education aimed at understanding
and designing electronic properties of materials, including electrical
resistivity and optical behavior, by control over material structure at the
level of atoms. The specific compounds of interest include oxides with
transition metal cations, and focus on the effect that fluorine, which can
substitute for oxygen in the materials, has on the electronic functionality.
Previous research on transition metal oxides has established the importance of
atomic structure engineering of electronic responses in many crystal families.
Most conventional property-by-design routes rely, however, on changing the
transition metal cation in oxides. This project seeks to apply another route -
tuning the interactions in the crystal through anion (fluorine and oxygen)
substitution. Changes in the geometry, arrangement and composition of the anion
atoms will be explored through a confluence of materials theory techniques based
on symmetry analyses, materials informatics (machine learning), and quantum
mechanical calculations. The PI has ongoing collaborations with leading experts
in synthesis and characterization of such materials composed of transition
metals, oxygen, and fluorine; understanding derived here will stimulate
experimental methods and vice versa. Continued investigation of known materials,
while valuable, is inadequate to formulate strategies for deterministic property
control. Knowledge obtained here will facilitate the selection and design of
materials with tunable electronic states. It will benefit society by advancing
the repertoire of structure-based design strategies to control electronic
structure, which could lead to the discovery of new functional materials, e.g.
for better performing energy storage and conversion systems, materials for
transparent electronics, and optical technologies relying on laser generated
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will further the educational
opportunities of students at Northwestern University and other academic
institutions, precollege students, and contribute to the professional
development of high school teachers. The PI will implement an educational plan
to foster awareness, understanding, and appreciation of advanced technology
materials and data-driven scientific methods through two main tasks. First, he
will create Engineering Design Modules capable of engaging students in grades 9
through 12 by fostering model building skills to analyze and communicate
concepts taught in secondary chemistry and physics courses that underpin many
modern technologies, and support teachers preparing for the recently adopted
Next Generation Science Standards. Second, he will create a Materials
Informatics Curriculum to engage university students in modern informatics-based
science problem-solving methods. All contextual learning activities will build
knowledge, promote scientific and engineering literacy, and provide greater
insight into the societal needs for engineering solutions, fostering cognitive
skills through an emphasis on cause/effect relationships that are axiomatic to
the research objectives and vital to the next-generation workforce. Assessment
of the proposed educational activities and broad dissemination through multiple
platforms will determine the efficacy of the educational activities, improve
their implementation, and maximize
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports synergistic research,
education, and outreach activities which focus on the design of functional
electronic behavior in transition metal oxyfluorides using control over the
ligand sublattice by oxygen/fluorine substitution and ordering. Conventional
routes to direct the responses in transition metal oxides primarily rely on
cation substitution and interfacial effects in thin films and superlattices,
which offer limited control owing to a single (oxygen) anion - this makes
materials discovery challenging. Remarkably, ligand (anion) engineering with
mixed anion polyhedral building blocks remains to be fully exploited for
property control and design, especially in these materials which already find
use in energy generation and storage, phosphors, and catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Combinations of applied group theory, informatics, and density
functional theory calculations will be applied to achieve the main research
objectives, which include (1) Advancing new theoretical methods to establish
structure-function axioms for how anion order can be used to direct crystal
structure and properties; (2) Formulating a quantitative theory of structure
stability based on understanding the ligand sublattice symmetry and local
bonding interactions; and (3) Understanding the consequences of mixed-anion
polyhedral topologies on electronic properties. Structure-property axioms will
be extracted by studying the consequences of anion substitution using
oxyfluoride building blocks on physical properties in cryolite and elpasolite
structures. With that knowledge, quantitative guidelines will be constructed to
tailor electronic structure and properties in new oxyfluorides: metal-insulator
transitions, electronic band gaps, and large non-linear optical responses.
Success in this research will produce new knowledge underlying crystal
stability, chemical bonding, and electronic behavior. It will articulate
predictive rules for selecting new oxyfluorides, accelerate discovery, and
enable an unprecedented expansion of compounds with varying electronic
functions. Ultimately, interactions with experimental groups will lead to the
discovery of functional properties in structurally and chemically more complex
(hybrid) organic and inorganic materials than those proposed. Such
collaborations will ensure that the virtual predictions translate into realistic
models and new materials, which may transform the discovery process for
materials deployed in glasses, phosphors, fuel-conversion, and Li-ion batteries
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will further the educational
opportunities of students at Northwestern University and other academic
institutions, precollege students, and contribute to the professional
development of high school teachers. The PI will implement an educational plan
to foster awareness, understanding, and appreciation of advanced technology
materials and data-driven scientific methods through two main tasks. First, he
will create Engineering Design Modules capable of engaging students in grades 9
through 12 by fostering model building skills to analyze and communicate
concepts taught in secondary chemistry and physics courses that underpin many
modern technologies, and support teachers preparing for the recently adopted
Next Generation Science Standards. Second, he will create a Materials
Informatics Curriculum to engage university students in modern informatics-based
science problem-solving methods. All contextual learning activities will build
knowledge, promote scientific and engineering literacy, and provide greater
insight into the societal needs for engineering solutions, fostering cognitive
skills through an emphasis on cause/effect relationships that are axiomatic to
the research objectives and vital to the next-generation workforce. Assessment
of the proposed educational activities and broad dissemination through multiple
platforms will determine the efficacy of the educational activities, improve
their implementation, and maximize impact.