* 1454230
* CAREER: Tailored metal-oxide-based heterogeneous nanointerfaces for robust electro-catalyst formation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2022
* Zoica Cerasela Dinu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2022
* USD 548,958.00

1454230&lt;br/&gt;Dinu, Zoica Cerasela&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
focused on identifying technologies capable of increasing the energy portfolio
while reducing the footprint on the environment. Through experimental assessment
and advanced design and characterization methods, the proposed research will
hopefully lead to the next generation of robust visible-light-responsive hetero-
structures capable of utilizing solar light for efficient photocatalysis and
energy generation. Highly desired is the development of photocatalyst materials
that effectively utilize visible light to form resourceful photo-electro-
systems. However, light-absorbance efficiency, high corrosion-resistance
properties, as well as low energy levels that do not match material
reduction/oxidation half-reactions in dry conditions remain contemporary
challenges in designing and manufacturing the next generation of proficient
photocatalysts. The goal of this project is to establish an integrated research
platform for the design of robust three-dimensional arrays of visible-absorbing
photocatalyst heterointerfaces that have optimum electrochemical capability,
increased photosentivity, enhanced power conversion efficiency, selectivity,
stability and prolonged shelf-life. The proposed education plan contributes to
the research project, and aims to educate and inspire the participants to
appreciate the power of catalysis and catalysis-based science and engineering.
Through implementation of comprehensive instructional modules in "Photo-Electro-
chemical Catalysis Science and Applications" and by using virtual laboratory
demonstrations, the PI will reach the under-representative population in her
community, expand its scientific literacy, and create opportunities for the next
generation workforce to understand the challenges associated with energy-related
technologies development and implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives consist of: (1) using combinatorial approaches relying on tailoring
material (metal-oxide/graphene hybrids) physicochemical properties and laser-
based direct writing to design scalable hetero-interfaces, (2) elucidating the
fundamental mechanisms that dictate the structure-photon absorption efficiency,
photocatalytic activity and hetero-structure conversion efficiency, and (3)
monitoring hetero-structure's resistance to corrosion, all in situ and in real-
time. One of the fundamental technological barriers in photo-electro-chemical
catalysis science is finding efficient light-absorbing catalysts that have
controlled conductor bands and reduced recombination of photo-generated
electron-hole pairs, to further allow for studying how their doping could lead
to increased photon absorption efficiency, improved photocatalytic activity, and
resistance to corrosion in liquid environments. The results generated from this
research are expected to fill this critical knowledge gap. The research should
unravel the crosstalk between material properties and hybrid interface reactions
and help identify the key factors responsible for the enhanced conversion
efficiency and selectivity in user-scalable three-dimensional photosystems.
Lastly, by offering fundamental/mechanistic information on the response of the
photocatalysts in relation to materials physical and chemical properties and by
optimizing structure-function reactivity, the research is expected to improve
the "benefit-to-risk" ratio and allow systematic design and integration of
tailored hetero-interfaces for efficient energy generation.