* 1454729
* CAREER: Control Design for Dynamical Network Flows with Applications to Transportation
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Ketan Savla, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

As our society is becoming more dependent on critical infrastructure networks
such as transportation, communication, water, power, and gas, their efficient
and resilient operation is becoming ever more important. Hence, one of the
engineering grand challenges identified by the National Academy of Engineering
is to restore and improve urban infrastructure systems. However, as recent
evaluations by the American Society of Civil Engineers show, the state of our
infrastructure systems continues to be substandard, and will likely remain so
without massive investments. With significant growth in demand projected, a
future infrastructure system that maintains the status quo will not function
even at today's current, often inadequate, levels. It is increasingly being
realized that leveraging sensing, actuation, and information technologies can
achieve substantial improvements in the performance of these systems. These
cyber technologies have the potential to endow our infrastructure networks with
the capability to dynamically respond to changes in demand, supply, and even
physical properties under disruptions. The existing approaches to control of
infrastructure networks, however, are inadequate to realize the potential of
this capability. This is because they are either heuristic with no formal
performance guarantees; or they adopt static abstractions, and hence are useful
only for long term planning; or the dynamical frameworks are used only for
simulation and analysis purposes with little or no consideration for control
design. The project will develop an integrated research and education program on
rigorous control design for intelligent infrastructure networks, with a special
emphasis on transportation. Collaborations with local transportation and
planning agencies will facilitate rapid transition from research to practice.
The outreach activities include development of an interactive traffic simulator,
which would also serve as an experiment test bed to model dynamic driver
behavior; and interactive network interdiction games to demonstrate the concepts
of cascading failures and network robustness to general public. The education
activities include development of new courses on analysis, control and
estimation of infrastructure networks. Research opportunities will be expanded
for undergraduates to implement control algorithms on professional
transportation software to generate case studies, which will be used for our
interactions with transportation agencies. Existing programs at the University
of Southern California will be utilized to integrate inclusive teaching
practices into educational activities in order to address retention of women,
underrepresented and minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network flow is a
natural modeling paradigm for several infrastructure networks. The current
state-of-the-art in theoretical network flow research primarily consists of
algorithms for fast computation of maximum network flow capacity, or optimal
flow distribution with respect to some performance metrics; and numerical
analysis of dynamical network flows with cascade effects under fixed routing
policies. The intellectual merits of the proposed research are: (i) a dynamical
network flow framework that models coupling between dynamics of flow and jumps
in network topology, e.g., due to cascading failures, as well as facilitates
control design; (ii) new advancements in analysis for nonlinear dynamical
systems using differential analysis and contraction principles, and applying
them for analysis and control synthesis under proposed dynamical network flow;
(iii) a computational framework for quantifying margins of resilience in terms
of the disturbance generation process, network topology, and cascade dynamics;
(iv) application of proposed tools to transportation through dynamic signal
control, and inclusion of resilience metric in network design. The margin of
resilience computations will identify canonical network flow concepts, besides
the classical notion of cuts, as key indicators of network performance from
efficiency and resilience perspective, under control and dynamical
considerations. Beyond its immediate emphasis on dynamical network flows, the
project aims to develop elements of robust control theory for networked
dynamical systems.