* 1454654
* CAREER: Risk Monitoring of Civil Infrastructures Using Correlated Change Patterns in Spatiotemporal Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Pingbo Tang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 09/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant pioneers a change-
based risk analysis method that uses diverse spatiotemporal data for predictive
defect detection of aging civil infrastructure systems and early warning of
structural collapse. Many failures of bridges, marine structures, and other
large-scale facilities often can be forecast by gradual changes in their
appearances. Civil engineers have found that certain changes across multiple
structures always occur together and form collective patterns that predict
collapses. For example, decaying steel structures often have collective crack
developments around components under cyclic loads. Maintenance agencies can
collect various spatiotemporal data, such as images, for monitoring structures
and predicting behaviors of structural systems. Unfortunately, current change
analysis practices are manual and tedious, so they cannot recover collective
patterns from heterogeneous data. This award is for fundamental research in the
development of an automated process for detecting changes across heterogeneous
data and predicting structural collapse. The developed procedure will enable
automated, data-driven analysis of the decays in civil infrastructure systems.
Detailed data-driven change analyses of decaying structures have applications in
the domains of infrastructure management, aerospace engineering, biomedical
engineering, and material science. Therefore, results from this research will
broadly benefit the American economy and society. In addition, findings from
this project enable wider, global efforts related to change-based risk analysis
of civil infrastructures through domestic and international collaborations. This
research will aid workforces capable of handling diverse spatiotemporal data for
proactive infrastructure management. Finally, change analysis games developed in
this effort are to be integrated into the engineering curriculum, K-12 summer
workshops, and industry outreach activities. A focus of this award is to engage
people from underrepresented groups, especially Hispanics and Native
Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing change analysis algorithms calculate
deviations of data points from their nearest neighbors in other data sources.
Such neighborhood searching cannot reliably track both global displacements and
local deterioration of objects across heterogeneous data. That limitation
impedes engineers from characterizing change patterns for predictive defect
analysis of structural systems. This research resolves this difficulty through
matching isomorphic spatiotemporal patterns across data sources to track both
global and local changes of objects, and then correlating these changes across
multiple structures for collapse prediction. Specifically, the research effort:
1) examines algorithms that hierarchically match similar spatiotemporal patterns
in order to identify corresponding parts of data; 2) investigates algorithms
that use corresponding parts of data to detect and classify changes; 3) uses
spatial statistical algorithms to discover patterns of correlated changes of
multiple structures; and 4) identifies patterns of changes that have strong
correlations with collapses. The contributions include: 1) a new method that
predicts structural failures through analysis of spatiotemporal change patterns
of multiple structures and 2) computationally efficient algorithms for reliably
detecting, classifying, and correlating changes across heterogeneous data.
Developed techniques will be validated using field data collected from twenty-
five structures within the United States, China, Korea, and Hong Kong, along
with data from the literature and civil infrastructure data repositories.