* 1454836
* CAREER: Fluctuation-Induced Phenomena in Microstructured Media
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Alejandro Rodriguez, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light can exert a force and carry
heat. Although these statements are uncontroversial today, their confirmations
were remarkable triumphs a little over a century ago, only a couple of centuries
after scientists had finally managed to show that light is a wave and moves at a
finite speed, as opposed to appearing instantaneously. Today's extraordinary
ability to confine and manipulate laser light at the nanoscale (billionths of a
meter) is enabling unprecedented control over the state of small particles and
the guiding of information over long distances, leading to breakthroughs in a
variety of technological areas, from medical imaging to telecommunications. The
increasing miniaturization of small mechanical devices, from accelerometers in
mobile phones to pressure sensors in modern tires, is pushing these small
systems into regimes where even tiny effects of light brought about by quantum
and thermal fluctuations of electric currents, the jittery motion of matter,
become important. Most famously, the vibrations of matter give rise to thermal
radiation, or the familiar glow of hot objects that underlies many naturally
occurring phenomena (such as the heating of the earth by the sun), and emerging
technologies (such as energy-harvesting devices which convert solar heat to
electricity). The same fluctuations carry momentum and lead to so-called
"dispersion" forces that enable geckos to climb walls and also cause static
friction between small devices with movable parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will support theoretical and computational research as well as
educational initiatives aimed at studying fluctuation effects in unexplored
regimes of nano-scale systems. In particular, the research team will develop
theoretical methods to understand the role and impact of designable materials on
heat transport and quantum forces between bodies with nano-metric features and
separations. At these tiny length scales, the fundamental description of
structured materials and their interaction with radiation must be modified to
account for the increasing role of atomic effects and strong light-matter
interactions. This paves the way for the study of emerging experimental and
technological regimes in which, like laser light before it, fluctuation effects
are used to control the state of nano-devices. Recent and ongoing studies of
these phenomena at larger length scales (millionths of a meter) all point to the
unavoidable impact of fluctuations on these systems, from heat radiation that is
many times larger than that of far-separated objects, to repulsive forces that
can be used to levitate objects in vacuum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
increasing the fundamental understanding of many naturally occurring processes,
progress in modeling fluctuation interactions will promote technical
developments that benefit society, by guiding improvements and applications in
nanotechnology, such as micro-electromechanical systems, thin-film
microfluidics, thermophotovoltaic energy conversion, and nano-scale cooling.
Furthermore, the research team will incorporate the resulting computational
techniques in freely available simulation-software packages that promote
teaching and learning by students, new researchers, and researchers from
developing nations who could not otherwise afford the high start-up costs of
developing new numerical tools from scratch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum and thermal fluctuations of electromagnetic
fields lead to a variety of important phenomena, including radiative heat
transport and Casimir forces between neutral, macroscopic objects. These effects
play a central role in many naturally occurring processes at everyday length
scales, including the radiation emitted from the sun and absorbed by the earth,
but become particularly pronounced at sub-micron scales where they can reach
atmospheric pressures. Recent theoretical developments in modeling fluctuation
phenomena between complex, nanostructured surfaces are enabling rigorous
explorations of these interactions. While calculations are extremely challenging
and come in a bewildering variety of flavors, from formulations based on
statistics of fluctuations to expressions based on path integrals and scattering
matrices, at its core the problem of modeling fluctuation interactions can be
reduced to the calculation of a large and cumbersome number of classical
electromagnetic scattering problems. Existing theoretical techniques have been
applied at both microscopic and atomistic scales, but fail to account for
important effects arising at intermediate scales. This project aims to fill this
gap by introducing novel theoretical and computational tools applicable in
emerging experimental regimes where the increasing role of atomistic and
nonlinear light-matter interactions cannot be ignored.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research thrusts include the study of (1) non-local
effects caused by smearing of the electronic response of materials, (2)
temperature gradients induced by external stimuli or material anisotropy, and
(3) nonlinearities arising from strong light-matter interactions. In particular,
this project aims to study heat transport between various classes of
nanostructured surfaces with features and separations at the nanometer scale,
where non-local effects and temperature gradients can be significant. Techniques
based on the volume integral equation of electromagnetic scattering which can
handle non-local and inhomogeneous media will be developed and applied to study
thermal radiation as well as other important fluctuation effects, including
fluorescence and Raman scattering. At high temperatures, the statistics of
fluctuations can be significantly modified due to the presence of strong light-
matter interactions. The research team will study the impact of such material
nonlinearities on the radiation spectra of bodies at and out of equilibrium,
where material-mediated coupling between photons at different frequencies can
lead to a variety of unusual effects, including phase transitions and line-shape
alterations. Finally, the impact of geometry and non-additivity on wetting
phenomena in highly non-planar surfaces will be explored, bringing new
perspectives and tools to the field of microfluidics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to increasing the fundamental understanding of many naturally occurring
processes, progress in modeling fluctuation interactions will promote technical
developments that benefit society, by guiding improvements and applications in
nanotechnology, such as micro-electromechanical systems, thin-film
microfluidics, thermophotovoltaic energy conversion, and nano-scale cooling. The
highly interdisciplinary nature of this research, spanning methods and ideas
from statistical physics, numerical linear algebra, electromagnetism, and
microfluidics, will be a great source of motivation and material to engage
students and the general scientific community. Finally, the techniques outlined
above will form the core of a free, well-documented, and portable software
package enabling study of fluctuation interactions spanning multiple length
scales. Such user-friendly packages promote teaching and learning.