* 1454868
* CAREER:   Modeling Response-Time Distributions to Test Theories of Event Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Jeffrey Starns, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2022
* USD 516,014.00

Memory for previously experienced events can take many forms, such as deciding
whether a person's face was seen previously versus deciding where a person's
face was seen previously. Different theories make different assumptions about
how these various forms of memory come about. Whereas some theories assume that
the ability to call to mind a prior experience is all-or-none (it either occurs
or does not), other theories assume that bits of information accumulate in a
continuous manner from less to more. Yet other theories assume that both an all-
or-none ability to call something to mind and a process of continuously
accumulating information co-exist, and either mechanism can underlie memory in a
given situation (it is a matter of teasing them apart). Determining the true
state of affairs is important for a number of reasons, including the development
of appropriate methods for assessing eyewitness memory, the development of
appropriate tools for assessing cognitive functions in cases of memory
impairment, and the development of appropriate memory tasks for use in research
on the neural underpinnings of memory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project
by an early career stage investigator aims to differentiate among existing
models of human event memory by imposing constraints not typically used by
researchers. Previous modeling efforts have led to somewhat of an impasse
regarding understanding human event memory because vastly different models are
all able to accommodate human data patterns produced in empirical studies of how
memory accuracy varies across experimental conditions. In addition to the
typically-used accuracy measures of memory, this project will use response time
measures to further constrain the data needing to be accommodated by the models
in order to better force differentiation among the possible theoretical
alternatives. Across a number of experiments, various experimental manipulations
will be used in conjunction with these measures to provide even further
constraints to help to rule models out and potentially identify a candidate
model for how human event memory most likely operates. As part of the education
component of the CAREER plan, the investigator will create a computational
modeling concentration within the Psychology major, providing undergraduate
students with a unique opportunity to develop cognitive modeling skills. He will
also make the modeling tools from the research available to the research
community via a website.