* 1454374
* CAREER:   Researching Chemical and Optical Properties of Secondary Organic Aerosol and Effective Practices for Environmental Science Education
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Roya Bahreini, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2022
* USD 793,466.00

This CAREER project is focused on investigating the relationship between the
chemical and optical properties of secondary organic aerosol in the atmosphere.
Secondary organic aerosols are small particles composed of compounds formed from
the atmospheric transformation of volatile organic gases. This research is being
conducted in an environmental chamber where the composition and optical
properties of the aerosols (such as how they scatter or absorb light) can be
measured as the conditions in the chamber change. This information is critical
for improving model estimates of the direct radiative forcing of secondary
organic aerosol and for understanding how they create haze and influence
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program is a Foundation-wide activity that offers the National Science
Foundation's most prestigious awards in support of junior faculty who exemplify
the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent education
and the integration of education and research within the context of the mission
of their organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental chamber experiments
are being conducted to study the dependence of the secondary organic aerosol
(SOA) optical characteristics on parent hydrocarbon, nature and degree of
oxidation, relative humidity, and chemical characteristics. The oxidation
experiments will involve reactions of hydrocarbons that are important SOA
precursors influenced by urban, biomass burning, and biogenically influenced
sources, in order to better represent the ambient SOA found in different
environments. The oxidation schemes tested will involve different sources of
photooxidation radicals and different levels of nitrogen oxides (NOx) to span a
range of NOx-free, intermediate-, and high-NOx conditions during the SOA
generation and aging processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational objectives
of the project are focused on supporting local high school teachers and future
STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Math) teachers in their professional
development, and improving the STEM related skills among high school students.