* 1454515
* CAREER: Statistical Analysis of Massive Data Sets under Low-Complexity Constraints
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Karim Lounici, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 203,293.00

The development of methods of statistical inference for massive data sets has
become a focal point of research in statistics and machine learning in recent
years with the dramatic increase of collected data in a wide range of
applications such as meteorology, genomics, or finance. A common denominator of
these new data sets is that they satisfy certain low-complexity structure
conditions. In specific settings, this could mean, for instance, sparsity of a
vector in high-dimensional regression or low-rank properties of a high-
dimensional matrix. This research aims at providing new efficient solutions
exploiting these particular structures in order to perform accurate inference.
The future findings should be of interest to a broad audience in the data
science community. The investigator also intends to integrate his contributions
into educational activities such as course development and mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students.

The research objectives of this project are to identify new informative low-
complexity structures in large scale data sets and propose new methods that are
adaptive to these structures, computationally efficient, and statistically
optimal in a variety of models, including in particular vector regression, trace
regression, principal component analysis for standard and functional data. The
new procedures will be based on penalized empirical risk minimization and
exponential weights mixing that favor low-complexity solutions. The investigator
plains to (a) determine fundamental characteristics of the problems that govern
the performance of these procedures; (b) establish new oracle inequalities
results in high dimension to assess the statistical performances of these
procedures; (c) investigate the computational performance of these procedures
under various conditions on the models.