* 1454904
* Reorganization of a Dopamine-Sensitive Locomotor Neural Network
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Karen Mesce, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 07/31/2021
* USD 559,940.00

Almost all living organisms need to move for their survival, and that locomotion
is often rhythmic and highly coordinated across an animal's legs, wings, fins,
or other body parts. How such coordination is orchestrated is not well
understood, but the consequences of losing nerve cells that are vital for
locomotion, for example, during a spinal cord injury, are strikingly clear. This
project examines how the nervous system can be retuned after a significant
perturbation or injury to regain its former ability to generate rhythmic
patterns of locomotion. Such reorganization addresses an emerging and highly
significant problem in the neurosciences -that of understanding the cellular
mechanisms of homeostatic plasticity. Essentially, this plasticity enables a
system to go back to its set point or regain its original operational status
after a perturbation. Currently, very little is known about locomotor-related
homeostatic mechanisms. To understand such events, at the level of individual
neurons, this project will use a combination of cellular, molecular and
behavioral methods to study how a recovering nervous system achieves its
transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific team has chosen to study
the medicinal leech as a model of locomotor control and homeostatic plasticity
because of its experimental accessibility and well-studied locomotor circuits.
Its central pattern generators (CPGs) for crawling behavior have been shown to
be regulated by dopamine, a universal modulator of motor activity in most
animals; each of these CPGs is located within each and every segmental ganglion
comprising the nerve cord. The compelling aspect of this project is discovering
how the crawl CPGs become retuned or reconfigured so that all timing events are
fully restored without the physical reconnection of cephalic inputs. Three
hypotheses will be tested: 1) proprioceptive inputs from the body wall
substitute for brain-specific timing events; 2) the CPG in the ganglion
immediately below the site of nerve cord injury takes the lead in initiating and
directing the metachronal crawl waves in the caudal direction; 3) changes in
gene expression patterns in the lead CPG provide for a lower crawl-activation
threshold to DA and/or proprioceptive inputs. Experimental methods will include
electrophysiology, immunocytochemistry, confocal imaging, behavioral video-
capture, computational neuroscience, and cutting-edge single-cell quantitative
PCR. This project's outcomes have potential to impact disparate fields outside
of the biological sciences, including physics, math, computer science and
engineering. The planned development of a leech transcriptome will also propel
the medicinal leech model into the era of genomics. The project will support the
training of female and minority participants, several leech-based laboratory
teaching modules, and community outreach projects involving a leech Critter-Cam
for middle school students.