* 1454086
* CAREER: SuSChEM: Experimental characterization of catalytic water oxidation reaction intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Etienne Garand, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2020
* USD 612,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics & Mechanisms B program
is supporting the research of Professor Etienne Garand of the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. Professor Garand will use cryogenic ion infrared
predissociation spectroscopy to characterize reaction complexes present in
catalytic water oxidation reactions. First, a methodology will be developed to
isolate catalytic reaction complexes generated under realistic electrochemical
conditions as well as by controlled gas-phase reactions. The structures of these
isolated complexes will then be characterized in detail using a method based on
a unique combination of mass spectrometry and vibrational predissociation
spectroscopy. Subsequent studies involving systematic variations of the catalyst
structure will reveal the influence of ligand environment and metal center on
the nature and electronic structure of the reaction complexes. The active
control of the solvent network in promoting processes such as proton coupled
electron transfer will also be probed in detail. The methodology developed here
will allow for precise and systematic spectroscopic characterization of reactive
species, providing a detailed description of the molecular level interactions
involved in the water oxidation process and elucidating their relationship with
the catalyst structure. Lastly, the results from these studies will also provide
stringent benchmarks for theoretical methods used to understand the mechanisms
of such molecular catalysts.

The project will improve our understanding of the mechanism of catalytic water
oxidation reactions, which will help the development of more efficient water
oxidation catalysts. Water oxidation reactions play a significant role in the
conversion of solar energy into chemical energy. Professor Garand will also
initiate educational projects that interweave research and teaching. To
demystify mass spectrometry for the general audiences, Professor Garand will
develop demonstrations based on a mechanically rotating saddle analog of the
Paul trap and a mass-selective quadrupole trap for macroscopic particles. These
interactive apparati will illustrate basic concepts in mass spectrometry such as
ion trapping, mass selection and collision activation. They will be integrated
into a general chemistry class and distributed more broadly through online
videos. Such visual and hands-on demonstrations of the concepts of mass
spectrometry will have the potential to engage the interest of the general
public and undergraduate students, providing them with a deeper understanding
and appreciation for the sciences behind these widely used instruments.
Professor Garand will also provide initiation to research for undergraduate
students through integrated research in classes and summer internships. Such
experiences can provide the students with a well-rounded educational experience
as they decide their future paths.