* 1454542
* CAREER: Interrogating and Exploiting the Hydrodynamics of Concentrated Emulsions for Droplet Microfluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Sindy KY Tang, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 09/30/2020
* USD 550,001.00

CBET - 1454542&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sindy Tang, Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project addresses the hydrodynamics
of concentrated emulsions in microchannel flows. Typically in these flows, the
droplets become closely packed, and they can coalesce with each other or break
apart. In many applications of microfluidic systems, the drops contain chemical
reagents or biological samples, and it is imperative to track the individual
motion of drops through the microfluidic device. If the drops rearrange their
order or breakup, tracking them becomes impossible. This project will identify
flow regimes in which drops retain their relative spatial arrangements even when
the flow takes the drops through microchannels that contain changes in their
cross-sectional shapes. The results of the project will be useful to
practitioners who design microfluidic systems for a variety of applications in
engineering, biological sciences, and medicine. In addition, results from the
research will be used in the development of a new course for engineering
undergraduates as well as in the development of demonstration modules and video
presentations for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine
the motion of concentrated emulsions in flow through microchannels with
confining geometries. Preliminary results demonstrate an interesting flow regime
where the spatial arrangement of drops that move through a channel containing a
contraction is exactly reversible when the direction of the flow is changed and
another regime that results in a stochastic breakup of drops. The goals of the
proposal are to characterize these regimes parametrically, identify the cause of
drop breakup, and to generate design rules for devices that require drops to
move through microfluidic devices maintaining precisely the sequential order of
drops through the entire device.