* 1454007
* CAREER: Chemically-Enabled Strategies for the Discovery and Characterization of Novel Enzymatic Function
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Emily Balskus, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 01/31/2020
* USD 675,999.00

Microorganisms are not only the most abundant form of life on Earth, but they
also possess the greatest diversity of metabolic functions. Gaining access to
their collective chemical arsenal would significantly enhance our ability to
produce essential small molecules ranging from commodity chemicals to life-
saving pharmaceuticals. Recent advances in DNA sequencing technologies have
delivered a wealth of microbial genomes that provide an unprecedented
opportunity for the discovery of new enzymes. The goal of this project is to
identify unusual and potentially useful enzymatic chemistry encoded in these
genomic data. The discovery of previously uncharacterized enzymatic activity and
its introduction into our reaction repertoire will ultimately lead to more
efficient and environmentally friendly routes for small molecule synthesis. The
specific C-C bond forming enzymes described in this work will be important
additions to the synthetic toolkits of both organic chemists and synthetic
biologists. These research efforts will also be integrated into a new
laboratory-based freshman seminar course that will engage students in the
discovery of new enzymes from human gut microbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Emily Balskus from Harvard University to
discover and characterize enzymes that mediate an unusual C-C bond-forming
macrocyclizing dimerization step used in the biosynthesis of the
cylindrocyclophane family of cyanobacterial natural products. Using a genome
mining approach that is guided by chemical knowledge, the PI has uncovered the
biosynthetic gene cluster encoding the enzymes responsible for this reaction.
The functions and mechanisms of these enzymes will now be elucidated using in
vivo and in vitro biochemical characterization methods, an effort that will be
enabled by chemical synthesis of crucial substrates. Important mechanistic
insights will also be obtained by solving the crystal structures of the enzymes
in collaboration with structural biologists. The central educational objective
of this proposal is to create a new research-based course for first-year
undergraduates focused on using a screening approach to discover novel enzymes
from the human gut microbiota. This class will bring the most exciting aspects
of scientific training to the forefront of the college curriculum, encouraging
interest in further undergraduate research and scientific careers. Overall, the
work detailed in this proposal represents an integrated research and education
effort at the interface of chemistry and biology.