* 1454855
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Advanced Machine Learning for Prediction of Preterm Birth
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Bob Carpenter, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 175,457.00

The United States spends over 26 billion dollars per annum on the delivery and
care of the 12-13% of infants who are born preterm. As preterm birth (PTB) is a
major public health problem with profound implications on society, there would
be extreme value in being able to identify women at risk of preterm birth during
the course of their pregnancy. Previous predictive approaches have been largely
unsuccessful since they have focused on a limited number of well described risk
factors known to be correlated with preterm birth (e.g. prior preterm birth,
race, and infection) and less on combining multiple factors. The latter approach
is necessary to understand the complex etiologies of preterm birth. While
identifying individual PTB risk factors has brought insight into the problem and
has led in some cases to successful treatments such as progesterone for women
with a previous preterm birth, this has only a limited impact on the overall
frequency since many at risk patients, such as first time mothers (nulliparous),
go untreated. Today, there is still no widely tested prediction system that
combines well-known PTB factors and is clinically useful. There is, however, a
global awareness of the need to discover and integrate the complex etiologies of
prematurity in order to predict women at risk. Significant efforts have been
made in the last couple of decades to collect large curated datasets of pregnant
women. Previous studies on these datasets used relatively straightforward
biostatitistical methodologies such as relative risk assessments to measure
associations between factors and PTB. However, risk factors are studied
independently of each other, which does not account for the multifactorial
complexity of PTB. This exploratory project aims to investigate the value of
more advanced machine learning methods by simultaneously considering all the
factors, to develop better predictive methods.

The PTB data acquired in the context of this project brings together Electronic
Health Records (EHRs) for mothers and their babies along with well-curated NIH
data. The data is rich with structured clinical data and unstructured free text
that require manual feature extraction. This project, largely motivated by the
PTB problem, has two main goals: (1) Improving the quality and aggregation the
annotations for heterogeneous data. The researchers aim to capture
socioeconomic, psychological and behavioral risk factors documented in the text
of clinical notes via studying the process of manual feature extraction by human
annotators. State-of-the-art methods either rely on the expertise of the
annotator and/or the difficulty of the instance but ignore the variability in
the quality of labeling over time due to fatigue, boredom, or knowledge. To
improve the annotations, the project will develop a novel Bayesian framework for
human labeling of unstructured data. The Bayesian model will embed a complete
set of parameters including the prevalence of each class, difficulty of the
instance and variability in the quality of annotation during the process. If the
model construction is successful, then the developed framework will replace ad-
hoc heuristics into a well-designed process for producing high quality
annotations. This framework would allow extracting reliable features from the
clinical text for subsequent analyses in devising PTB prediction models. (2)
Developing predictive models for multiple data spaces. To leverage all of the
existing data, the project will investigate the value of using Vapnik's paradigm
of Learning Using Privileged Information (LUPI) in the context of preterm birth.
Privileged information is a data that is available for training models but is
not available for test examples. Data in this project come with two potential
privileged information spaces namely the clinical notes and the space of future
events. NICU data is an example of future event privileged information, which is
only available for a subset of the examples (only premature babies requiring
intensive care stay in the NICU). It has been shown that LUPI not only induces a
better decision rule, it also increases the rate of convergence of the
algorithm, hence requiring fewer training examples. This is a compelling
property in the case of PTB prediction because of the rate of PTB. The project
will extend LUPI into a powerful and applicable framework to handle the two
spaces of privileged information, while developing spline-generating kernels, to
manage LUPI's high computational cost. If successful, this proof-of-concept is
expected to yield efficient and widely applicable LUPI algorithms in domains
where privileged information is available, such as the financial domain and many
other medical applications. The developed software, publications and datasets
resulting from this project will be made publicly available to the research
community through the project website
(http://www1.ccls.columbia.edu/~ansaf/CING/PTB/).