* 1454950
* CAREER: Developing Graphene Superlattices in a Massive-Massless Hybrid Electron System
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Cheng Cen, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 04/30/2021
* USD 500,515.00

Nontechnical Description: The ability to control the electronic properties of
graphene (an atomic layer of carbon) with nanoscale precision is critical for
the implementation of graphene-based devices. However, many existing techniques
used in traditional semiconductors are much less effective on graphene due to
its unique structure. To address this challenge, a fundamental materials study
enabling such precision control in graphene is developed in this CAREER award
project. Overlapping an artificial periodic electronic structure on top of
graphene has been predicted to be an effective approach for such a task.
Stemming from a hybrid bilayer system that integrates graphene with complex
oxide interfaces, this project focuses on understanding the controlling
mechanisms which could lead to an on-demand tuning technique for future
innovative graphene-based electronic devices. Taking advantage of the novel
technique developed through this research, the project will produce a new class
module on "physics in nanoelectronics" with demonstrations and experimental
opportunities for students involved. The associated videos and course materials
will be shared with the broader education community. Undergraduate students will
be involved in both the research project and the development of the class
module. In addition the course module and related materials will be adopted by
outreach programs tailored for students from underrepresented groups to promote
their interest in physics and a future career in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The research goal of this CAREER
award is to develop a method of band engineering in graphene, which will support
the design of unconventional superlattice-based graphene electronics, and to
study its fundamental mechanism. The study is based on both the hybrid bilayer
system integrating graphene with LaAlO3(LAO)/SrTiO3(STO) interfaces and the
conducting atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) technique. The nanoscale periodic
patterns of a two dimensional electron gas (2DEG) reversibly created at the
LAO/STO interface using c-AFM are expected to generate reprogrammable
superlattice potentials in graphene for desired band modifications. The
interactions between the massive regular fermions confined at the LaAlO3/SrTiO3
interfaces and the massless Dirac fermions in graphene are studied. Controlling
the proximity effects in graphene/complex oxide heterostructures is expected to
give rise to exciting new physics and novel functionalities. In addition, the
close coupling between oxides and a high-mobility graphene layer could be very
powerful for probing the properties at the oxide interfaces, such as sub-band
structures and electron correlations. These studies may help to shed light on
some of the unsolved problems in complex oxides.