* 1454763
* CAREER: Characterizing Acid-Catalyzed Secondary Organic Aerosol Formation in the Atmosphere
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Christopher Hennigan, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2021
* USD 561,265.00

With this CAREER Award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the
Division of Chemistry is supporting the research of Professor Christopher J.
Hennigan at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. Professor Hennigan is
characterizing the effects of acid-catalyzed reactions on the atmospheric
transformation of volatile organic compounds into secondary organic aerosol
(SOA). SOA is a ubiquitous and highly abundant component of fine particle mass
in the atmosphere, contributing to aerosol effects on human health and climate.
This research bridges the apparent disagreement between laboratory and ambient
studies on the role of particle acidity in forming SOA. These studies seek to
achieve an improved representation of SOA formation in models and thus, may lead
to improved predictive capabilities of ambient aerosol loadings. Professor
Hennigan is integrating the research with educational activities that broaden
access of underrepresented groups to research in environmental chemistry. This
will be facilitated through the Meyerhoff Scholars Summer Bridge Program, and
through the organization of outreach that connects high school students with
undergraduates pursuing environmental chemistry
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, new methodology is being developed
for the fast, near real-time measurement of particle acidity. The result will be
an automated system that provides the best combination of high time resolution
and accuracy of any aerosol pH measurement or estimation method to-date. The
system is being deployed to characterize the effects of acid catalysis on the
gas-particle partitioning of semi-volatile organic compounds in the atmosphere.
The ambient measurements will span multiple seasons to capture a diverse array
of meteorological conditions and source influences. The work seeks to provide a
detailed understanding of a process in which biogenic emissions are transformed
by anthropogenic pollutants in the atmosphere. This has implications for
understanding the broader impact of human activities on changes in air
composition and quality and consequential impacts upon climate.