* 1454151
* CAREER: Scalable Liquid Exfoliation Processing of Ultrathin Two-Dimensional Metal Dichalcogenides Nanosheets for Energy Storage Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Gurpreet Singh, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will establish a
novel process for large-scale production of atomically thin sheets of transition
metal dichalcogenides (or TMDs) with optimized properties suitable for energy-
based applications, specifically, rechargeable metal-ion batteries. TMD sheets
possess several distinct functional properties that are not realized in their
bulk crystalline form or in other widely studied layered materials such as
pristine graphene and hexagonal boron nitride. One major hurdle currently
impeding the commercial success of TMDs is lack of production at larger scales
while maintaining desired chemical and physical attributes. This award supports
fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development of a
solution-based processing route that involves spontaneous exfoliation (i.e.,
separation into single molecular layers) of bulk crystals in strong acids. The
new process will enable production of kilogram quantities of ultrathin TMD
nanosheets, which would overcome major roadblocks and unlock a vast array of
applications for these materials in the energy sector, ranging from inexpensive
catalysts for hydrogen production to high performance rechargeable batteries and
supercapacitors. Therefore, results from this research will promote the U.S.
economy, environment, and quality of life of its citizens. This research spans
across several disciplines including manufacturing, engineering mechanics,
electrochemistry, and materials science. The inter-disciplinary approach will
increase participation by underrepresented groups in laboratory research and
positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's
solution-based approach can overcome challenges that current methods have such
as low production rates of single layer sheets, scission of sheets into sub-
micron sized particles, and long sonication times (hours to days). However,
additional scientific barriers need to be overcome in order to unlock the full
potential of exfoliated TMDs in the energy sector (for example, sodium-ion
rechargeable batteries). These include, lack of basic science related to
exfoliation mechanism(s); inability to manufacture large-area nanostructured TMD
electrodes with desired fracture properties; and unexplored mechanism(s) of
TMD/metal-ion intercalation and conversion chemistry. This project aims to fill-
in these knowledge gaps by (1) performing experiments and developing theoretical
formulations to explain the dominant mechanisms for spontaneous exfoliation of
bulk TMDs into ultrathin sheets, (2) assessing the processing advantages of
exfoliated sheets by interfacing with graphene (thinnest and strongest
electrical conductor) to form composite electrodes, thereby testing the limits
of nanostructuring on fracture strength and electrochemical storage capacity,
and (3) combining novel in-situ and ex-situ experimental techniques with
companion computational models to establish TMD/metal-ion intercalation
chemistry and phase transition mechanisms.