* 1454098
* Career: An Approach for Area Efficient Ultra-Broadband Low Power mmWave Beamforming Transceivers in Communication and Medical Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Jacques Rudell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract Title: An Approach for Area Efficient Ultra-Broadband Low Power mmWave
Beamforming Transceivers in Communication and Medical
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jacques C. Rudell, University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;Proposal NO: 1454098
(Career)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadband wireless internet access has
been identified by the Federal Communications Commission as a foundational
necessity for "economic growth, job creation, global competitiveness, and a
better way of life". Existing consumer electronic devices heavily utilize the
spectrum around the Very High Frequency (VHF) microwave bands (300MHz 5 GHz) for
radio communication; however, with the proliferation of mobile smart phones,
notebook, and laptop computers, the microwave band has become increasingly
crowded. In contrast, the spectrum available above 24 GHz, commonly referred to
as the millimeter wave (mmWave) band, is sparsely occupied and presents
opportunities to address future wireless infrastructure demands. Exploiting
these higher frequency bands requires new strategies to realize small, low-cost,
broad bandwidth, and low power hardware. Although significant research effort
over the past decade has been applied toward the realization of practical mmWave
hardware solutions, the devices developed thus far have yet to experience
widespread adoption, due in large part to the increased complexity associated
with operating at such high frequencies. This research seeks to not only improve
upon the existing hardware technology, but to transform it with new radio
architectural techniques. In addition to expanding consumer markets, these
hardware solutions will also benefit other areas, such as scientific and medical
research; examples include improvements to Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
imaging systems and transceivers for 5th Generation (5G) mobile devices.
Moreover, these system and circuit challenges will also provide an ideal
backdrop for integrating this research with University coursework, helping to
prepare students for careers in industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt;This research
seeks to address broad challenges inherent to realizing extremely wideband
mmWave systems: What are the fundamental hardware trade-offs between power
consumption, silicon area, and complexity for energy efficient longer-range
mmWave communication These tradeoffs will be explored in this research using
experiments to develop mmWave circuits and systems which demonstrate reliable,
long range, broad bandwidth wireless communication in bands above 24GHz.
Specific research objectives include: (1) invent and define new circuit
topologies to facilitate integration of high-element low power phased-array
transceivers, (2) develop techniques to build ultra-broadband circuits using
minimal silicon area in conventional low cost silicon CMOS, and (3) design low
power frequency synthesizers and the associated local oscillator distribution
networks for high-element phased-array systems with minimal power consumption.
The PI is actively involved in the IEEE and has strong relationships with many
industry partners including Qualcomm, Broadcom, Google, Boeing, and Intel Corp.
This places him in a unique position to disseminate research findings and new
design methodologies to a wide audience through seminars and workshops for
private industry, and at international conferences.