* 1454601
* CAREER: Fast Surrogate Modeling for Design under Uncertainty of Complex Engineering Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Alireza Doostan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 04/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will establish an
integrated research and education program motivated by the challenges associated
with the development of predictive, simulation-based methods for the design and
optimization of complex engineering system. Complex engineering systems often
involve multiple physical phenomena at multiple scales. Such systems dominate
current engineering interests, for example, as in the design and manufacturing
of materials and energy storage systems. The dynamics of these systems are
intrinsically variable due to, for instance, material properties or
manufacturing imperfections, so that there is an imperative need to quantify the
impact of such uncertainties for accurate performance prediction and design
optimization. To this end and with the objective of advancing the current
simulation technologies available for design and optimization, this award
supports the development of a set of novel theories, algorithms, and software
tools for fast characterization and propagation of uncertainty. The increasing
significance and societal impact of predictive simulation capabilities in
present and future design of engineering systems will additionally form the
basis of an outreach and education effort to attract and engage future
generations of engineers, especially from women and underrepresented minorities,
entering and studying at the University of Colorado, Boulder.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach for uncertainty characterization and
propagation is based on new and scalable surrogate modeling &amp;#8232;schemes,
together with effective computational tools for robust design and optimization
of complex engineering systems. The idea of surrogate modeling is to construct
an approximate (but inexpensive to evaluate) representation of the mapping
between the parameters of a model and the performance objectives. This surrogate
model is then used for robust design, optimization, sensitivity analysis, or
decision making. To enable fast construction of surrogate models, novel
deterministic and random sampling schemes along with model reduction approaches
will be developed, in the context of sparse and low-rank approximations. The key
to the scalability of the new algorithms is that they effectively and
automatically identify the lower-dimensional manifold on which the possibly
high-dimensional or non-smooth system solution exists. The surrogate modeling
tools will be employed to better predict the reliability of lithium ion battery
cells, and to facilitate the uncertainty-aware design of their electrodes.