* 1454984
* CAREER: Defect-driven Metal Oxides for Enhanced Energy Storage Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Hui Xiong, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 552,213.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to advance the
understanding of defect-driven oxide materials for developing new battery
technologies to meet global energy needs. People depend on energy to power
buildings, cars, portable devices, manufacturing, and communication systems.
Global energy demands are growing exponentially, making improved energy storage
technologies increasingly urgent. This project explores a new electrochemical
paradigm to create oxide materials with disorder for high energy, power, and
stability battery systems. Recent studies have indicated that metal oxides with
structural defects and local disorder may offer superior capacity and stability
over the widely explored well-ordered oxides for advanced battery systems.
Confirmation of the hypothesis of enhancing battery functionality in this
project using defect-driven oxide materials could profoundly transform battery
research, manufacturing, and applications, and also open pathways for defect-
driven electrode materials research. This project stands to improve the U.S.
innovation and economic competitiveness in the area of energy storage
technologies. Finally, this project aims at educating and mentoring students
from elementary through graduate school through an integrated research program
that is focused on fundamental science of energy materials. Graduate students
are offered opportunities for professional development through collaborative
research with national laboratories. This project is also developing educational
modules for Idaho youth in non-school settings through a new partnership with
local Boys and Girls Clubs to boost students' interest in science and
engineering. Research outcomes are demonstrated through hands-on education
modules in the annual STEM Exploration Day and other on-campus outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;This project
tests the hypothesis that nanoscale disordered metal oxides can serve as a host
with a fairly open framework that can be electrochemically altered to form
optimal structures for enhanced electrochemical charge storage. Recent studies
have indicated that cation-disordered ceramic materials may offer higher
capacity and better stability as compared to well-ordered oxides; however the
underlying electrochemical charge storage mechanism remains largely unknown.
This study aims to advance knowledge of defect-driven oxide materials,
thermodynamics, intercalation kinetics, and how to leverage them for energy
storage. Evidence that tailoring the defect chemistry will result in spontaneous
phase transformation during electrochemical cycling from nanoscale amorphous
oxides to optimal structures is sought. Under study are simple model oxide
systems (titania and niobium pentoxide) and Li(Na)-ion battery systems. The
research could offer a universal method to create new high performance electrode
materials. In addition, the team is adapting nanoscience, electrochemistry, and
energy materials research concepts to curricula from K-12 to the graduate level.
Graduate student researchers are collaborating with national laboratories to
expand the capabilities in this project; through these collaborations, students
are also gaining technical experience with cutting-edge research equipment and
techniques.