* 1454315
* CAREER: Thermophotonics for Efficient Harvesting of Waste Heat as Energy
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Peter Bermel, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

In 2013, 61% of raw energy (namely, coal, natural gas, and oil) was wasted as
heat because of the low efficiency of power conversion. A thermophotovoltaic
(TPV) system desirable for its low maintenance and quiet, portable operation can
uniquely capture this waste heat as electricity by using thermal photons
(discrete units or quanta of light) whose energies match the bandgap of the
photovoltaic (PV) cell. However, TPV systems emit the vast majority of thermal
photons at low energies, thus greatly reducing efficiencies. To overcome this
barrier, we propose to develop a highly innovative approach to TPV, which we
call thermo-photonics (TPX), by redirecting thermal photons into useful energies
matching the PV cell. TPX can significantly increase the efficiency of TPV
converters up to 50%. What is more, this device may efficiently utilize standard
silicon PV technology, thus ensuring a relatively easy transfer to commercial
development when the concept is proven. Studying TPX will develop fundamental
knowledge of thermal radiation, heat transfer, and the limits of photovoltaic
conversion processes to make a potentially transformative contribution.
Applications may include harvesting waste heat, converting solar power, and
creating new light sources. The long-term career objective of this proposal is
to integrate photonics-based approaches to harvesting waste heat with the
education of future engineers through simulation-based learning. Simulation
modules will be developed in an undergraduate research program and widely
distributed to the scientific community through Purdue's NSF-supported existing
nanotechnology dissemination site, nanoHUB. Courses on new device concepts will
be disseminated worldwide using nanoHUB-U. Female undergraduate students will be
recruited through a series of events planned with Purdue's Women in Engineering
Program. The basic nanoscience and engineering concepts underlying this work
will also be conveyed to local high school teachers, through an intensive
professional development program known as Research Goes to
Schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermophotonics (TPX) is a highly innovative
variation on thermophotovoltaics (TPV) where thermal radiation below the PV
bandgap is strongly suppressed, while radiation above it is enhanced, thus
enabling extremely high efficiencies. However, this approach requires redesign
of virtually every aspect of previous TPV systems. To investigate the
theoretical and experiment aspects of this problem thoroughly, we will employ a
comprehensive, vertically integrated methodology utilizing the following
elements: (1) a self-consistent electro-thermo-optic simulation tool that
combines finite-difference time domain (FDTD) and carrier drift-diffusion (DD);
(2) experimental CMOS-compatible fabrication of nanostructured thermophotonic
structures via interference lithography and high-performance Si PV diodes; (3)
characterization of PV receivers with a range of techniques; and (4)
characterization of TPX emission and efficiency in a UHV chamber. This project
will combine careful and detailed simulation of the TPX converter with
innovative device fabrication and detailed characterization to verify the
photonic and photovoltaic device models. Such a combination of theory, device
fabrication, and experimental validation is necessary to achieve high
efficiencies in this new device. Careful modeling of two new emitter designs in
this work suggests that the solar spectrum can be concentrated into a narrower
range of photon energies, while new work on photon recycling suggests that thin
PV cells can more efficiently convert them into electricity. Combining these
innovations could yield a highly efficient conversion of heat to electricity
approaching 50%. This proposal will lead to a detailed understanding of the
promise and feasibility of building such TPX systems by developing models,
computational tools, and process flows applicable to a broad range of high-
temperature nanophotonic and heat-to-electricity conversion systems. Ultimately,
it will yield a demonstration of selectivity in TPX emitters, including a
detailed comparison to theory and simulation, and will integrate photonics-based
approaches to harvesting waste heat with the education of future engineers
through simulation-based learning.