* 1454016
* CAREER: History-Dependent Cell Motility in Heterogeneous Microenvironments
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2022
* Amit Pathak, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 01/31/2022
* USD 605,109.00

The research objective of this NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program award is to understand how cells move across tissue of varying stiffness
to reach distant locations within the body. The ability of cells to move, both
singly and together, through living tissue fundamentally controls how our bodies
function in health and disease, including development, aging, and disorders such
as cancer. Throughout their life cycle, cells move in time and space according
to a complex program. While various steps of this process have been studied
separately, it is not well understood if multiple steps of the cell migration
process are interdependent. This research will tackle these unanswered questions
through an innovative multi-disciplinary approach that combines micro-
fabrication, biomaterials, cell biology, and computer simulation. These studies
will reveal how mechanical properties of the tissue regulate how cells move,
both as individuals and groups, which in turn will help create new strategies to
engineer cell motion. These research efforts will be combined with an education
and outreach plan to develop a framework for training and educating graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 students at the interface of engineering and biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge about time and length scales of changes in
cellular phenotypes across heterogeneous environments might enable better
predictions of how cells invade complex tissue. Towards this research goal, the
project will employ engineering-based approaches that allow systematic "time and
space" deconstruction of intra- and extra-cellular parameters. These studies
will include fabrication of tissue-mimetic cell culture platforms of tunable
mechanical properties, study of cell motility across matrices of varying
properties, and construction of computational models simulating single and
collective cell migration in diverse environments. The accompanied education
plan highlights how engineering-based approaches are often uniquely suited to
study complex biological processes. The education activities will train students
in cellular mechanobiology through an integrated community outreach program
consisting of a robotic cell-crawling exhibit and corresponding teaching modules
for high-school students. The computer simulations and cell motility videos from
research efforts will be included in the teaching modules and made available to
science teachers from partner high schools. The education plan also includes
undergraduate and graduate course development on "mechanics of cell motility"
and undergraduate research internships for first year students to encourage
multidisciplinary learning at an early stage.