* 1454343
* CAREER: Modeling Polymer Electrolyte Microstructure: How Polymer Architecture Controls Ion Conduction
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Lisa Hall, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2021
* USD 475,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational
studies of polymeric materials for potential applications as non-flammable
polymer electrolytes in a new generation of safe, lightweight batteries. The
goal of this project is to develop and use innovative computational and
theoretical tools to model ionic conductance in block copolymer based materials.
In diblock copolymers, chains of the two different chemical types are connected
together, forming a long chain molecule with different chemical composition on
each end. If the two blocks are different, they phase separate (like oil and
water) forming nanometer scale structures. Of special interest for future
applications are diblock copolymers with added salts in which one block forms
soft and the other forms hard domains. The softer domains conduct lithium ions
(serving the purpose of the battery electrolyte), while the harder domains
prevent the growth of lithium dendrites which can short-circuit the battery. The
PI's group will focus on understanding how polymer structure controls final
materials properties.

The education and outreach part of this project builds on development of an
interactive simulation setup with a 3D display and force-feedback joystick to
communicate to students across the age groups and to the general public what
polymers are and how their structure impacts material properties. The PI and
members of her group will participate in the "Translating Engineering Research
to K-8" (TEK8) program through the College of Engineering at OSU and use the
existing infrastructure of Ohio State's STEAM Factory and Women in Engineering
program to increase interest of underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award supports research and educational activities
with a focus on development of innovative computational tools for modeling ionic
conductance in block copolymer based materials. The goal is to use theoretical
techniques and computer modeling to elucidate the underlying physics behind the
structure and conductance of polymeric materials and to guide future synthesis
efforts. The experimental systems that inspire this research are nonflammable
battery electrolytes that are inherently safer and could increase battery energy
density while preventing lithium dendrite growth. The approach is designed to
overcome difficulties associated with the multiple time and length scales of the
problem due to complex polymer morphology, effects of packing of finite size
ions and polymeric units, and the long-range electrostatic interactions between
charged species. The theoretical approach will be based on the fluid density
functional theory and simulation techniques will include molecular dynamics
simulations of the coarse-grained models. To bridge multiple time and length
scales the strategy will be to obtain the equilibrium polymer morphology from
density functional calculations and to use this structure as a starting point
for coarse-grained simulations. This approach will be applied to model material
properties of diblock copolymers and tapered copolymers, in which a region with
a gradient in monomer composition is added between two pure blocks. The goal of
this approach is to efficiently sample parameter space and to show how the
materials properties depend on polymer architecture, polymer morphology, and ion
concentration.

The education and outreach part of this project builds on development of an
interactive simulation setup with a 3D display and force-feedback joystick to
communicate to students across the age groups and to the general public what
polymers are and how their structure impacts material properties. The PI and
members of her group will participate in the "Translating Engineering Research
to K-8" (TEK8) program through the College of Engineering at OSU and use the
existing infrastructure of Ohio State's STEAM Factory and Women in Engineering
program to increase interest of underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.