* 1454918
* IDBR : TYPE B Development of a Laser Based Benchtop Radiocarbon Analyzer
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Daniel Murnick, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2018
* USD 703,354.00

An award is made to Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey in Newark for
the Development of a Laser Based Benchtop Radiocarbon Analyzer, a system to be
used for the detection of very small quantities of Carbon 14. Broader impacts of
the instrument development project are varied and span many areas: drug
metabolism analysis, carbon dating, and environmental monitoring are
particularly important. In the pharmaceutical area, microdosing methodology
where non-therapeutic trace doses of labeled drugs are used to safely obtain
pharmacokinetic information on new drugs will benefit from the developed
instrument which will lower costs, speed up drug trials and make new drugs
safer. For environmental monitoring, because the analyzer can accommodate a
continuous flow of carbon dioxide, continuous air or soil gas monitoring
heretofore impossible will become feasible and allow more robust monitoring of
fossil fuel carbon in the biosphere. Important to the instrument development
project is outreach to a broad user community and to potential commercial
partners. Using methodology learned in the NSF I-CORPS program this bridging
development project will expedite commercialization of the instrument via
private sector manufacturing, sales and service. The highly diverse student body
at Rutgers in Newark will be exposed to the project which may influence their
career decisions; and qualified students will participate in development
projects. Technology transfer success will benefit the wider scientific
enterprise by illustrating the value of fundamental physical research in solving
societal problems. Government and private sector funding will be sought for
technology transfer and broad scale commercialization.

The use of Radiocarbon or Carbon 14 (C-14) as a tracer is very widely accepted
in many areas of science. Because it is a "natural" label of living systems it
is often used for carbon dating of once living samples and also for tracing
carbon in the atmosphere/biosphere system. Labeling with 14C is especially
important in drug development and environmental studies as well as in basic
research associated with metabolism. Traditional instrument systems to quantify
C-14 still depend on the detection of a nuclear decay event, a highly
inefficient process which requires the use of either high levels of
radioactivity, large samples, long counting times, or some combination of each.
Greatly enhanced sensitivity, now only possible with large centralized particle
accelerator technology, is necessary for low dose and small sample tracer
studies, for long-term metabolic studies, for drug dissemination studies and for
environmental monitoring. The laser-based instrument to be developed in this
project can provide the required high sensitivity, with the simplicity of
radiation counting, in a benchtop analyzer capable of being used by a laboratory
technician. Such high sensitivity will reduce the costs associated with drug
metabolism studies and allow human tracer testing with little radiation
exposure. Engineering, algorithm and calibration simplification will improve the
precision and throughput allowing the widespread use and commercialization of
the technology.