* 1454802
* CAREER: Middle and Late Cenozoic Surface Uplift and Climate along the Strike of the Rocky Mountains: Refining the Development of an Intracontinental Mountain Belt
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Majie Fan, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 05/31/2022
* USD 485,627.00

The Rocky Mountains of the western North America is the premier example of
intracontinental mountain belts. Thick Cretaceous marine deposits provide
unambiguous evidence that the region was near sea level at about 80 Ma ago.
However, the history of subsequent vertical movements that formed present
topography are less well constrained, yet crucial for understanding the tectonic
processes and driving forces by which mountains form in continental interiors.
This project aims to constrain the surface uplift of the Rocky Mountains and
western Great Plains and associated climate changes during the last 35 million
years. State-of-the-art isotopic methods will be used to estimate the
paleotopography along transects in the northern and southern Rocky Mountains.
The results will test the hypothesis that the timing and magnitude of uplift of
the Rockies varied along its length, variations that can constrain the complex
geodynamic processes the formed the Rockies during the this time period. The
educational component of this CAREER award involve concerted efforts to engage
students from underrepresented minorities in STEM and to provide teaching
training to graduate students to better prepare them for academic careers.
Specifically, the project will introduce professional activities and career
outlooks of geoscientists to about 100 underrepresented minority high-school
students in east Texas through a two-day long GEOCAMP, involve underrepresented
high-school and undergraduate students in research, and train doctoral students
to implement best practices in teaching for diverse learners as part of
successful professional careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent geologic and
geophysical observations of this classic intracontinental mountain belt
demonstrate that the geodynamic drivers of Rocky Mountain uplift are complex and
include: (1) late Cretaceous-early Eocene crustal thickening and shortening, or
mantle dynamic processes related to low-angle subduction or the removal of an
oceanic plateau; (2) middle Cenozoic detachment of oceanic slab; and/or (3) late
Cenozoic mantle upwelling and thermal isostasy. The timing of occurrence and the
role each mechanism played probably varied along the strike of the range. This
project explores the idea that the timing and magnitude of the uplift of the
Rockies varied along strike, and that these variations resulted from complex,
but decipherable, geodynamic processes during the mid- to late Cenozoic.
Specifically, the project will: (1) calibrate clumped isotope geothermometer of
Quaternary fluvial carbonate cement in order to evaluate its application to
paleoelevation and paleoclimate reconstructions; (2) improve the
chronostratigraphy of the middle and upper Cenozoic strata in the Rockies and
adjacent Great Plains as well as east Texas by determination depositional ages
using detrital and tuff zircon U-Pb geochronology; and (3) document the
paleotopographic and paleoclimatic evolution of the Rockies and the adjacent
Great Plains along strike using carbonate clumped isotope and volcanic glass
hydrogen isotope paleoaltimeters in order to understand the tectonic processes
of the formation of the Rockies and associated climate changes during the middle
and late Cenozoic.