* 1454656
* CAREER: Development and Application of Crumpled Graphene Oxide-Based Nanocomposites as a Platform Material for Advanced Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* John Fortner, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

1454656&lt;br/&gt;Fortner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Development and
Application of Crumpled Graphene Oxide-Based Nanocomposites as a Platform
Material for Advanced Water Treatment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water is critical to
sustainability in the 21st Century. There are numerous aspects to water
sustainability with one of those being development of new treatment processes
which utilize new materials. This CAREER proposal directly benefits society as
it will provide fundamental scientific understanding and information to help
address the critical, global need for continued development of novel and
advanced water treatment technologies. The PI will broadly disseminate project
related scientific results through publication in peer-reviewed journals,
presentation at conferences, and through the organization of symposiums at
national meetings of the American Chemical Society. Additionally, this project
incorporates a five year, comprehensive educational and outreach plan, which is
designed to 1.) provide unique educational opportunities for an estimated 500
students in the St. Louis region, including over 450, 6-12th grade students; 2.)
create specific and hands-on, project related, research opportunities for
numerous undergraduate researchers (20-30 students); and 3.) directly support
two Ph.D. students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, this project aims to
systematically engineer, fundamentally characterize and broadly demonstrate 3D,
crumpled graphene oxide platform composites for improved performance and, in
some cases, enabling innovative (re)design strategies for advanced water
treatment technologies. This project is highly novel and timely in that
engineered, nanocomposite crumpled graphene oxide materials have, to date, not
been evaluated as platform materials for advanced, aqueous based photocatalysis
or as multifunctional membrane components, despite distinct material/engineering
advantages, including: intrinsic porosities, highly tailorable photocatalytic
and magnetic properties, tunable (carbon) surface chemistry and physical
size/shape regimes, high aqueous and chemical stabilities, and scalable
production routes. The fundamental nature of this work will not only directly
support and inform the next generation of 3D graphene based composite structures
for environmental applications but will also serve a wide range of researchers
focused on engineering (curved) carbon-based nanostructures for advanced
sensing, catalysts, photovoltaics, antifouling/antimicrobial surfaces, among
other applied materials.