* 1454815
* CAREER: Boosting Signals for Hidden Supersymmetry with the ATLAS Hadronic Calorimeter
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2015,07/31/2020
* David Miller, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 07/31/2020
* USD 985,595.00

Part I&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award will support Professor David
Miller, at the University of Chicago, in seeking to answer questions about the
fundamental structure of matter at a new energy frontier. Specifically, Prof.
Miller will extend and enhance his research program using the ATLAS detector at
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), to conduct measurements that will seek out the
existence of new TeV-scale particles, and characterize the particles and forces
of the Standard Model with greater precision. This will be achieved by
developing novel analysis algorithms to search for these new massive particles
and advanced high-speed electronics that enhance the performance of the ATLAS
detector in key domains. For broader impact, the PI will be leading the Lane
Tech High School U. Chicago Outreach Program and the Enrico Fermi Summer Interns
Program for 7th graders. In addition, he will bring high-energy physics concepts
into undergraduate classrooms, by providing college students with concrete
examples of how the core physics curriculum is being used by active researchers
at the forefront of science today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
II&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award will extend the PI (Professor
David Miller)'s research program, which is focused on developing a comprehensive
approach to recognize the most complex hadronic final states in search of new
TeV-scale particles. This research includes development of novel analysis
algorithms and advanced high-speed electronics. His goal is to search for
evidence of Supersymmetry in final states characterized by Lorentz-boosted
massive particles using distinct signatures in the ATLAS calorimeter system, and
to better understand the Standard Model processes involved that form a large
background to these new states. The particles sought should generate multi-jet
final states, and new algorithms will be introduced to recognize them. In
addition, this effort will be integrated into the development of high-speed
electronics for new triggering systems, vital to the future running of Large
Hadron Collider (LHC). The PI's group will perform detailed measurements of
Standard Model processes that will help to better understand the backgrounds
these represent to the new signals sought. Timing of this program corresponds to
the higher center of mass energy of Run II at the LHC which should increase the
yield of processes such as collinear emission of a W-boson, the intermediate
carrier of the weak force and a prime target of study in this work. For broader
impact, the excitement and results of this physics program will be communicated
through K-12 and undergraduate education programs. These programs will include
community outreach activities that target underrepresented students in the City
of Chicago. The PI will be leading the Lane Tech High School U. Chicago Outreach
Program and the Enrico Fermi Summer Interns Program for 7th graders.