* 1454816
* CAREER:   Probing the Demographics of Supermassive Black Holes with Time-Domain Observations of Tidal Disruption Events
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Suvi Gezari, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 04/30/2021
* USD 808,004.00

Supermassive black holes (SMBHs) are not just rare and exotic; recent
observations of nearby galaxies have demonstrated that SMBHs are a central
component of almost all galaxies. Based on these observations, the best evidence
suggests that both the SMBHs and the galaxy grow in mass over time. How does
this happen? The researcher has a plan of observations that will show the
connection between these central beasts (SMBHs) and their host galaxies. However
the observations are difficult. Most SMBHs in the Universe are hidden from view:
too distant to measure the gravitational pull on the stars by the SMBH, or too
dim from the lack of gas falling onto the SMBH. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher plans to use optical telescopes, which look at the sky automatically
and repeatedly every night, to find rare transient events: when stars pass too
close to SMBHs. A 'starved' (dormant) black hole will reveal itself when an
unlucky star passes close enough to be torn apart by tremendous tides expected
near the SMBH. Based on the brightness of the flare, when the Tidal Disruption
Event (TDE) happens, they will be able to weigh the central SMBH, estimate the
black hole spin, as well as constrain the mass, radius, and internal structure
of the disrupted star.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has several major
intellectual merits: 1) The researcher clearly lays out the status of measuring
intermediate-mass and supermassive black hole properties with tidal disruption
events and convincingly details how to find thousands of TDE candidates. 3) They
plan to increase the sensitivity of Pan-STARRS 1 (PS1) Medium Deep Survey with
stacking analysis and using the dataset to classify transients of all flavors is
the step towards efficiently filtering observations with the new Large Synoptic
Survey Telescope. 3) The researcher will help other scientists' research by
sharing their machine-learning algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher
will enhance the Maryland GRAD-MAP program, which encourages women and under-
represented groups in STEM fields. She will leverage established success of
GRAD-MAP in improving retention rate among physics majors at local minority
serving institutions. Her previous experience in GRAD-MAP is significant. PS1
database offers a useful source of data for short research projects as part of
the winter workshop. Their experience with PS1 will ensure that the use of this
database is maximized. The GRAD-MAP program has evidence of success with five of
seven participants following through with research programs during the summer.
There is the potential to take 5 success stories and turn them into many more
new success stories.