* 1454926
* CAREER: Probing an Emergent New Class of Electronic Liquid Crystals Using Synchrotron X-rays: Superconductors and Beyond
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Ruihua He, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 128,841.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;New materials, from semiconductors to plastics,
have revolutionized our lives. Liquid crystals, for example, have transformed
the way that we display and transmit information. However, these advances
occurred only after we had developed an understanding of the properties of these
materials, which share the properties of both liquid and solids, and the complex
phases (arrangements of molecules) that they exhibit. Recently, the ideas that
underlie our understanding of liquid crystals are being applied to understand
the electronic properties of new materials such as high temperature
superconductors. A more detailed understanding of the properties of these
materials will allow them to be optimized for applications such as power
transmission and energy storage. Under this CAREER award the PI and his students
will apply a unique combination of advanced x-ray techniques to study systems
such as high-temperature superconductors and charge density wave materials with
an ultimate goal of establishing a new understanding of these unique phases of
quantum matter. Integrated into the research is a plan for education and
outreach centering around two key research components-advanced x-ray facilities
and superconductors. The former is provided through K-12 mentoring,
undergraduate and graduate training at x-ray facilities and Boston College,
course development, and outreach presentations for minority faculty. An outreach
plan focused on superconductors is planned that features both lectures and
maglev demonstrations to be given to the general public through participation in
two programs run by the MIT Museum, to the students of regional middle and high
schools through school visits, and to their teachers through organizing small
training workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;A
central theme of condensed matter physics is to discover and understand the
emergence of novel phases of quantum matter. Research in the past decade has
brought a number of such phases to the limelight, including electronic liquid
crystal phases. These quantum phases were literally proposed in analogy to the
liquid crystalline phases of classical fluids in terms of their similarities in
the patterns of broken symmetry. Two classes of electronic liquid crystalline
phases, the electron nematics and smectics, have been primarily focused on and
attracted significant interest. Here, the research team seeks a further
generalization of that fascinating analogy through the incorporation of the
third known major liquid crystalline phase--the cholesterics that breaks long-
range chiral symmetry. Initial indications for the possible existence of
electron cholesterics in a transition-metal dichalcogenide and some high-Tc
superconductors have recently been found experimentally, showing its potential
of being as prevalent as its nematic and smectic counterparts in quantum matter.
In order to look into this intriguing possibility, the principal investigator
proposes a comprehensive experimental survey in this emerging frontier with the
aid of a unique combination of synchrotron x-ray techniques. These techniques
are element specific and can directly probe electronic states via different
physics processes on different chirality-related physical quantities. Their
joint force allows the existing candidate phases to be scrutinized to previously
unattainable depth, and lays a foundation for future explorations on other
condensed matter systems. Specifically, the proposed studies of cuprate
superconductors aim for a unified understanding based on a unique chiral
perspective of charge ordering phenomena - a current focus of the high-Tc field.