* 1454754
* CAREER: Self-Assembled, H2S-Releasing Gels for Promoting Angiogenesis
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* John Matson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 03/31/2021
* USD 530,003.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;Despite its reputation as a foul-smelling, toxic
gas, hydrogen sulfide gas (H2S) is a vital biological signaling molecule that is
constantly produced and consumed in the human body. Over the past decade and a
half, researchers have discovered that H2S carries out biological functions in
the human brain, heart, liver, kidneys, and other organs. In all of these
studies, however, none have examined the effects of H2S delivered from
implantable materials. This CAREER award explores the synthesis and construction
of the first-ever H2S-releasing gels and their effect on H2S signaling. Graduate
students contributing to this project will use advanced techniques in organic
chemistry, materials science, and cell biology to synthesize and fully
characterize these novel materials. First-generation college students will be
recruited to join the project as undergraduate researchers, exposing them to the
field of biomaterials in a highly interdisciplinary laboratory environment. The
gels that will be made over the course of this award will provide new tools for
biologists studying the physiological roles of H2S, and results generated from
this award will provide a basis for examining these materials as stimulators of
angiogenesis, the process through which the body makes new blood
vessels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen sulfide (H2S)
is the most recently discovered addition to a critical class of gaseous
biological signaling molecules called gasotransmitters. While the signaling
capacity of H2S has been known for nearly two decades, no materials currently
exist to deliver H2S in a controllable manner. As a result, how the signaling
capacity of H2S is affected by localized (vs. systemic) release is unknown, as
is the broader question of how matrix mechanical properties affect H2S
signaling. This CAREER award focuses on the synthesis and characterization of
novel peptide-based H2S-releasing gels and their effects on angiogenesis, the
process through which the body makes new blood vessels from existing ones. The
central hypothesis is that both the rate of H2S delivery and the mechanical
properties of the matrix will influence pro-angiogenic H2S signaling. Graduate
students involved in this project will use the tools of organic chemistry to
develop the gels and characterize them using analytical techniques common in
materials science, including electron microscopy, rheology, and other advanced
analytical techniques. Through these efforts, the first family of H2S-releasing
biomaterials will be designed, and these materials will provide a new
understanding of how biochemical and biophysical cues can combine to promote
angiogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;