* 1454668
* CAREER: In-situ Advancements for Study of Multi-axial Micromechanics of Solid Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Aaron Stebner, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2020
* USD 595,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant supports research
on the mechanics of the microscale level deformation of metals through advanced
experimental mechanics and analysis. The research contributes to national
Materials Genome and Advanced Manufacturing Initiatives. Microstructure-property
relationships are central to the understanding of the mechanical response of
materials. For solid materials, such models require knowledge of how
microstructural building blocks - their grains - respond to thermo-mechanical
load changes. New insights into these processes will be gained through novel in-
situ X-ray diffraction experiments. X-rays will penetrate materials while
thermo-mechanical loads are changed. Measuring changes in X-rays diffracted from
samples will provide quantifiable information about changes of the grain
structures. A novel class of in-situ experiments is considered where two-
dimensional thermo-mechanical loads are applied in-situ. The sharing of the
unique experimental data will enable other researchers to test their multi-
axial, thermo-mechanical, process-microstructure-property relationships. The
present research methodologies will be incorporated into a new Nonlinear Solid
Mechanics graduate course. An annual international design competition using
advanced solid materials will be initiated through a professional engineering
society. Graduate students will be trained to perform outreach at area high
schools, community colleges, and libraries by presenting advanced material and
in-situ experiment capabilities in a format that stimulates imagination and
demonstrates accessibility.

A non-destructive, combined planar-biaxial and induction heating in-situ X-ray
diffraction experiment will be developed. It will be employed along with new
data analysis methodology for studying concurrent phase transformation,
elasticity, and plasticity of individual grains within a thermo-mechanically
loaded polycrystalline specimen. The new experiment will be used to explore
uncharted territory in the micromechanics phase transformation in shape memory
alloys and stainless steels. Since the roles of individual deformation
mechanisms within crystals and individual crystals within polycrystals will be
quantified, bridges between different scales of mechanics will be elucidated.
The following research questions are considered: (1)How do inter-granular
boundary conditions give rise to stress distributions amongst microstructures?
(2) What are the interaction energies required to activate different
transformation, twinning, and slip systems at the crystal scale, and how do
microstructural constraints affect them? (3) What is the proper microstructural
building block for micromechanical modeling of martensite? (4) How do we measure
elastic anisotropy of low symmetry martensite structures? (5) Why is hysteresis
different in thermal vs. stress-induced transformation of shape memory alloys,
why does it vary with loading mode, and does processing anisotropy change the
nature of transformation hysteresis with respect to different material axes?