* 1454734
* CAREER: South Greenland's Holocene Climate History Reconstructed Using Three Paleolimnological Approaches
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Yarrow Axford, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 598,048.00

This NSF CAREER award to Yarrow Axford at Northwestern University would support
a multi-pronged effort at deciphering and understanding the climate history of
southern Greenland over the last eleven thousand years, and an educational
effort focused on public communication of science and K-12 science literacy.
Paleoclimate data provide our only empirical observations of how the arctic
system responds to major sustained climate change. It is especially urgent to
understand how past climate change unfolded on Greenland, because mass loss from
the Greenland Ice Sheet will drive a large fraction of future sea level rise.
Existing data from south Greenland hint that climate trends there may differ
from trends observed elsewhere in the Northern Hemisphere on a range of
timescales, with potential consequences for future temperature change and thus
for ice sheet mass balance. The proposed research will assess the apparent
divergence through the Holocene (the last 11,000 years), by developing a suite
of climate reconstructions from lakes in southernmost Greenland.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate records to be generated include quantitative
temperature reconstructions based on insect (chironomid) assemblages and
reconstructions of precipitation isotopes (reflecting changes in atmospheric
circulation) using an emerging method based on chironomid oxygen-18. A third
approach -- reconstructions of alpine glacier fluctuations using sediments from
glacial threshold lakes -- will constrain local ice mass balance and help to
further characterize local atmospheric climate through the Holocene, especially
its influence on the ice sheet. This work would double the number of continuous,
quantitative Holocene terrestrial temperature reconstructions available from
Greenland beyond the ice sheet, thus contributing to community-wide efforts to
understand how the arctic system responds to sustained climate change. Data will
be incorporated into paleodata syntheses, in keeping with the PI's track record
of participation in such efforts, and will allow for better tests of climate and
ice sheet models. Independent reconstructions of Holocene precipitation isotopes
will be used to assess whether changes in atmospheric circulation accompanied
past climate change, and thus might accompany future climate change. By
constraining summer temperatures and local glacier mass balance, and comparing
results with glacial geologic studies, this work will help clarify the role of
atmospheric climate at the ice sheet margin in driving ice sheet changes. This
work will also advance two methods: It will validate and apply an emerging
isotopic proxy with potential for widespread application, and the PI will lead
international collaborative development of a new calibration dataset for the
chironomid paleothermometer. This grant will train at least two Ph.D. students
and at least five undergraduates in international polar research, and will
advance the professional development of a pre-tenure geoscientist who has a
demonstrated commitment to the broader impacts of her research. Multiple
collaborations, including with glacial geologists and paleoecologists at five
foreign institutions, will be advanced. A new seminar will train graduate
students in sustainability-relevant STEM fields in skills for communicating
science beyond academia, contributing to broad training of the future STEM
workforce. This project will provide sustained professional development for K-12
teachers, who in turn will bring climate and energy science to Chicago-area
classrooms, promoting innovative STEM education for students in one of the
largest U.S. urban school districts (Chicago's District 299).