* 1454257
* CAREER: Force-activated Protein Dynamics in Mechanobiology
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Brenton Hoffman, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 03/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will pioneer a new
approach for understanding the effects of mechanical force on the dynamics of
specific proteins in living cells. Disease is generally understood and treated
through biochemical means; when we get sick, we typically get a pill. However,
in addition to biochemical signals, cells are subject to a wide variety of
mechanical cues. Inside living tissues, cells exist in a complex mechanical
environment that is both a source of applied forces and a means of mechanical
support. Alterations in the mechanical environment surrounding cells are potent
regulators of many fundamental processes, including how cells grow, migrate, and
develop into different tissue types. Understanding how cells sense, interpret,
and respond to mechanical cues is currently limited by the inability to study
the interplay between mechanical forces and biochemical signaling pathways at
the molecular level in living cells. A greater understanding of this
relationship will aid endeavors to develop therapies for diseases like cancer
and atherosclerosis, where the mechanical environment is altered, as well as
efforts to engineer replacement tissues for regenerative
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An incomplete understanding of the processes
cells use to detect mechanical cues, referred to as mechanotransduction, is
preventing advancements in diverse fields, ranging from fundamental studies of
the collective movements of cells during morphogenesis to applied research
geared toward improving tissue engineering approaches by incorporating relevant
mechanical stimuli. The sub-cellular structures that mechanically link the
force-generating cytoskeleton to the extracellular environment, termed focal
adhesions, are known to be innately sensitive to mechanical force and critically
important in mechanotransduction. A key molecular process dictating these force-
activated dynamics is the mechanical loading of vinculin, an adaptor protein
found in focal adhesions. This research will create and utilize state of the art
molecular tools and experimental approaches capable of elucidating the
interdependence and dynamics of the molecular-scale mechanical and biochemical
processes mediating mechanotransduction in living cells and tissues. Novel tools
include genetically-encoded molecular tension sensors with rationally-designed
biophysical properties and defined biochemical functions. Additionally, a
simple, but novel, experimental procedure for directly measuring force-activated
protein dynamics will be developed. These will be combined to test the
hypothesis that distinct forms of mechanical stimulation are detected and
integrated by the cell through alterations in the force-activated dynamics of
vinculin.