* 1454153
* CAREER: Understanding and Controlling the Deformation of Thin Rods within Soft and Fragile Matter
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Douglas Holmes, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 01/31/2020
* USD 545,000.00

The lessons learned from this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
grant will provide the framework for the active navigation of thin rods within
soft and fragile matter, such as granular materials and tissue. Active materials
that can bend and fold on command provide advanced engineering opportunities for
deployable structures, smart needles, and soft robotic arms. This award supports
fundamental research on the mechanics of thin rods in complex materials, and
will provide the knowledge necessary to create advanced, autonomous structures
capable of actively navigating around obstacles in various media. To assist in
the broader dissemination of mechanics, this award supports the development of
an innovative program to improve scientific communication and literacy by
utilizing online digital media to showcase mechanics knowledge to the global
community by focusing on Digital Inspiration, Communication, and Education
(DICE). By placing an emphasis on visual, verbal, and written communication,
this program will enhance both the scientific communication of the next
generation of scholars and broaden participation of the general public through
the creation and curation of open, online mechanics content. Steering a
structure through soft and fragile matter, such as tissues and granular media,
requires understanding the mechanics of slender structures, the deformation of
stimuli-responsive structures and the forces that arise from the interplay
between the deforming structure and its surrounding media. This award will lead
to a better understanding of how a slender structure deforms within a complex
medium. First, a quantitative experimental relationship will be developed to
describe the bending, buckling, and interfacial penetration of a passive elastic
strip within various surroundings, including dry, wet, and soft granular matter
and hydrogels. For each medium, this will provide an understanding of the
magnitude of stimulus required to bend a structure to a specific curvature.
Stimuli-responsive microstructures will then be incorporated into the elastic
strip, enabling it to bend and curl in response to pneumatic pressure. The
experimental results from this work will provide the basis for important
theoretical studies that couple poroelasticity, granular jamming, and the
mechanics of slender structures while inspiring advanced, stimuli-responsive
structures. The results of this award will help predict the deformation and
buckling of slender structures within complex media, while providing a general
framework for designing structures that can actively and controllably bend
within soft and fragile matter.