* 1454407
* CAREER: Investigation of Boiling Heat Transfer Mechanisms and their Enhancement using Biotemplated Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Matthew McCarthy, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2021
* USD 507,752.00

CBET-1454407&lt;br/&gt;PI: McCarthy, Matthew&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase-change
heat transfer is ubiquitous in industry, and it plays a critical role in
electrical power generation, chemical processing, water purification, and HVAC
systems. Modest enhancements in phase-change heat transfer can generate
significant savings in energy and costs. Furthermore, innovative phase-change
heat transfer systems are important not only due to their effects on energy
usage, the environment, and water resources, but also due to the thermal
management needs of next-generation high-power electronic and photonic systems.
Recent studies have shown that high-surface-areas coatings comprised of
nanostructures can be used to substantially increase performance during phase-
change processes, and, in particular, during boiling heat transfer. However,
numerous questions remain regarding the underlying physical mechanisms by which
nanostructured coatings enhance heat transfer. The goal of this project is to
utilize biotemplated nanofabrication to systematically investigate fundamental
mechanisms by which nanostructured coatings affect and enhance phase-change heat
transfer. Results from the research will be integrated into educational
activities in nanoscale science and technology for high-school and university
students, including a hands-on nanofabrication and thermal characterization
experiment, a nano-thermal energy learning community, and opportunities for
students to participate in the nanoscience research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific objective of this CAREER development award is to leverage the
simplicity and flexibility of biotemplated nanofabrication to investigate
fundamental mechanisms by which nanostructured coatings affect liquid-to-vapor
phase change during boiling. This will be accomplished using the self-assembly
and metallization of the Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) to fabricate tunable surface
structures for novel and probative thermofluidic characterizations, leading to
the realization of high-performance surfaces with heterogeneous architectures.
Critical morphological and material properties will be tuned with unprecedented
control, allowing systematic experimental characterizations, direct correlations
to boiling phenomena, and the determination of new mechanistic models. Advanced
imaging techniques based on IR thermometry and confocal scanning laser
microscopy will permit simultaneous visualization and measurement of the wetting
state, surface temperature, and local dynamic heat flux during
boiling/evaporation. These measurements will be made possible due to the
compatibility of biotemplating with low-conductivity and low-melting temperature
polymeric materials. Lastly, novel surfaces with complex and heterogonous
architectures (made possible via biotemplating) will be engineered for enhanced
performance across all stages of boiling. These include surfaces with in-plane
variations in materials and thermal conductivity, combined with superhydrophilic
nanostructures.