* 1454825
* CAREER: Laser Spectroscopic Investigation of Vibronic Interactions in Free Radicals and Molecular Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Jinjun Liu, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2021
* USD 494,062.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Jinjun Liu of the
University of Louisville to conduct experimental studies aimed at understanding
how the vibration and electron motion are coupled in small reactive molecules
and in ionic dimers. This coupling of electronic and vibrational degrees of
freedom is ubiquitous in photochemical reactions, which are an important class
of reactions in atmospheric chemistry and in other venues. Post-doctoral,
graduate and undergraduate students working on this project will receive
training in laser science, spectroscopy, and the design of experimental
apparatus, while working on compelling chemical problems with significant real-
world impact. Part of this CAREER program is also focused on a number of
education projects, including the revamping of the physical chemistry curriculum
and the involvement of underrepresented students in his research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Jinjun Liu and his research group will
use a suite of spectroscopic techniques to study the vibronic interactions in
chemical species of significance to atmospheric chemistry, combustion chemistry,
and other areas. Species to be studied include alkoxy radicals which will be
created in an electric discharge and ion pairs of ionic liquids will be created
with a heated nozzle. The methods used to interrogate these molecules include:
(1) laser induced fluorescence (LIF); (2) dispersed fluorescence (DF); (3) and
cavity ringdown spectroscopy (CRDS). More specifically, the alkoxy radical
intermediates will be generated by either pulsed electric discharge or laser
photolysis, while ion pairs of ionic liquids, a spectroscopically underexplored
family of molecular complexes, will be studied in the gas phase using a heated
nozzle. LIF and Ultraviolet-CRDS experiments will be conducted to explore the
vibrational energy levels of high-lying electronic states, whereas DF- and mid-
Infrared-CRDS techniques will be used to investigate the vibronic structure of
the lowest electronic states. Spectroscopic study of isolated ionic liquids is
aimed at understanding the Coulombic interaction and hydrogen bonding between
ion pairs, determining the conformations of the molecular complexes, and
connecting their microscopic structure to physiochemical properties. In
particular, it is anticipated that the work on Jahn-Teller and pseudo Jahn-
Teller interactions will be of considerable interest to theorists.