* 1454607
* CAREER: Quantum Light-Matter Interfaces Based on Rare-Earth Ions and Nanophotonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Andrei Faraon, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 02/29/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Title: Quantum Light-Matter Interfaces Based on Rare-earth-doped Crystals and
Nanophotonics for On-chip Storage and Retrieval of Photonic Quantum
States&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description: Information utilized by
our society is processed using electrical signals in computer microprocessors,
and transmitted long distances using optical signals travelling in fiber
networks that form the backbone of the Internet. The performance of these
technologies is reaching fundamental limits, so quantum machines are expected to
drive the next technological revolution. These machines process information by
manipulating the most fundamental properties of atoms and photons, their quantum
states. Applications include absolutely secure communications over the Internet,
the capability to quickly solve problems like protein folding for drug
discovery, and quantum simulation of new materials with extreme properties.
Analogous to the current Internet, optical quantum networks will be used to
interconnect quantum machines. Quantum networks consist of optical channels
where photons travel and nodes where photons are generated, stored and processed
using quantum light-matter interfaces. The goal of this research is to develop
on-chip light-matter interfaces for storing photons and their quantum states.
Depending on the application, the interface could act as a memory where the
quantum state is retrieved back into a photon, or the state could be transferred
to another quantum device. The interfaces will be implemented using solid-state
crystals doped with rare-earth atoms, materials known for their excellent photon
storage capability. Established processing techniques from the semiconductor
industry will be used to fabricate the light-matter interfaces directly in
crystalline chips, thus leading to a scalable platform. The proposed research is
situated at the transition between quantum science and quantum engineering.
Thus, this project provides an ideal opportunity to educate the general public
about this transition, which is happening now, where multiple technologies
developed for fundamental quantum science are finding applications in quantum
computing, communications and sensing. To reach a broad audience, the principal
investigator and members of his group will write articles and develop
educational videos that will be posted on scientific blogs. To increase
diversity in science and engineering, the research group will be involved in an
outreach program with a high school on the Navajo Nation US Indian
reservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Quantum light-matter
interfaces that reversibly map the quantum state of photons onto the quantum
states of atoms, are essential components in the quantum engineering toolbox
with applications in quantum communication, computing, and quantum-enabled
sensing. The goal of this research is to develop on-chip quantum light-matter
interfaces based on nanophotonic resonators fabricated in rare-earth-doped
crystals known to exhibit some of the longest optical and spin coherence times
in the solid state. The role of nano-scale optical resonators with high quality
factors is to enhance the interaction of single photons with small ensembles of
rare-earth ions thus enabling compact devices suitable for large-scale
integration. The experimental approach merges new nano-fabrication techniques
for rare-earth-doped crystals (neodymium doped yttrium orthosilicate), high-
resolution laser spectroscopy, and coherent control of atomic quantum states. As
a result of this research, the feasibility of developing integrated nanophotonic
quantum devices based on rare-earth-doped crystals will be assessed. The optical
coherence, the spectral stability and the spin coherence of rare-earth ions
embedded in a nano-scale environment will be studied, and techniques for
coherent control of their quantum states in on-chip photonic networks will be
developed. Optical quantum memories with the smallest footprint to date and
their on-chip integration will be demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award is jointly funded by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices
(EPMD) Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems
(ECCS), the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) Program in the Division of
Materials Research (DMR), and the Quantum Information Science (QIS) Program in
the Division of Physics (PHY).