* 1454879
* CAREER: Copper Catalyzed Oxidative Decarboxylative Coupling Reactions for the Direct Functionalization of Arenes
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Jessica Hoover, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 02/28/2021
* USD 631,516.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jessica Hoover of West Virginia University is developing new
catalytic reactions for the formation of carbon-carbon (C-C) bonds from
carboxylic acids through oxidative decarboxylative coupling reactions. This new
method uses a copper catalyst to transform simple carboxylic acids and arenes
into heterobiaryls and haloalkyl arenes that are relevant to pharmaceutical and
biological molecules. This technology offers improvements over classical
coupling methods, including the replacement of expensive, toxic, and wasteful
organometallic reagents with inexpensive and readily available carboxylic acid
starting materials while generating minimal waste. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
formation of C-C bonds are key steps in the construction of complex structures
and the successful development of this methodology will enable the design of
new, more efficient catalysts for the formation of C-C bonds by the
pharmaceutical and fine chemical industries. Professor Hoover is actively
engaged in the integration of research and education at the undergraduate level
partly by involving undergraduates in the research laboratory and partly by
incorporating research experiments and concepts into the undergraduate
curriculum. This award also supports the development of a new summer program
designed to bring together chemists, engineers, and artists to work toward the
common goal of building a public science-art installation. The program is
designed to initiate a meaningful dialog of science within the local Morgantown
community, to help student participants communicate effectively between science,
the humanities, and art, and with the broader public sphere.