* 1454389
* CAREER: Enabling Multimessenger Astrophysics with Real-Time Gravitational Wave Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Chad Hanna, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

In the last decades, astrophysicists and astronomers have studied the Universe
for clues about what causes some of the most energetic transient events. It has
long been thought that truly extreme objects such as black holes and neutron
stars are responsible. Advanced instruments spanning the electromagnetic
spectrum have provided a wealth of information regarding the transient Universe;
however, many observations are unable to directly probe the dynamics of the
systems in question. General relativity provides a way to map out the dynamics
of massive, dense objects from a distance by encoding the motion as ripples in
space-time known as gravitational waves. The principal investigator of this
project will lead an effort within the LIGO Scientific Collaboration to detect
transient gravitational waves from the merger of black holes and neutron stars
in real-time, enabling prompt multi-wavelength follow-up observations that can
shed new light onto the origin of transients. Discoveries will be relayed to a
network of follow-up observatories so that scientists can learn as much as
possible about these events before they fade away. This research will increase
understanding of the fundamental nature of space, time and the properties of
exotic states of matter and energy that are not accessible to Earth-based
laboratories.

The LIGO Collaboration has built highly sensitive laser interferometric
gravitational wave receivers in Hanford, WA and Livingston, LA that will measure
to extra-galactic distances the minute oscillations of space-time caused by, for
example, the merger of two neutron stars. Data from these observatories will be
streamed in real-time to supercomputing facilities across the U.S where
thousands of computing nodes will integrate millions of unique physical models
of black hole and neutron star systems, known as templates, with the data in
real time. Advanced signal processing techniques and software co-developed by
the PI will infer the presence of a signal from any of the models within seconds
of the signal arriving at Earth. Requiring signals to be observed simultaneously
in multiple geographically separated gravitational wave detectors will allow the
position of the source to be localized as well as provide confidence that the
signal is not of terrestrial origin. The best-fit parameters and estimate of the
event significance will be ingested into the gravitational-wave candidate event
database where alerts to external partners will be issued as well as real-time
correlation with external triggers such as gamma-ray bursts through the Gamma-
ray Coordinates Network (GCN).