* 1454807
* CAREER: Iron Polymerization Catalysis for the Synthesis of High Performance Degradable Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Jeffery Byers, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2021
* USD 654,978.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jeffery A. Byers of Boston College is developing methods to
convert chemicals made from renewable feedstocks, such as corn and soybean oil,
into biodegradable plastics with a wide range of properties. These methods are
based upon using catalysts to accomplish chemical conversions, and the
particular catalysts being developed are based upon a low toxicity, earth
abundant element, iron. The catalysts are able to make plastics with new
structures and compositions that are expected to display improved physical
properties. To increase awareness of the need for new, sustainable materials and
to promote the participation of under represented minorities in STEM fields,
Professor Byers is developing, testing and disseminating a set of experiential
demonstrations for teaching K-9 students about the scientific method as well as
catalysis and polymers. Professor Byers is also working on a "Paper to Plastics"
workshop experience for high school students to discover how sustainable
materials can be prepared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Byers
is studying bis(imino)pyridine-bisalkoxide complexes of iron as catalysts for
the polymerization of D,L-lactide and epoxides. While in the +2 oxidation state
the complexes catalyze the polymerization D,L-lactide but not epoxides and in
the +3 oxidation state the complexes catalyze the polymerization of epoxides but
not D,L-lactide. Thus, redox chemistry or electrochemistry is being explored to
switch the catalyst between two different modes of reactivity, and this property
of the catalyst is being exploited for the synthesis of multiblock copolymers
between epoxides and lactide as well as the development of a redox-triggered
crosslinking reaction. Termination chemistry is being explored that will link
the two growing polymer chains on each metal center. These polymer structure
modifications are expected to result in biodegradable polymers with properties
that are unique compared to currently used biodegradable polymers. The broader
impacts of the project pertain to the potential uses of redox switching to
mediate orthogonal reactivity in catalysis, the usefulness of sustainable
materials, and the planned educational activities.