* 1454467
* CAREER: Coupled Electron-Proton Dynamics at Photocatalytic Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Jahan Dawlaty, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2021
* USD 682,000.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Jahan Dawlaty of the
University of Southern California and his post-doctoral, graduate and
undergraduate student colleagues to conduct experimental studies aimed at
understanding how the motions of protons and electrons are coupled in
photocatalytic reactions at interfaces. The coupling of proton and electron
motion in these reactions is believed to help to make these reactions take place
more readily. Photocatalytic reactions are important in realms as diverse as
biology (photosynthesis) and chemical engineering (production of solar fuels).
Post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate students working on this project will
receive training in state-of-the-art laser and optical science, spectroscopy,
and the design of complex experiments, while working on important chemical
problems with significant real-world impact. The young researchers working on
this project will receive excellent technical training in laser science and
modern spectroscopic methods which will prepare them for the modern scientific
workforce. Under the educational aims of this CAREER award, Prof. Dawlaty will
build simple physical models to illustrate important physical chemical
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Jahan Dawlaty and his research group will
use ultrafast laser techniques to study the interfacial chemistry of proton-
coupled electron transfer. He will use spectroscopic techniques to measure the
synchronous motion of electrons and protons during photocatalytic events. In the
experiments supported with this award Dawlaty's group will study: (1) amorphous
manganese oxide surfaces; (2) hematite surfaces and (3) and silicon
functionalized surfaces. The reactions will be probed using a variety of
surface-sensitive spectroscopic methods, including two-dimensional electronic-
vibrational correlation spectroscopy. From the proposed work, a new
understanding of surface redox reactions, where protons are free from the Born-
Oppenheimer approximation is expected to emerge. In the longer term, the work is
aimed at guiding the design of interfaces with light-controllable proton
activity is a new concept that has potential to unravel the mechanistic details
of multi-electron and multi-proton surface redox reactions.