* 1454806
* CAREER: Mechanisms of Drug Resistance in a Responsive Biomaterial Platform
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Shelly Peyton, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2022
* USD 562,743.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to University of Massachusetts at Amherst is to
develop novel materials that can capture human tissue properties in a
controlled, reproducible, and economical fashion. It is cofunded by the BioMaps
program and funds from the ENG/CBET/BBBE program. At present, new drugs are
developed by screening hundreds of possible candidates against cancer cells
grown on plastic surfaces. Drugs that show potential are further tested in
animals, and anywhere from zero to a handful of candidates could make it through
this process, where they are then taken to clinical trials. Drug candidates that
appear successful in cells on the plastic surfaces often fail in clinical
trials. Overall, this process is long and not cost effective. The biomaterials
that are being studied have potential use in understanding how cancer cells
respond to drugs in an environment that mimics human tissue, and thereby
overcomes some of the drawbacks of the present approaches. With this award, the
PI plans to develop new educational opportunities for students from high school
to graduate levels. High school students, especially women will be trained in
the PI's laboratory during the summer months, where these students can learn how
to do cell culture and 3D printing techniques and to observe how cells move and
grow on different material surfaces. Undergraduate students will be trained in
creating new pathways to take ownership and authorship of their learning
experience, resulting in educational modules that can be used across the nation.
At the graduate level, the focus will be in recruiting highly capable students
from underrepresented groups across the nation to become the next leading
scientists working at the interface of materials and biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The ability of cells to resist
chemotherapy impacts cancer patients around the globe. A core problem of the
current drug screening techniques that utilize plastic multi-well plates is that
it fails to account for a cell's native material microenvironment. This CAREER
project will take a transformative approach to drug screening by quantifying
cancer cell responses to drugs in a biomaterial platform mimicking the rapidly
evolving material properties of the tumor microenvironment, specifically a
material microenvironment that is continually remodeled by resident mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs). This proposal will use a high-throughput biomaterial platform
to determine how three dimensional matrix stiffness, integrin binding, and
soluble growth factors and cytokines impact cancer cell response to drugs. The
underlying hypothesis is that physical and biochemical cues from an MSC-
remodeled extracellular matrix (ECM) interfere with the efficacy small molecule
drugs, and that targeting the MSCs, not the cancer cells, can halt this drug
resistance. The results from this proposal would transform our fundamental
understanding of the role that the physical environment plays in interfering
with small molecule drugs. The PI will leverage CAREER funding to increase
educational opportunities in bioengineering at three levels: high school,
undergraduate, and graduate. The PI has already created a new summer laboratory
program at University of Massachusetts at Amherst that teaches high school
students cell culture and advanced microscopy techniques. Over the next few
years, the PI plans to create new educational modules for undergraduate students
that are specifically aimed at self-directed learning techniques and fostering
creativity and teamwork in the classroom. Additionally, the PI plans to expand
recruiting efforts nationwide, in collaboration with the Diversity Institute at
the campus, to bring more qualified students from underrepresented groups to
campus, and train them to become the future leaders in science and engineering.