* 1454406
* CAREER: Scalable Electrospray Processing of High-Efficiency Perovskite Solar Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,08/31/2015
* Weiwei Deng, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant aims to break new
ground in the manufacturing of high-efficiency thin-film solar cells through
electrospray deposition. Presently, nearly all commercial thin-film solar cells
involve costly vacuum environments and rare earth materials, which are in
limited supply. To help reduce the manufacturing cost and ease the nation's
dependence on rare earth elements, this award supports fundamental research on a
solution-based solar cell manufacturing process that operates at atmosphere
pressure and uses only earth-abundant materials such as perovskites. Perovskite
solar cells have exhibited power conversion energies above 15 percent, which is
higher than the best organic solar cells, and have the potential of approaching
30 percent. The knowledge generated will enable a scalable, roll-to-roll
manufacturing process of flexible thin-film (&lt;300 nm) solar cells. The
process uses extremely fine spray generated by an electrostatic liquid
atomization technique to coat a substrate with a thin and uniform layer of
liquid film. The drying of the liquid film will be judicially controlled to
enhance the quality of the solidified thin-film and boost the power conversion
efficiency. This research project crosscuts multiple disciplines such as
manufacturing, thermo-fluid science, and materials science. The broad appeal of
solar energy renders an excellent educational opportunity to increase public
scientific literacy, engage women and other underrepresented student groups in
physical sciences, and better prepare students to contribute to a modern
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polycrystalline perovskite solar cells have
rapidly emerged as strong contenders for efficient solar energy conversion
devices because perovskite photovoltaic materials are earth abundant,
inexpensive, and can be processed at moderate temperatures and atmospheric
pressure. These relaxed processing conditions expand the selection of compatible
substrates thereby enabling technologies such as tandem solar cells and roll-to-
roll fabrication. However, two major challenges remain. First, the liquid films
tend to rupture and de-wet during drying, leaving significant portion of
substrate area uncovered. Second, scalable manufacturing processes for ultra-
thin (&lt;300 nm) perovskite films are still lacking. The proposed research
undertakes the dual challenges of film rupture and manufacturing scalability.
The idea of regulated drying of thin liquid films is proposed to suppress
spontaneous rupture of the wet film, reduce detrimental pin-hole formation,
improve crystal structure and, consequently, increase the power conversion
efficiency. The research team will formulate a theoretical model to prescribe
fluid mechanical and thermal boundaries that suppress film rupture. Model
predictions will be compared and validated with experiments on regulated drying,
followed by film characterization and device performance evaluation to reveal
the interplay between processing, characteristics and performance.