* 1454448
* CAREER: Impact of Urbanization on Organic Carbon-Metal Interactions and Trophic Transfer in Streams
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Timothy Vadas, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

1454448&lt;br/&gt;Vadas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Impact of Urbanization on
Organic Carbon-Metal Interactions and Trophic Transfer in
Streams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an increasingly urbanizing landscape, the
negative impact of metals from both stormwater and wastewater effluent on
organisms in streams will continue to rise. While the focus of most metal
bioavailability models for stream organisms is on ambient exposure to dissolved
metal phases, this proposed research also addresses the integral role of
attachment and ingestion of organic matter in controlling bio-uptake of metals.
At the ecosystem scale, the biodynamics of metal uptake and retention relate to
both metal and organic matter characteristics, exposure patterns and feeding
behavior of stream organisms. Assessment of metal speciation and size
distribution as well as organic matter characteristics as related to metal
uptake is required knowledge for the development of ecosystem level exposure
assessment models that are useful for establishing management strategies for
streams. In addition to the proposed research, the education plan will support
the training of 1 M.S. and 1 Ph.D. student and at least 2 undergraduate
researchers. Enhanced student training will focus on additional coursework in
related disciplines and communication skills to promote interdisciplinary
research in the future. Educational modules will be developed for K-12
classrooms according to State education guidelines. These modules will be
disseminated through the DaVinci program at the University of Connecticut to
broaden their reach beyond an individual classroom. A significant aspect of this
project will be integrating ecology and environmental engineering across all
levels of education through a focus on basic understanding and communication
across disciplines: Several interdisciplinary problem-based learning exercises
will be developed for university level education and K-12 education modules
related to stream impairment will be developed and distributed
widely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This career development plan addresses the research
and education challenges associated with developing more effective management
strategies for impaired streams in urban areas. The existing framework to assess
and manage impaired streams does not address the dynamic and unique conditions
present in streams. Metals such as copper and zinc are both necessary and toxic
depending on the concentration, and are one of the most common causes of
impairment. However, the strong interaction with organic matter across all size
ranges and differences in exposure patterns of the effluent and stormwater
sources of impairment are dramatic. Total metal loads are not necessarily good
indicators of bio-uptake and both metal lability and ingestion of the different
organic-metal particulates must be considered. In order to address the stream
impairment issues associated with different metal sources, a more complete
understanding of metal bio-uptake under urban stream conditions is required. To
accomplish this, the following objectives and approach will be: 1) Quantify the
variability of metal speciation and size distribution in different stream source
waters across space and time: Automated samplers will collect time interval and
flow-weighted samples of effluent and stormwater runoff, respectively, at
impaired sites across a range of urban to suburban sites. Samples will be
separated into size fractions relevant to biotic uptake and analyzed for total
metals, organic matter, colloidal metal and organic matter size distribution,
and organic matter optical, chemical and metal binding characteristics. 2)
Identify metal speciation and size distribution predictors of biological uptake
in primary producers and higher trophic level organisms and the dependence on
metal loading dynamics: Metal uptake and attachment will be analyzed as a
function of size distribution and chemical characteristics of the organic matter
in different source waters. Biodynamic modeling will assess the net metal uptake
into algae and subsequent transfer to higher trophic level organisms. These will
be examined under exposure regimes that mimic the stream, e.g. with different
ratios of source water to stream water for effluent sources and varying exposure
concentrations for stormwater runoff.