* 1454673
* CAREER: SELECTIVE TRANSPORT IN BIOLOGICAL HYDROGELS - FROM DESIGN PRINCIPLES TO MECHANISMS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Katharina Ribbeck, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2020
* USD 724,977.00

Hydrogels in Biology represent a class of molecular assemblies that are
understudied, with many fascinating and important structure-function problems to
discover and engineering applications to invent. Nuclear pores, for example, the
tiny channels in the nuclear envelope, are filled with a hydrogel that controls
the selective exchange of molecules between the nucleus and the cytoplasm.
Another important biogel is mucus, made from highly hydrated biopolymers from a
ombination of peptide and sugar subunits. Mucus coats all the wet surfaces in
the human body, providing a selective barrier that allows nutrients and
information in while keeping pathogens out. Hydrogels are an integral part of
Biology and, yet, clear concepts of how they function are missing. The goal of
this project is to elucidate the fundamental biophysical principles that allow
biogels to act as selective barriers and filters, and the cellular mechanisms
involved in building and regulating them. The project also will educate and
engage community health leaders, teachers and students about the state-of-the-
art science of hydrogels, emphasizing the importance of mucus barriers within
the broader context of the Physics of nature's bio-materials. The research will
also be the cornerstone for the development of free online teaching material,
including a children's book and a video contest, enabling widespread public
awareness and understanding of biological hydrogels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
nuclear pore filter is an ideal system in which to elucidate general principles
of biofiltration by hydrogels. Its molecular composition is well characterized,
and can also be reconstituted from well-defined phenylalanine-rich repeat units.
A unique suite of quantitativ methods and theoretical tools will be used to
characterize selective transport and to elucidate the relationship between a
particle's biochemical properties, and its mobility across nuclear pore hydrogel
barriers. The project will also engineer hydrogel filters with a precise control
of selected elements of the barrier, including the size, the charge, and the
cross-link chemistry of the repeat units. The PI's aim is to substantially
extend the already existing technology to study hydrogelbased filtering, and
advance the field toward new frontiers, by addressing the function of repeat
domains, the basic building blocks of many biological gels, in the regulation of
barrier selectivity. Her goal is to provide the foundation for a theoretical
framework that captures general principles governing selectivity in the nuclear
pore, and likely also in other important biological hydrogels such as the mucus,
and bacterial biofilms.