* 1454501
* CAREER: Characterizing the Glycoproteome with Effective MS-based Chemical and Enzymatic Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Ronghu Wu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/28/2021
* USD 662,000.00

With this CAREER award from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program,
Professor Ronghu Wu and his group at Georgia Institute of Technology will
develop novel analytical methods for the global characterization of
glycoproteins in complex biological samples. Protein glycosylation is essential
to the survival of eukaryotic cells and is involved in nearly every cellular
event. Based on the common features and unique properties of glycans, new
strategies integrating chemical and/or enzymatic reactions and modern mass
spectrometry-based proteomics techniques will be designed to specifically and
comprehensively analyze glycoproteins. The proposed methods will provide a
unique opportunity to systemically study the regulation of protein secretion by
glycosylation in yeast cells, which will result in an in-depth understanding of
the functions of protein glycosylation. The newly developed methods will find
extensive applications in biological and biochemical research communities and
promote the progress of glycoscience.

The proposed research could have a major impact in the field of glycoprotein
studies and in the biology/biochemistry research community in general. The
proposed research and educational activities will also provide graduate and
undergraduate students, including those from historically underrepresented
groups, training opportunities in this highly interdisciplinary research
including analytical chemistry, chemical biology, instrumentation and large-
scale data analysis. In addition, through Georgia Tech's Center for Education
Integrating Science, Mathematics and Computing, the PI and his group will
actively participate in outreach activities with high school chemistry teachers
and students.