* 1454472
* CAREER: Soft Robotics for Upper Extremity Rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Conor Walsh, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 04/30/2020
* USD 509,677.00

CAREER: Soft Robotics for Upper Extremity Rehabilitation

In terms of upper extremity disabilities, the Americans with Disabilities 2010
report found that 6.7 million people reported difficulty grasping objects like a
glass or pencil. These disabilities are a result of a wide variety of conditions
(e.g. traumatic injury, stroke, cerebral palsy, burns and arthritis) and in
nearly all cases rehabilitation therapy is desirable in order to improve motor
function. This CAREER Award proposes to develop a soft wearable robot that can
be used for hand rehabilitation. Compared to conventional therapy, this
technology will enable more controlled and automated therapy by allowing precise
control over the motions and forces that are applied to the fingers and thumb.
The use of soft robotics offers advantages over traditional robotics and this
work focuses on the development of a soft wearable actuated glove and embedded
sensor system, which addresses some of the known challenges in implementing such
a system with traditional rigid robotic components (i.e. alignment, weight).
Additionally, the sensors embedded in the device will enable control over the
assistance applied to the wearer and additionally, monitoring of the activities
for the therapist. Present occupational and therapy is inherently expensive and
the dosage (or number of visits) for patients is limited. With effective
wearable robotic systems that can be used in the clinic and home, more frequent
but shorter and more focused therapy may increase the speed of patient recovery
and positively impact the productivity of therapists.

This CAREER Award proposes to shift the paradigm of rehabilitation from one
where the therapist manipulates the fingers and thumb through some range of
motion, to one where a lightweight, comfortable and soft robotic glove can
provide high dose rehabilitation in either a continuous passive motion mode or
in a functional assistance mode. This will be achieved through new soft
actuators with integrated sensors that can comfortably apply forces to the
wearer and integrated functional prototypes that will be evaluated on patients
in collaboration with clinical partners. This work will advance soft actuator
designs that are mechanically programmed to match the complex motions of the
human fingers and thumb. This will be achieved by creating anisotropy in the
bulk material properties enabling combinations of contraction, extension,
bending and twisting to be achieved. These actuators are of interest to the
community because they are lightweight, inexpensive, and capable of complex
functionality. Low-level closed-loop controllers will be implemented on
individual actuators to control their position and the force they apply and in
addition different control strategies for intuitive human-robot interaction will
be explored. Patients and therapists will be involved at all stages of the
project and pilot studies on patients will be performed to demonstrate the
potential of this technology.