* 1454948
* CAREER: Combining Research and Education via the Exploration of Peptide-Lipid Binding and Aggregation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Silvina Matysiak, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2022
* USD 720,650.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Silvina Matysiak from The University of Maryland,
College Park to investigate how lipid composition affects peptide self-assembly
pathways on a lipid membrane. The project involves the use of computational
methods to establish how the chemistry of a lipid headgroup promotes peptide
recruitment, misfolding and aggregation in the cases of several amyloidogenic
peptides. These studies will provide fundamental information on vital conditions
that promote or impede peptide self-assembly and that are responsible for the
morphology of the resulting aggregates. The results of this project may be used
to understand how protein misfolding in neurons may lead to neuronal
dysfunction. As part of the project, several toolboxes will be created to teach
parents and students at the high school and undergraduate levels, the importance
of molecular interactions in the everyday world. In order to achieve this goal,
real-time videos of living cells or animations will be combined with interactive
hands-on modeling of proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a fundamental gap
in understanding how proteins misfold and aggregate on cellular membranes. This
project involves a computational investigation that aims at elucidating how
membrane composition modulates amyloid peptide aggregation. A deeper
understanding of the driving forces behind peptide aggregation on membranous
surfaces would have impact on a number of disciplines ranging from biomaterials
to biotechnology. The approaches involve an expansion of a previously developed
coarse-grained model in the context of this project. The project aims to 1)
study the role of peptide-lipid hydrogen bonds in peptide aggregation, 2)
quantify the impact of electrostatic interactions in shaping aggregation
pathways, 3) dissect the influence of multivalent ions in lipid domain
formations and how this affects peptide energy landscapes and 4) characterize
how changes in a membrane's physical properties can modify peptide aggregation
behavior. The computational models developed in this award will be made freely
available to the public.