* 1454437
* CAREER: In Situ Observation of Coupled Transport and Degradation in Battery Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* George Nelson, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 04/30/2021
* USD 508,491.00

PI Name: Nelson &lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 1454437&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Transportation accounts for 25% to 30% of U.S. energy consumption.
Electric vehicles are one alternative to reducing fossil fuel consumption for
transportation. Electric vehicles require rechargeable batteries that balance
the electrical energy storage and power delivery needs, and these batteries must
have lifetimes that support affordable cost of ownership. The lithium-ion
battery is currently the leading technology for electric vehicle applications.
Lithium-ion battery power and energy storage capacity can be enhanced by
utilizing battery electrode materials that are structured at the nanoscale using
principles of nanotechnology. However, the use of nanostructured electrodes may
accelerate electrode degradation that reduces battery life. This research award
seeks to understand degradation in nanostructured lithium-ion battery electrodes
during charging and discharging under realistic conditions. This will be
accomplished by using advanced x-ray imaging techniques to visualize what
happens to the battery electrode during operation, which has never been done
before. Insights from the proposed research will lead to battery material
structures that improve battery performance and reliability. These improvements
in turn have potential to extend the range and lifetime of hybrid and electric
vehicles. The education and outreach programs associated with this award will
provide mechanical engineering undergraduate students with hands-on experiences
in energy storage processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this
CAREER award is develop a fundamental understanding of the processes leading to
degradation of nanostructured spinel cathodes for Li-ion batteries through in
situ three-dimensional (3-D) X-ray imaging techniques during battery charge and
discharge. The proposed research will test the hypothesis that nanostructured
cathodes for high power lithium-ion batteries exhibit accelerated degradation at
elevated temperature due to enhanced metal dissolution from the cathode active
material. This hypothesis will be tested by fabricating electrodes with ordered
and irregular microstructure, characterizing electrode performance over a range
of temperatures, and directly observing 3-D microstructure using X-ray
nanotomography. During the course of this research program, new contributions to
the fields of electrochemical energy conversion and storage are expected. These
contributions include the use of 3-D X-ray material tomatographic imaging to
help elucidate the interactions between electrode microstructure and degradation
mechanisms, revealing the merits and challenges of nanostructured battery
architectures, and generation of a documented set of 3-D microstructural data
for lithium-ion battery materials that is correlated to battery performance and
degradation through electrochemical testing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education
and outreach programs associated with this CAREER award will provide mechanical
engineering undergraduate students with hands-on experiences in energy storage
processes. Energy storage experiments developed for undergraduate laboratories
will be adapted to provide modules for K-12 teacher training programs in schools
that serve under-represented groups in STEM fields, and will also support
development of exhibits at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville,
Alabama that engage diverse audiences with energy storage topics and concepts.