* 1454200
* CAREER: Artificial 2D Superlattices of Epitaxial Pyrochlore Iridates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Ambrose Seo, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Oder
* 08/31/2021
* USD 672,981.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project aims to investigate
iridium-oxide superlattices, i.e. epitaxial multilayers, having the so-termed
pyrochlore crystal structure, which are predicted to be prime candidates for
realizing exotic topological states. The exotic topological states are protected
by the symmetry of the crystal and are robust against backscattering and energy
dissipation. Materials exhibiting such properties can contribute to new
technologies in electronic spin-based devices as well as low energy-cost
applications. A critical drawback to the progression of these developments is
the lack of high-quality samples. This project's goal is to create artificial,
two-dimensional meta-materials with enhanced quantum fluctuations, which allow
their intriguing physical properties to be unveiled. This project is intertwined
with educating graduate students who will become the next generation of
condensed matter physicists with strong expertise in advanced materials
syntheses. The principal investigator also engages his students with state-of-
the-art characterizations of these materials through collaborations at National
Labs and Synchrotron facilities. Through summer research activities,
undergraduates in pre-teaching concentrations are able to participate in various
stages of the project. All research findings are to be shared with the public
through outreach activities involving local area high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
the exotic, nontrivial topological ground states that can be experimentally
realized in the dimensionally-confined superlattices of pyrochlore iridates. The
inherent strong electron-correlations and spin-orbit interactions present in
these compounds are ideal features for obtaining novel states such as quantum
spin-Hall insulators and Weyl semimetals. However, bulk crystal studies show
these systems to have correlation-induced magnetic ordering and fully gapped
insulating states, which render the topological states invisible. The unwanted
magnetic ordering can be suppressed by creating artificial, two-dimensional
superlattices, and thus the hidden topologically nontrivial states can be
revealed. The goal of this project is to close the existing gaps between
theories and experiments in the expanding field of strongly-correlated, spin-
orbit coupled electrons in low-dimensional condensed matter. To this end, this
project develops various epitaxial multilayer structures consisting of
pyrochlore iridates and wide-band-gap insulators. The high-quality sample
syntheses are performed using a custom-built pulsed laser deposition system that
incorporates dual in-situ, real-time monitoring techniques. By controlling
interfacial interactions, dimensionality, and lattice-symmetry via epitaxial
strain, it is possible to explore the phase diagrams of correlated topological
states. Experimental characterization for probing these novel electronic states
includes infrared spectroscopic ellipsometry, scanning probe microscopy, and
low-temperature transport measurements under magnetic fields. The principal
investigator engages his graduate students with research activities in state-of-
the-art techniques of synthesis and characterization. The principal investigator
also offers a research experience for undergraduates with secondary education
concentrations, and outreach workshops for local high school students in under-
represented areas.