* 1454523
* CAREER: Light-Matter Control of Single Defects in Diamond Using Plasmonic Nanocavities
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Maiken Mikkelsen, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 593,767.00

This CAREER award is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials
(EPM) and the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Programs, both in the Division of
Materials Research (DMR), and by the Quantum Information Science Program (QIS)
in the Division of Physics (PHY).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project seeks to understand and control
light-matter interactions in nanoscale photonic structures for potential
applications in quantum information science, i.e., information science depending
on quantum effects in physics. Specifically, by studying single solid-state
emitters in the presence of engineered nanostructures designed to create highly
confined and intense optical fields, this project aims to create transformative
technologies using quantum mechanical properties. This fundamental materials
study could lead to secure long-distance communication and complex simulations.
It may also enable electronic devices with enhanced performance and low-power
consumption such as light sources, high-sensitivity sensors, and sub-wavelength
imaging. This project has broad educational goals coupled to the research aims,
with a focus on the pipeline of future scientific researchers. The project
facilitates the establishment of a Photonics Academy, offering local high school
students exposure to cutting-edge photonics and science careers. Research
outcomes are integrated into courses and course modules at the undergraduate
level. Expanded mentorship for women in physics is offered for junior female
researchers ranging from undergraduate to postgraduate levels at Duke University
with the aim of increasing retention of women in science and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;Addressing
single quantum states, efficient state detection, and links between multiple
nodes are essential building blocks for future quantum information science
applications such as secure long-distance communication, quantum computing, and
complex simulations. Increased understanding of quantum effects and control at
the nanometer scale is essential for enabling optoelectronic devices with new or
enhanced functionalities. The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to
understand and control light-matter interactions of and between single solid-
state quantum emitters in photonic structures with ultra-small mode volumes for
potential applications in classical and quantum information science. In pursuit
of this goal, the project objectives are to (i) control radiative processes of
single point defects in diamond by inclusion in highly engineered plasmonic
nanocavities; and (ii) explore the strong coupling regime with point defects in
diamond. The approach is to probe isolated nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond
coupled to plasmonic nanocavities using ultrafast optical experiments, including
photon statistics measurements, fluorescence lifetimes, and pump-probe
techniques. The project advances the understanding of fundamental physical
behavior and phenomena arising between optical fields and solid-state quantum
emitters embedded in artificially structured photonic materials with sub-10 nm
dimensions and this fundamental study may lead to a broad range of
technologically important applications.