* 1454021
* CAREER On-chip non-classical light sources in nanophotonic platforms
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Antonio Badolato, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 06/30/2016
* USD 394,527.00

Title:&lt;br/&gt;Harnessing the quantum nature of light in photonic structures
engineered on semiconductor chips&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
abstract: The goal of this project is to study the behavior of light when it is
confined for a long time in a very small volume of matter. Early work has shown
that a novel generation of structures made on silicon may realize such a strong
light confinement and as consequence generate so-called non-classical light.
This is a type of light with properties inherently different from the light
produced, for example, by the sun or by the lasers, and that can only be
explained by quantum, i.e., non-classical, theory. Such structures are fully
integrated on a chip to form photonic platforms at the nanoscale, i.e., as small
as one-hundredth the diameter of a human air. &lt;br/&gt;Lying at the
intersection of condensed matter physics, quantum photonics, materials science,
and nanotechnology, this project draws upon expertise from broad areas of
physics and engineering, while presenting major opportunities to advance
fundamental research and transformative photonic devices. Photonics has been
recognized as one of the key enabling technologies for future prosperity. This
project investigates the physics and engineering of quantum-enhanced devices
that may constitute the building blocks for futuristic photonic technologies
that leverage the mature infrastructure of silicon-based devices. Advances in
this field may enable computing and communication devices with superior
performances and broad impact on energy, defense, and manufacturing. At the same
time, the study of non-classical light has a vast impact in basic science. At
the fundamental level, the quantum nature of light is intimately tied to modern
science and plays a central role, for example, in the experimental foundation of
physics and measurement theory.&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary character of
this research combined with its broad impact on technology and society provides
an excellent educational opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students
across different departments. The project incorporates a strong outreach program
and enhances the complementarity and cooperation with national labs, NIST, and
world-class transnational
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract : In this
project I will study novel on-chip nanophotonic structures working at the single
photon level and based on nonlinearities in silicon and III-V semiconductors
quantum dots. Such devices harness quantum coherence for their core operation
while exploiting photonic functionalities designed by a genetic evolution
approach.&lt;br/&gt;The realization of this goal will involve numerical
modeling, nanofabrication, and laser spectroscopy. Those activities will be
applied to develop fully integrated genetically designed photonic crystal
nanostructures, to growth and characterize materials with improved nonlinearity,
and to implement on-chip single photon sources based on silicon. The expected
results of this project will pave the way for silicon quantum photonics made
with nanophotonic platforms amenable for scalability and large-scale
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is jointly funded by the
Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Program in the Division of
Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) and the Electronic and
Photonic Materials (EPM) Program in the Division of Materials Research (DMR).