* 1454289
* CAREER: Metalloenzyme mechanisms probed by resonance Raman spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Hannah Shafaat, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 09/30/2021
* USD 650,000.00

Metals are an essential component of approximately 50% of all proteins, with
functions ranging from energy storage and metabolism to molecular transport and
cellular signaling. However, due to the complexity of these metalloprotein
systems, many of which contain multiple, distinct metal centers, the mechanisms
of action often remain elusive. This research will develop a novel approach
towards studying these reactions by combining laboratory experiments with
computational chemistry to better understand how these metalloproteins function.
This methodology will be applied to the study of hydrogen production and
oxidation in natural and engineered enzymes, with future potential applications
for alternative energy, sustainable fuels, carbon dioxide fixation, and nitrogen
cycling, among others. Furthermore, the research objectives of this proposal are
integrated with education and outreach activities, with far-reaching impact for
both science and society. The interdisciplinary nature of the work, involving
aspects of biology, chemistry, and physics, renders the subject accessible to a
wide variety of audiences. The educational plan will expose a broad range of
students from underrepresented racial/ethnic groups and with disabilities to
modern chemistry research in an immersive fashion, with the objective of
building a diverse, career-oriented pipeline of STEM talent. General-interest
seminars for adult audiences will be presented with aims of improving scientific
literacy, increasing awareness, and better engaging the community in
contemporary research being carried out at OSU and across the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Hannah Shafaat from The Ohio State
University will study enzymatic mechanisms in metalloproteins using
computationally-guided resonance Raman spectroscopy (CGRRS). By harnessing the
selectivity and sensitivity of resonance Raman spectroscopy performed on a
highly tunable, state-of-the-art instrument, important information on the
structures of catalytic intermediates, including protonation state, bond order,
and coordination mode, will be obtained. Site-selective and state-specific
excitation in conjunction with theoretical predictions of spectroscopic
properties will be used to characterize intermediates and transient species that
are inaccessible by conventional approaches. Small molecule activation reactions
at metalloenzyme active sites, including proton reduction, hydrogen oxidation,
and oxygen reduction in hydrogenases and models, will be investigated to
demonstrate the utility of this experimental-computational approach and identify
key structural motifs during catalysis. This synergistic methodology will be
broadly applicable to the study of many classes of enzymes, particularly those
containing multiple metallocofactors, such as nitrogenase and carbon monoxide
dehydrogenase. Using CGRRS, it will be possible to gain molecular-level insight
into complex reaction mechanisms and begin to understand how metalloproteins are
able to function as some of the most efficient catalysts known.