* 1454552
* CAREER: Next Generation Positron Emission Tomography Integrated with Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Jing Tang, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 526,178.00

The emerging hybrid Positron Emission Tomography integrated with Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (PET/MRI) system represents the cutting edge technology in the
field of biomedical imaging. While first clinical studies are currently underway
to assess the prospect of this major breakthrough in multimodal imaging,
methodological challenges and potentials still need to be addressed or exploited
before this technology finds its way to routine applications. The proposed
research investigates "super-correction" techniques in PET imaging to
revolutionize one of the most sensitive in vivo molecular imaging modalities
when integrated with MRI information. The project will be an important step
toward reaching the full technological capabilities of PET and MRI, extending
its capabilities to diagnostic and prognostic benefits for oncologic,
neurologic, and cardiologic diseases thus improving patient care and research.
Besides scientific research activities, this project also draws up plans to
reach the PI's educational goals through activities to integrate research,
education, and outreach. The new biomedical engineering curricula are expected
to meet the growing demands of students from southeast Michigan and provide
high-quality training to the next generation engineers and scientists in
biomedical imaging. The research opportunities provided through this project and
the pre-college biomedical engineering programs will attract female and
historically under-represented students to pursue careers in the engineering
discipline. The online medical imaging resource will promote public
understanding of the biomedical imaging field to plant seeds for its steady
growth.

Despite the considerable excitement about the potential of PET and MRI, this new
technology is evolving significantly slowly than expected toward its clinical
acceptance. Difficulties due to lack of transmission source for PET attenuation
correction and underexplored benefits of MR information demands the need to
address set of challenges due to integration of these two systems. The proposed
career development plan is a systematic effort to advance the hybrid PET/MRI
system to enable for more defining applications. The specific research
objectives to be accomplished during this award include: a) to determine MR-
assisted joint PET activity and attenuation estimation techniques, b) to
evaluate MR-assisted motion-sensitive PET image reconstruction techniques, c) to
investigate MR-assisted PET image reconstruction techniques for partial volume
correction, and d) to evaluate and validate techniques quantitatively using
realistically simulated PET and MRI data and physical phantom experiments for
brain, cardiac, and whole-body imaging. The proposed research on MR-assisted
joint estimation of activity and attenuation from the time-of-flight PET data is
expected to eliminate the regionally varying bias resulted from the MR
segmentation-based attenuation map. The proposed study on MR-assisted motion
correction and partial volume correction will fully take advantage of the high-
resolution, high soft-tissue contrast MR images to suppress the organ motion
blurring and conquer the inherent limitations of PET imaging resolution. When
successfully completed, the project has the potential to revolutionize the
hybrid PET and MRI system leading to new scientific discoveries and clinical
applications.