* 1454297
* CAREER: Effects of River Inflows on Coastal Ecosystem Sustainability under Climate Change, Urbanization, and Flow Regulation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Huilin Gao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2022
* USD 525,726.00

1454297 (Gao). Coastal ecosystems play a key role in economic and environmental
sustainability, but are facing unprecedented challenges caused by the
synergistic effects of climate change, urbanization, and flow regulation. To
better manage these changes to coastal ecosystems and sustain the valuable
services they provide, reliable predictions of phytoplankton productivity (which
are a strong indicator of ecosystem health) are desirable. The research goal of
this project is to promote sustainable coastal ecosystems through a systems-
level view of the effects that freshwater inflows have on phytoplankton
productivity. The educational goal is to advance environmental sustainability
education through incorporating hands-on activities into curricula and research
training. This project intends to achieve the following three research
objectives: 1) Identifying the relationship between inflows and phytoplankton
productivity; 2) Evaluating the impacts of urbanization and climate change on
inflows and phytoplankton productivity; and 3) Investigating the responses of
phytoplankton productivity to flow regulation, both with and without co-
occurring climate change and urbanization. The educational objectives are: 1)
Teaching environmental sustainability to high school students by working with
high school teachers and participating in student events; and 2) Promoting
undergraduate and graduate environmental sustainability education by integrating
education modules into courses and mentoring the students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create new knowledge leading to reliable
predictions of phytoplankton productivity under a changing environment. The
interdisciplinary research approaches will help close several critical knowledge
gaps. First, by using a combination of in situ observations and state-of-the-art
remote sensing data, the complex relationships between inflows and phytoplankton
productivity will be clarified. Second, by implementing a systems-level model
that estimates inflows and productivity simultaneously, impacts of watershed
management plans on ecosystems can be evaluated directly. Third, by adding a
reservoir module into a fully distributed physically based hydrological model,
the modification of ecosystem productivity due to reservoir operations can be
accurately quantified. Thus, the research will provide decision makers with a
powerful tool to understand the interactions among climate change, urbanization,
flow regulation, and ecosystem sustainability. While the focus is on Texas river
basins and bay areas, the generality of the methodology provides for its
extension to other coastal regions (both nationally and internationally) as
well. The research deals with real-world lessons incorporated into high school,
undergraduate, and graduate curricula using a set of physical and computer
modules. By working with high school teachers directly, by advising high school
students who attend Camp BUILD, and by installing rain gauge stations at
participating schools, education for about 1000 students will be directly
impacted. The higher education activities will affect 800 undergraduate and
graduate students. In turn, research (especially at the local scale) can benefit
from the educational activities - with both rainfall information and the
environmental survey information provided by high school students.