* 1454618
* CAREER: Hexagonal Ferrite Thin Films for the High-Temperature Magnetoelectric Memory Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Xiaoshan Xu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Oder
* 08/31/2021
* USD 591,256.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery and utilization of the
dynamic coupling between the electric and magnetic fields - electromagnetic
waves - has revolutionized human society, particularly in the wireless
communications. The "static" couplings between the electric and magnetic fields
in a material (e.g. switching the north and south poles of a magnet using an
electric field) are expected to have major applications in compact and energy
efficient information storage and processing, sensors, and actuators. These
applications are desired since the demand for information storage and processing
is ever increasing while the capabilities of current technology are being
exhausted. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project explores the
possible static couplings between the electric and magnetic fields in new
materials, such as hexagonal ferrites, by elucidating the connections between
their electric, magnetic, and structural properties, and fine-tuning the
materials using advanced material preparations. Integrated with the research,
the educational objectives of this project are, to promote teaching
undergraduate students fundamental physics by exposing them to cutting-edge
research and by exploiting new student-centered pedagogical approaches, to
mentor and inspire student researchers with systematic trainings for innovative
research, and to engage K-12 students to stimulate their interests in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Switching
a magnetic dipole using an electric field (magnetoelectric memory effect) - an
effect that can be a working principle of the next-generation technology for
information processing and storage - is unfortunately rare in known materials
and restricted to low temperature. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) project explores the magnetoelectric memory effect that is efficient
and stable at high temperature, by the discovery of new materials or by tuning
the properties of known materials experimentally. In particular, this project
investigates the possible magnetoelectric memory effect in the materials that
exhibit both improper ferroelectricity and improper ferromagnetism, such as
hexagonal ferrites (h-RFeO3; R =Y, Ho, Lu). The specific research objectives of
the proposed work are: 1) Elucidate the origin of the magnetic orderings in
hexagonal ferrites. 2) Experimentally determine the magnetoelectric effect and
identify the underlying mechanism in hexagonal ferrites. 3) Adjust the magnetic
properties and the coupling between the magnetic and electric properties in
hexagonal ferrites by tuning their structures using epitaxial thin film growth.
Pulsed laser deposition method is employed to prepare single crystalline
epitaxial thin film materials of tuned structures. The details of magnetic,
electronic, and lattice structures are investigated using neutron scattering,
x-ray spectroscopy, and x-ray diffraction respectively. The couplings between
the electric and magnetic properties are studied by measuring the change of
ferromagnetic properties in an electric field. Besides advancing the
understanding in the magnetoelectric couplings in complex oxides in general, the
success of the project may experimentally establish a new paradigm of
magnetoelectric effect originated from improper ferroelectricity and improper
ferromagnetism