* 1454109
* CAREER: Reversible plasticity in nanocrystalline metals and alloys for shape memory applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Jagannathan Rajagopalan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2022
* USD 568,811.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Nanocrystalline materials are composed of
crystallites (grains) that have an average size of about 100 nanometers or less.
The small grain size leads to very high strength, which has led to significant
interest in using these materials for structural applications. But in addition
to their exceptional strength, nanocrystalline materials also exhibit several
intriguing properties including the ability to recover plastic deformation,
which is typically considered to be irrecoverable. This CAREER award supports
fundamental research that aims to exploit this unusual deformation recovery in
nanocrystalline metals and alloys for shape memory related applications. In
essence, the project lays the foundation to employ nanocrystalline metals and
alloys as smart, functional materials that have applications in aerospace,
medicine and robotics. The research activity is integrated with a broad effort
to promote materials science education at multiple levels. These education and
outreach efforts include a new mentoring program and scientific demonstrations
for high school students, teacher workshops, course enhancements, and training
of undergraduate and graduate students in multidisciplinary materials research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Conventionally, plastic deformation
is considered to be permanent. However, nanocrystalline materials can recover a
large fraction of plastic strain after unloading by thermal activation. This
project explores the fundamental aspects of this unusual strain recovery and
seeks to determine whether complete strain recovery can be repeatedly obtained
in nanocrystalline metals and alloys by controlling their microstructure. The
research efforts are directed towards two distinct goals: 1) Characterizing the
repeatability and temperature dependence of strain recovery in nanocrystalline
face centered cubic metals and alloys over multiple cycles and 2) Understanding
how the interplay between material properties (elastic and plastic anisotropy,
stacking fault energy) and microstructural heterogeneity (variation in size and
orientation of grains) affects the strain recovery characteristics and
mechanisms. These goals are pursued using novel, micro-electro-mechanical
systems based thermomechanical testing and in situ transmission electron
microscopy straining experiments on nanocrystalline metal and alloy films with
controlled microstructures.