* 1454190
* CAREER: Automated scientific discovery and the philosophical problem of natural kinds
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2023
* Benjamin Jantzen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 443,427.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award, the NSF's most prestigious awards in support of
junior faculty who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding
research, excellent education and the integration of education and research
within the context of the mission of their organizations. This award supports an
integrated research and education project that addresses a fundamental
scientific question: Out of countless number of empirical quantities related to
some phenomenon of interest, to which quantities should attention be directed in
order to successfully discover the regularities or laws behind the phenomenon?
Only a special few facilitate accurate generalization from a few particular
facts to a great many that are not in evidence, and yet in the course of their
work scientists efficiently choose variables that support generalization. That
scientists are able to do this is both fascinating and perplexing. This project
will clarify and test a new approach to solving this puzzle by constructing a
series of computer algorithms that automatically carry out a process of variable
choice in the service of autonomous scientific discovery. The inductive success
of these algorithms when applied to genuine problems in current scientific
settings will serve as tangible validation of the theory underlying these
algorithms. The automated discovery algorithms produced will be leveraged to
introduce a generation of graduate students in philosophy and science to the
deep connections between physical computing and formal epistemology. A recurring
summer school will train graduate students in basic programming and formal
methods, with hands on development of automated discovery
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project connects the philosophical problem of natural kinds with computational
problems of automated discovery in artificial intelligence. It tests a new
approach, a dynamical natural kinds theory, denoted the Dynamical Kinds Theory,
by deriving discovery algorithms from that theory's normative content and then
applying these algorithms to real-world phenomena. The inductive success of
these algorithms when applied to genuine problems in current scientific settings
will serve as tangible validation of the philosophical theory. More
dramatically, these discovery algorithms have the potential to produce more than
one equally effective but inconsistent classification of phenomena into kinds.
The existence of such alternatives plays a central role in debates over
scientific realism. Outside of philosophy, the application of the discovery
algorithms to open problems in areas of ecology, evolution, metagenomics,
metabolomics, and systems biology has the potential to suggest previously
unconceived theories of the fundamental ontology in these fields. In particular,
the algorithms will be applied to agent-based models of evolutionary dynamics to
search for population-level laws, and to publicly available long-term ecological
data to search for stable dynamical kinds outside the standard set of ecological
categories.