* 1454578
* CAREER: Enabling High Performance Battery Charging Systems: Adaptive and Optimal Charging Algorithms Based on Dynamic Battery Characteristics
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2015,12/31/2021
* Sung Yeul Park, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 12/31/2021
* USD 532,000.00

Lithium-ion batteries are excellent energy storage devices due to their high
energy density. Lithium-ion batteries are rather costly, and it is desirable to
extend their cycle life as much as possible. However, conventional battery
charging algorithms do not consider the time-varying electrochemical properties
of batteries because the theory behind electrochemical behavior is complex and
computationally challenging to incorporate within charging algorithms. The
primary target of this project is to provide a new, innovative approach enabling
high charging efficiency and long cycle life in electric vehicles, renewable
energy storage, and building back-up power applications. Adaptive charging
algorithms based on electrochemical parameters will enhance charging efficiency
and reduce thermal stress by adjusting the charging current with respect to the
internal state of the batteries. As a result, this project will not only provide
a method for improved charging efficiency, which will enable increased cycle
life, energy savings, and reduced maintenance costs; but also power electronics
technologies will now be able to embed control capability with respect to time-
varying electrochemical behavior in their charging algorithms without extra
cost. It is our expectation that we will gain a profound understanding of the
complex behavior occurring within high power battery stacks as a result of this
research, and from this we may significantly improve the performance and
affordability of such systems. Thus, the outcomes of this project are not only
expected to fundamentally advance the field of battery charging algorithms, but
also to have broad and highly positive societal impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the objective of this project is to
investigate a novel framework that integrates dynamic battery impedance
measurements into battery charging algorithms in order to enhance the charging
efficiency, reliability, and cycle life of batteries. The variations in
impedance are correlated with changes in the electrochemical state, and,
particularly, the degree of conductivity within the battery. The research
thrusts will be: 1) effective and efficient on-line measurement of the time-
varying electrochemical impedance, 2) development of an adaptive sinusoidal
charging algorithm, and 3) construction of a real-time hardware-in-the-loop
test-bed for battery life cycle testing and validation of the concomitant
adaptive charging algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental understanding
of battery charging and advanced energy interfaces will provide a significant
leap in the development of charging algorithms supporting energy efficient,
reliable, and long cycle life batteries. Moreover, results of this research will
not only improve the capabilities of today's state-of-the-art energy storage
technologies, but will be applicable to all battery chemistries because the
internal phenomena of other electrochemical devices exhibit similarities. This
ensures that this research will benefit energy storage system designers,
regardless of their choice of materials and design. This also has the secondary
benefit of improving the efficiency and lifespan of integrated renewable energy
sources featuring electrochemical storage as a constituent component. The
results of this research will be integrated into existing graduate and
undergraduate courses related to power electronics and power systems. Beyond
graduate/undergraduate student education, project based learning programs will
be developed and disseminated via technical school presentations, K-12 student
demonstrations, and summer school teacher workshops.