* 1454010
* CAREER:  Fast Algorithms for Particulate Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Shravan Veerapaneni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 420,721.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to
build stable, high-accuracy, and optimal algorithms for direct numerical
simulations of particulate flows. Dense suspensions of deformable particles in
viscous fluids are ubiquitous in natural and engineering systems. Examples
include drop, bubble, vesicle, swimmer, and blood cell suspensions. Unlike
simple Newtonian fluids, the laws describing their flow behavior are not well
established, owing to the complex interplay between the deformable micro-
structure and the macro-scale flow. For instance, interactions between soft
particles modify their trajectories and cause shear-induced diffusion, and
interaction with confining walls controls the spatial organization of the
suspensions. Besides experiments, direct numerical simulations are often the
only means for gaining insights into the non-equilibrium behavior of such
complex fluids. Hence, there is a need for robust and optimal algorithms that
are scalable. Integrated with the research effort, this project will undertake
educational, mentoring, and outreach activities including a new
interdisciplinary graduate-level course on computational methods for complex
fluids and an interactive education module illustrating the non-intuitive
phenomena observed in complex fluid systems that is accessible to high school
students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this project include (i)
highly accurate algorithms to compute the nearly singular integrals that arise
within the context of boundary integral methods when particles approach very
close to each other when subjected to flow, (ii) fast, high-order, and adaptive
algorithms to simulate multiphase flows through arbitrary periodic geometries,
and (iii) stable time-marching and reparameterization schemes for the coupled
systems of stiff, nonlinear, time-dependent differential and integro-
differential equations governing the evolution of particles and some material
concentration on their surfaces (e.g., surfactants or multi-phase lipids). The
proposed computational infrastructure will lead to better predictive
capabilities for blood flow through complex geometries, margination of platelets
and targeted carriers, and new design tools for microfluidic devices. They can
be applied to a large class of particulate flow problems. Besides fluid
mechanics, the proposed numerical methods and the computational infrastructure
can be applied to solve partial differential equations that arise in various
other disciplines. The research outcomes will have an impact on a broad spectrum
of disciplines in sciences and engineering.