* 1454022
* CAREER: Systemic Performance and Robustness Measures for Large-Scale Dynamical Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Nader Motee, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/29/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Improving energy efficiency as well as robustness to external perturbations in
large-scale dynamical networks is critical for long-term sustainability, from
engineering infrastructures to living cells. Examples include distributed power
networks, distributed emergency response systems, interconnected transportation
networks, metabolic pathways, and social and financial networks. The overarching
goal of this project is to develop new methodologies to classify viable domain-
specific systemic performance, risk, and fragility measures for dynamical
networks and quantify inherent fundamental limits on the best achievable values
for each class of such systemic measures. The main barrier to achieve this
objective is the lack of rigorous knowledge about networks of interconnected
dynamical systems when it comes to understanding their structure, dynamics and
holistic behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The issue of fundamental limits and
their resulting tradeoffs are important for synthesis of dynamical network as
they reveal what is achievable, and conversely what is not achievable by
feedback control mechanisms. The focus of this project is to reveal important
role of underlying dynamical structure and sparse information structure of
dynamical networks in emergence of severe fundamental limits on the best
achievable levels of performance and robustness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is highly relevant for analysis and synthesis of engineered and natural
dynamical networks. Recent technological advances in distributed control and
dynamical systems cannot be efficiently integrated on real platforms without the
necessary theoretical and experimental support. This project will produce data-
driven algorithms to assess global performance and robustness properties of
engineered dynamical networks by computing the values of viable systemic
measures in real-time operation. The application areas include energy, robotic,
transportation, and biological networks. This project further seeks to make
broad impacts through development and dissemination of courses and material in
academia and industry that cover key network science concepts while staying
grounded in engineering applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal
of this project is to develop an integrated theory of dynamical networks based
on notions of systemic measures. This project will focus on discovering
connections between existing gold standard performance and robustness measures
that have been used in disciplines such as control theory, dynamical systems,
physics, biology, and finance, and develop a unified systems-theoretic framework
for characterization of such measures and their inherent fundamental limits and
tradeoffs. This project intends to create a multidisciplinary research
environment focusing on developing a foundational science that allows for
measuring, predicting, and containing systemic measures for network-oriented
applications.