* 1454548
* CAREER: Fundamentals of Low-complexity Relaxations for Nonconvex Optimization Problems with Conic Structure
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Fatma Kilinc-Karzan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 01/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will pioneer novel
tools for the analysis and design of efficient and scalable algorithms for
solving large-scale nonconvex optimization problems with conic constraints.
These problems are critical components of operational problems in many diverse
fields facing uncertainty such as energy, finance, and telemedicine, and are
also frequently used in extracting useful information from high-dimensional
data. While convex conic optimization problems are efficiently solvable, the
presence of nonconvexities, such as yes/no decisions, present significant new
challenges and the state-of-the-art algorithms do not scale well. This award
supports foundational research to establish frameworks that overcome these
challenges by exploiting valuable structural information in a unified manner.
The main developments will address key trade-offs on relaxation quality and
computational tractability. If successful, these developments will advance the
fundamental tool set in optimization, thus improving the efficiency of
operations in a broad range of activities in the aforementioned sectors, having
a profound impact on US economy and society. Progress in this vein will provide
valuable insights to researchers and practitioners in interdisciplinary domains
such as machine learning and high dimensional statistics. The outcomes of this
research will be incorporated into commonly used open-source platforms and
integrated into the graduate curriculum. These efforts will also go hand-in-hand
with synergistic activities to promote operations research among
underrepresented groups as well as encourage creative mathematical problem
solving skills in K-12 education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award aims to
develop foundational theory to study the key properties of structured non-convex
sets and design new efficient algorithms. The focus will be on development of
new systemic techniques to generate classes of low-complexity relaxations
(expressed in linear or conic form) that are effective and easy to incorporate
into existing and/or novel algorithmic frameworks. This research will introduce
non-traditional paradigms for incorporating more information into the
convexification process from different types of cones, multiple conic structures
simultaneously present, and specific sources of nonconvexities such as nonconvex
quadratics. Degradation of relaxation quality due to partial information use and
resulting computational complexity trade-offs will be rigorously quantified.
Whenever possible, these developments will be supplemented with explicit results
on convex hull characterizations and accompanied with efficient algorithms based
on reduced-complexity optimization methods to further enhance the scalability of
this approach. Research findings will be studied in a diverse set of models from
a number of interdisciplinary fields