* 1454095
* CAREER: In- and Out-of-Equilibrium Behavior of Colloidal Clusters with Broken Symmetries
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Ning Wu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 04/30/2021
* USD 548,413.00

Colloidal dispersions play an important role in materials processing for
industries ranging from electronics to pharmaceuticals. When colloidal particles
are organized into arrays and other structures, the resulting materials can
exhibit optical and electrical properties that are not found in natural
materials. Therefore, colloids serve as building blocks for fabricating advanced
functional materials. This project will develop new approaches to make clusters
of colloidal particles with well-controlled compositions and geometries, which
will expand the range of materials that can be fabricated. The project will
investigate how external fields can be used to manipulate the assembly of
particles into clusters and ultimately into large ensembles. Results from the
project will provide fundamental knowledge that scientists and engineers can use
to develop materials and devices, such as new sensors or new coatings with
controlled optical properties. In addition, the project team will develop a
summer research program in colloidal science targeted to high school students in
the Denver area and especially to students from underrepresented groups. A
multi-disciplinary course titled "Engineering of Soft Materials" will be
developed to engage undergraduate students in colloidal science and train them
for careers in the materials industry.

New approaches will be developed to make clusters of colloids with well-
controlled broken symmetries. A microfluidic device that integrates both
electric (for assembly) and optical fields (for structural cross-linking) will
be used to fabricate monodisperse higher order colloidal clusters with
addressable compositions and geometries. The asymmetric properties of colloidal
clusters will be systematically studied within the context of particle
propulsion, which constitutes a significant step toward understanding the
transport properties of active colloids. A virtually patterned electrode will be
used to generate micro-gradients in electric field and direct particles into
periodic structures with addressable symmetry at both cluster and lattice
levels. The coupled optical effects between neighboring clusters and the
feasibility for making functional coatings will also be explored. The overall
goal of the project is to understand how the broken-symmetry in colloidal
clusters affects their in- and out-of-equilibrium behavior from the level of an
individual particle to a large ensemble.