* 1454301
* CAREER: Reverse engineering the inflammatory signaling network from single-cell data
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Kathryn Miller-Jensen, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

1454301&lt;br/&gt;Miller-Jensen, Kathryn &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innate immune
system is the group of cells and their products that protect humans and other
organisms against invading pathogens. When innate immune cells function
abnormally, they can contribute to autoimmune diseases and cancer by secreting
incorrect signals to neighboring cells. However, if drugs could specifically
target the innate immune cells to return them to a healthy state, then it may be
possible to harness them to treat these diseases. The innate immune response -
like many other biological systems - is complicated by the fact that not all
cells respond exactly the same way to the same stimulus, even though the cells
are genetically identical. The goal of this CAREER award is to better understand
the innate immune system by measuring noisy signals and secretion in single
cells to discover how they work together to produce a protective immune
response. This research will use novel experimental tools such as microfluidic
devices, that permit measurement of many biological signals from single cells.
Computational modeling will be used to interpret these complex single-cell data
sets and develop new hypotheses about innate immune system regulation and new
ways to modify the innate immune system to treat disease.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An effective immune response requires extensive
communication between cells of the innate and adaptive immune systems.
Macrophages play a major role in regulating the immune response by executing a
well-orchestrated cascade of secreted pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines upon
stimulation by microbial products, such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Recently,
it has been discovered that there is significant cell-to-cell heterogeneity in
innate immune intracellular signaling and secretion responses. The goal of this
CAREER award is to test the hypotheses that 1) signaling dynamics regulate
secretion heterogeneity; and 2) intercellular heterogeneity is converted to
rapid and reliable responses in the population via paracrine (i.e., cell-to-
neighbor cell) signaling. To explore these hypotheses, the researchers will use
state-of-the-art experimental tools for single-cell analysis, including an
integrated microfluidic device for live-cell imaging of signaling,
transcriptional dynamics and secretion in the same single cells. These data will
be used to classify heterogeneous 'secretion programs' (Specific Objective 1),
identify sources of heterogeneity from transcription to secretion across
differentially trafficked cytokines (Specific Objective 2), and to develop a
mathematical model of signaling, cytokine secretion, and diffusion fit to
single-cell data to make predictions about emergent population behavior
(Specific Objective 3). The results will have significant implications for
immunology, cancer, and beyond, and may suggest improved strategies for
specifically modulating the innate immune response to treat disease.
Microfluidic tools like the ones used in this research not only enable discovery
of new biological mechanisms, but also provide fun and tangible ways to learn
foundational skills in biology and engineering. Therefore, this CAREER award
will support an educational initiative to increase diversity and participation
in engineering through a summer outreach program for high school students in the
greater New Haven area. Specifically, the researchers will use microfluidic
devices to engage high school students and teach them basic concepts in
immunology, biology and engineering through development of a summer teaching
module (run through Yale's Pathways to Science Program) and summer lab
internships. Such hands-on approaches are critical to recruit and retain a more
diverse group of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) college
graduates.