* 1454346
* CAREER: SusChEM: Development of Governing Mechanistic and Kinetic Models for the Selective Oxidative Cleavage of Levulinic Acid Over Supported Vanadium Oxides
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Jesse Bond, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2020
* USD 530,985.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jesse Q Bond&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
1454346&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Syracuse University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop a strategy for producing succinic acid and maleic acid
from biomass. Traditionally, these commodity chemicals are made by oxidizing
components of crude oil or natural gas, which is challenging. Instead, it may be
possible to produce them more efficiently and inexpensively from sugar
molecules, which can be extracted from biomass. This approach would require that
we understand the reasons why certain catalysts and precursors deliver the
desired products, while others do not. We anticipate that a technology that
converts biomass and biomass derivatives to valuable products could help with
commercial development of biomass processing industries. An educational
component of the project will build a connection between Syracuse University
students and communities in the city of Syracuse through service projects. The
education program includes public workshops designed to improve public
scientific literacy by educating participants on topics in energy and resource
sustainability. Workshops will also outline effective methods for reducing
society?s dependence on fossil resources and technology?s role in
sustainability. The workshops will be facilitated by Syracuse University
students as part of their undergraduate curriculum. These students will also
work on design projects that incorporate new, energy- and resource-efficient
technologies into ongoing urban development initiatives. This will allow them to
use their training to improve their community and demonstrate the beneficial
societal impacts of a STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
the study of gas-phase, aerobic oxidative cleavage of bifunctional levulinic
acid (4-oxopentanoic acid) over supported vanadium oxides to yield C4 diacids.
Diacid formation occurs through cleavage of the terminal C-C bond in levulinic
acid, which is not generally observed in monofunctional ketone analogs, such as
2-pentanone. The central hypothesis is that the structure and bifunctionality of
levulinic acid underlie unique interactions with VOx sites that shift
selectivity toward terminal C-C cleavage. The project seeks to identify
descriptors that govern C-C cleavage selectivity during ketone
oxidation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will consider the influence of VOx
speciation by measuring rates and selectivities of oxidative ketone cleavage
over VOx/Al2O3 catalysts in which VOx phase and degree of polymerization are
controlled by varying vanadium loading. The roles of Br√∏nsted and Lewis acidity
will be examined by studying oxidative cleavage over monolayer VOx/Al2O3
catalysts in which both acid site density and distribution are varied using
acidic and basic modifiers. The influence of V-O-X bond character will be probed
by comparing VOx sites on oxides that differ in reducibility. Isotopic tracing
using 18O will identify the roles of lattice and chemisorbed oxygen during
levulinic acid oxidation. Influences of ketone structure, steric interactions,
and secondary functionality will be probed through a combination of kinetic and
spectroscopic studies that contrast levulinic acid oxidation with that of
various mono- and bifunctional ketone analogs. Electronic structure calculations
will be used to build and parameterize a microkinetic model, which will
reconcile first-principles expectations with experimental outcomes. Raman, UV-
Vis, FTIR, and Temperature-Programmed spectroscopies (e.g., TPD, TPSR) will
provide comprehensive characterization of site structure and chemical
functionality.