* 1454865
* CAREER: Interactions between Floer Theory, Khovanov Homology, and Low-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2024
* John Baldwin, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 404,930.00

This research project involves studying 3- and 4-dimensional spaces called
manifolds, and geometric structures on them. Understanding these spaces and
structures is central to understanding the shape and properties of our universe.
For example, Einstein's description of gravity via general relativity relies on
mathematical tools for understanding manifolds that are not too different from
those under development in this project. Indeed, many of the theories under
study have applications and origins in physics. A major goal of the project is
to develop methods that might be used to unify several existing and important
tools for studying 3- and 4-dimensional manifolds. Such unification would likely
reveal interesting connections between disparate fields of mathematics. An
important method for understanding higher dimensional spaces is to study lower
dimensional spaces that embed into them; much of this research project will be
focused on understanding 1-dimensional spaces called knots embedded in
3-dimensional manifolds. Knot theory was initiated as a subfield of topology in
the 1880's by the chemist Lord Kelvin, and it has many other interesting
applications outside of mathematics -- to the study of how certain enzymes alter
the knotting of DNA, for example. One of the project goals is to unify two very
important, but prima facie different, tools for studying knots; there is
tantalizing conjectural evidence of a concrete relationship between these two
theories. Another means of studying 3- and 4-dimensional manifolds is by
understanding the sorts of geometric structures they support. Considerable
effort in this project will go into understanding contact structures on
3-dimensional manifolds. In addition to their applications in mathematics,
contact structures are important in classical mechanics, thermodynamics,
dynamical systems, and in the study of liquid crystals. This project also
contains several explicit directions for student research, at both undergraduate
and graduate levels, and will support the PI's teaching and mentoring
activities. In addition, the project will serve the broader community by
creating a Wiki repository of open problems, with background and context. The PI
will also use the funds from this award to start a Boston-area graduate seminar,
and to participate in math outreach for the general public at the Cambridge
Science Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Floer theory has revolutionized the study
of the topology and geometry in low dimensions. Many of these Floer theories
appear to encode the same information, indicating deep connections between
fields like symplectic geometry and gauge theory. These and connections between
Floer theory and link invariants from representation theory have led to
spectacular results in low-dimensional topology, such as proof of the Weinstein
conjecture. Despite some progress in understanding these connections, there is
not yet a simple, unifying explanation for them. Indeed, a fundamental open
problem, and a distant lodestar for part of the research project, is to
axiomatize Floer theory. One approach involves developing invariants of bordered
3-manifolds. The bordered monopole Floer theory under development in this
project is novel in that it may provide methods for computing invariants of
4-manifolds as well. A complementary goal of this project is to elucidate links
between Floer theory and Khovanov homology, an invariant of links motivated by
representation theory. Such connections were instrumental, for example, in
establishing that Khovanov homology detects the unknot. This project
investigates a new approach to proving a long-standing conjecture relating
Khovanov homology with knot Floer homology, which would imply, among other
things, that Khovanov homology detects the figure eight, trefoil, and Hopf link
as well. The project also investigates a novel approach for using actions of
quantum cohomology on Floer theory to study the rich theory of Heegaard
splittings of 3-manifolds. This has not been done before, despite the role
Heegaard splittings play in the constructions of some Floer theories. Finally,
the research project will employ newly-developed gauge-theoretic contact
invariants to provide fresh insights into Legendrian knots and Lagrangian
concordance, and to establish hitherto unexplored connections between contact
geometry and the fundamental group.