* 1454983
* CAREER: Refining forest management strategies to maximize hydrologic gains from snow dominated watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Mukesh Kumar, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 04/30/2019
* USD 570,291.00

Seasonal snow in forested uplands is a critical water source for most of the
western United States and other snowfall-dominated regions of the world. In
addition to providing melt water, the forests also provide goods and services
valued by society, including timber production, carbon sequestration,
biodiversity preservation, nutrient interception, and water exchange to the
atmosphere. To sustain these ecosystem services, forest management practices
(FMPs) such as mechanical thinning, gap creation, and firebreak cutting are
often implemented. However, these FMPs can have unintended consequences,
including increased snow melt and peak flow that can cause erosion, destabilize
streams, produce water shortages, and degrade water quality and ecosystem
health. Water and forest managers need to strike a balance between maximizing
forest productivity and minimizing impacts on water resources. This project will
study the role of altered forest configurations due to FMPs on peak and melt-
season streamflow in snow-dominated forests. The results will lead to mitigation
of harmful hydrologic impacts from both natural and managed forest alterations
and enhance the resilience of economies in the western U.S. and other areas
supported by snow-fed water from these forests. Research and education will be
integrated across multiple educational levels. K-12 outreach will be achieved
through the Decision Room, a group simulation exercise to: 1) develop knowledge
around specific water topics and 2) understand trade-offs involved in decision
making and implementation of science-based solutions. The Decision Room will be
implemented in collaboration with Morehead Planetarium Science Center at the
North Carolina Science Festival, which has a history of engaging a very diverse
student population. At the university level, data and models developed in this
project will be integrated into courses on Water Quantity and Quality
Assessment. Educational activities in North Carolina public schools, at Duke
University and at the University of Idaho, will inspire a new generation of
scientists and engineers to explore, collaborate and teach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project will develop an improved understanding of how
FMPs, such as thinning and gap creation, impact snow accumulation, snowmelt, and
the consequent hydrologic response. The research will advance integrated
assessment of radiation transfer, snow accumulation and melt, and the consequent
hydrologic response in forested watersheds, through synergistic observation and
modeling. Specifically, the project will: 1) develop, validate, and evaluate a
physics-based forest radiation model for heterogeneous forests and 2) assess the
impacts of changes in forest patch and gap configuration on hydrologic response,
by integrating the radiation model with a snow melt and accumulation model and a
distributed hydrologic model. Hypothesis testing, and parameterization,
evaluation, and validation of the models will be performed at multiple sites
including the Mica Creek Experimental Watershed (Idaho), Southern Sierra
Critical Zone Observatory (California) and Niwot Ridge Long Term Ecological
Research site (Colorado). The validated model will evaluate existence of optimal
forest patch and gap configurations that may either minimize the negative
impacts of FMPs or enhance hydrologic benefits. The integrated model developed
during the project, to be released to the broader community, will allow robust
hydrology impact analyses for forest alteration scenarios and provide a
foundation for testing future sustainable water resource and forest management
strategies.