* 1454226
* CAREER: A Biomanufactured Platform for Modulating Immune Cell-Bacteria Interactions in the Tumor Microenvironment
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,08/31/2023
* Bahareh Behkam, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2023
* USD 515,223.00

PI: Behkam, Bahareh&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1454226&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cancer is the second leading cause of death in the
U.S., annually claiming over half a million lives. Thus, there is an acute need
for improved non-invasive disease diagnostics and more effective drug delivery
techniques that minimize toxic side effects. Engineered bacteria have been shown
to safely accumulate in tumor tissue with high selectivity and treat cancers
that are not responsive to conventional therapies in mouse cancer models.
However, clinical success has been rare due to insufficient tumor colonization
by bacteria. This is presently attributed to the host immune response, and
bacteria-neutrophil interactions in particular have been implicated in several
in vivo studies. Nonetheless, interactions of neutrophil and bacteria within the
tumor microenvironment remain largely unexplored. This CAREER award focuses on
fundamental research in bacteria-neutrophil interactions in a three-dimensional
(3D) disease model with the goal of modulating these interactions in order to
overcome the immunologic barrier to successful bacteria-based cancer therapy.
The proposed CAREER research and education plan has the potential to
revolutionize the quality of life by enabling novel cancer treatment pathways,
while providing the opportunity to integrate research elements and discoveries
into multidisciplinary educational and outreach
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the research component
of this CAREER proposal is to biomanufacture a system based on controlled self-
assembly of live, attenuated tumor-targeting bacteria with leukotoxin-loaded
nanoparticles in order to enable localized control of bacteria-immune cell
interactions within the tumor microenvironment. It is hypothesized that
controlling intratumoral inflammation through localized modulation of
neutrophil-bacteria interactions will enable bacteria to overcome the
immunologic barrier to proliferation in viable tumor tissue. Fundamental studies
on cell-cell interactions in engineered 3D disease models will be performed and
means for controlling such interactions will be developed. The following
research objectives will be pursued: (1) Biomanufacture and characterize a
first-of-its-kind Nanoscale Bacteria Enabled Immune Modulation System
(NanoBEIMS) for localized and in-situ disabling of the immunologic barrier to
intratumoral proliferation of bacteria; (2) Investigate the role of the mutual
effects of bacteria biofilm formation and neutrophil stimulation in intratumoral
colonization of bacteria; and (3) Quantify enhancement in bacterial
proliferation in tumors caused by NanoBEIMS-enabled localized depletion of
neutrophils. The new knowledge gained through this interdisciplinary effort will
provide a unique repertoire of enabling technologies for localized cell-cell
interaction modulation, as well as highly-targeted theranostic applications for
cancer therapy and beyond. Knowledge of the immune system-bacteria interactions
is also critical to elucidating the underpinnings of bacterial oncogenesis and
enabling effective cancer immunotherapy as well as bacteria-mediated gene
therapy. The main goals of the educational component of this CAREER plan are to
enhance recruitment and retention of the socioeconomically disadvantaged and
ethnically underrepresented groups in STEM and to prepare future scientists to
tackle complex multidisciplinary challenges in biotic/abiotic systems
engineering (BASE). To this end, this CAREER proposal will establish a multi-
tier plan centered on research-inspired learning. The three major components of
the plan include: (1) research and training opportunities for elementary school
students and teachers from a rural county in southwest Virginia, (2) web-based
interactive learning modules to introduce 9-12 year old children to non-
traditional areas in engineering at the national level; (3) multidisciplinary
research experience for community college students with special focus on
underrepresented undergraduates.