* 1454747
* CAREER: Understanding the Reactivity of Hydrogen Sulfide with Bio(in)organic Targets
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Michael Pluth, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 01/31/2021
* USD 650,000.00

Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is historically recognized for its malodorous rotten-egg
smell, but is now accepted to be involved in diverse and important biological
signaling processes. The fundamental chemistry by which H2S exerts this
biological action, however, remains unclear. This project focuses on using
synthetic model complexes to study H2S reactivity, with the goal of providing a
greater understanding of how H2S reacts with important biological targets.
Specific goals include understanding how H2S reacts with metal-containing
biomolecules and how sulfur-rich compounds react in relation to H2S release and
storage. The educational component of this project focuses on providing hands-on
laboratory-based experiments for local middle and high school students while
also providing career-development mentoring opportunities for college and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER Award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Professor Michael
Pluth from the University of Oregon to investigate the mechanisms by which H2S
interacts with bioinorganic and bioorganic targets. Synthetic small-molecule
model complexes will be used to investigate the mechanisms by which H2S reacts
with transition-metal containing biomolecules. Parallel investigations will
focus on establishing new methods of preparing small-molecule persulfides and
understanding how these compounds react with biologically-relevant small
molecules. Both foci share the goal of providing greater insight into the
fundamental chemistry associated with H2S-mediated biological signaling. This
CAREER award also supports the expansion of an outreach program co-developed by
Professor Pluth that addresses reduced lab-based science education for local
students due to state budget cuts. This program brings local middle and high
school students to the University of Oregon to participate in STEM-based
outreach activities and provides leadership and mentoring opportunities for high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students.