* 1454574
* CAREER: Understanding Behavior and Properties of Nano-Sized Particles in Cement-Based Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Kay Wille, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will investigate the
behavior and properties of nano-sized particles in cement-based materials.
Nanoparticles have the potential to lead to more dense materials, and to carry
over specific functionalities leading to novel material design possibilities,
such as intelligent multi-functional highly durable engineered concretes. These
design possibilities will allow for enhanced performance control and will
increase the potential in effectively addressing the current poor condition of
the nation's aging infrastructure as well as prepare for future infrastructure
concerns. Unlocking the full potential of nano-sized particles in cement-based
systems is currently held back by the limited understanding of the mechanisms by
which they disperse throughout the concrete matrix. This information is critical
for understanding and improving the strength and durability of the material.
This award supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for high
quality dispersion of nano-particles in cement-based systems. Meaningful impacts
will be created through educational outreach activities by a) sharing newly
gained knowledge for the advancement of the cement based technology, b)
inspiring and motivating the next generation to pursue science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), letting them discover their potential of
creativity, and c) connecting knowledge of various science disciplines to
enhance the interaction between civil engineers, materials scientists and
chemists. Inspired by biology and life science, the centerpiece of the
educational impact is creating 3D visualization of particle dispersion
mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this CAREER award is
to examine and understand the dispersion mechanisms of nano-sized pozzolans in
cement-based composites. The central hypothesis is that enhancing the chemical
bond energy between polymer and nanoparticle (&lt;100 nm) in addition to
improving the stabilization forces between polymer-particle units in cement
based matrix will lead to better dispersion quality and densification of the
matrix. In pursuit of this hypothesis the proposed research is subdivided into
the following five interconnected research aims, 1) constituents
characterization, 2) polymer synthesis and characterization, 3) particle-polymer
interfacial interactions, 4) nanoparticle stabilization and 5) concrete density
assessment. A multi-method investigation is proposed to study the intriguing
complex dispersion mechanisms. The main challenge of the proposed research is to
isolate interconnected mechanisms to reduce the system complexity. Controlled
polymer synthesis and controlled ionic concentration of the cement based pore
solution are examples of facilitating the isolation of parameters influencing
adsorption kinetics and dispersion mechanisms.