* 1454770
* A New Paradigm for Multiflow in MC-MR Wireless Networks: Theoretic Foundations And Practical Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Peng-Jun Wan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 09/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

The multiflow problems in wireless networks address the transportation of
traffic demands by multiple end-to-end communication requests at the maximum
capacity. State-of-the-art methods of solving the multiflow problems require an
excessive amount of computational resources, and consequently often prove
unusable in practice. This project explores a completely new paradigm for
multiflow problems in multi-channel multi-radio wireless networks and develops
much faster and simpler practical algorithmic solutions that offer quantified
trade-off between accuracy and efficiency. The new paradigm has wide
applications in domains beyond wireless networks, and serves as a basis for
interesting future projects on network capacity and cross-layer design and
optimizations in wireless networks.

Due to the cross-layer nature, multiflow problems in wireless networks pose
unique and significant challenges. Characterizing computational hardness and
strategies for resolving achievable approximation bounds have been the priority
in existing studies of multiflow problems in wireless networks. In fact, state-
of-the-art approximation algorithms for multiflow problems in wireless networks
are all centralized and rely upon traditional linear programming (LP) methods
exclusively. However, these traditional LP methods require an inordinate amount
of running time and memory even for a moderate sized input, and consequently
they often prove unusable in practice. Furthermore, the centralized nature of
traditional LP methods make them unsuitable for developing distributed network
protocols. This project explores a new paradigm for multiflow problems in multi-
channel multi-radio wireless networks that is different from the prevailing LP-
based paradigm, and develops practical algorithmic solutions that are much
faster and simpler.