* 1454320
* CAREER: A New GaN-based Unit Cell for Highly Efficient Integrated Power Conversion
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Srabanti Chowdhury, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 01/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to develop a very low loss power transistor with an integrated drive
circuit for power conversion applications. The approach will use an innovative
fabrication process to address issues with Gallium Nitride-based vertical
transistors that have previously limited the technology from achieving superior
performance and widespread adoption. A significant amount of energy is wasted as
heat due to inefficient power conversion. The solution provided through this
program will reduce or eliminate the wasted energy thereby effectively extending
the lifetime of available energy resources. This energy savings will add to the
global energy security and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The educational and
outreach components are aimed at fostering interest in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines and developing scientific
knowledge at the undergraduate and K-12 levels. These activities are focused on
working with a diverse group of students particularly women and other
underrepresented groups. Integration of the research and education will be
achieved through workshops and classes dedicated to understanding semiconductor
devices and build prototypes or models for their K-12 classrooms. Specific
outreach goals include collaboration with K-8 girls through Engineering
Adventure and Teacher College candidates through Engineers Serving Education.
The educational goal is to continue building on a recently introduced coursework
on power electronics and extend the knowledge on cutting edge technologies
acquired through the research under this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique polarization properties of
the nitrogen polar orientation of Gallium nitride will be utilized for the first
time to develop vertical transistors that require no interruptions during the
growth of the structure. The reverse polarization field of the Aluminum Gallium
Nitride/Gallium Nitride heterostructure is designed to block current in the
transistor while providing a very conductive path for the current to flow in
designated region. An on-state resistance below 1 mohm.cm2 is estimated from
this novel transistor design and is set as a target in this program. Lack of an
integrated gate driver has limited high switching speed and efficiency of power
converters due to the deleterious effects of board interconnects and bond wire
inductance. This innovation pushes the limits of power electronics to very high
power densities with high efficiency delivered at high frequencies by first
developing superior performance of nitride-based vertical transistors and then
eliminating the limits placed on switching speed by trace inductance of bond
wires and board interconnects by integrating the driver circuit based on lateral
transistors on-chip. The scope of this research extends into both fundamental
device research and application space where the device structures will be used
to determine fundamental properties of the material including the first direct
measurement of electron velocity in Gallium nitride. Finally the merit will be
evident through new circuit architectures with increased efficiency and reduced
form factor by enabling high efficiency power conversion at high frequencies.