* 1454925
* CAREER: Integrating Chemical Biology into Research and Education: Studying Glycosylation of Cellulolytic Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Zhongping Tan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 05/31/2019
* USD 650,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Zhongping Tan from the University of Colorado at Boulder
to investigate the glycosylation of cellulases, a class of important enzymes
that are widely used in industry for the production of fuels derived from
renewable biological materials (biofuels). In order to reduce the costs of
producing biofuels, it is paramount to enhance the performance of cellulases and
glycosylation, i.e., the attachment of carbohydrates to proteins, appears to be
a promising way to achieve such a task. The proposed research seeks to establish
a link between glycosylation and cellulase performance and provide clear
guidelines to develop more efficient cellulase enzymes. By working on this
project, students will gain a diverse range of skills and experiences across
chemistry and biology. This project includes plans to educate elementary and
secondary school science teachers on the production of renewable biofuels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the combined use of chemical synthesis, enzymatic
biotransformation, and biochemical characterization, this research project seeks
to unveil the molecular level impact of cellulase glycosylation. The proposed
approach will use both chemical and enzymatic synthesis to prepare a library of
homogeneous glycosylated protein isoforms (glycoforms) with control of the
number of occupied glycosylation sites and of glycan composition. The effects of
glycosylation on stability and function will be quantified by comparing the
characteristics across these well defined glycoform arrays. This type of
systematic knowledge is anticipated to not only shed light on the possible roles
of glycosylation on industrially important enzymes, but also lead to the
identification of cellulase glyco-variants with enhanced efficiency relative to
those currently used in industrial processes.