* 1454496
* CAREER: Frequency Comb Laser Diagnostics for Combustion Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Gregory Rieker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 02/28/2021
* USD 507,353.00

1454496 - Rieker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will develop a
measurement technique to be used in combustion environments that are too harsh
for traditional sensors. The goal is to achieve a laser light with multiple
wavelengths that can simultaneously determine multiple property values (such as
temperature and species concentrations) with high resolutions. The knowledge
thus gained can be used for enhancing energy efficiency and pollution reduction.
It also involves students in hands-on laboratory activities, and training
graduate students for advanced research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this CAREER grant is to address the difficulties of in-situ, multi-
species, multi-property measurements in combustion environments by establishing
the first frequency comb (i.e., consisting of multiple peaks at discrete narrow-
band frequencies) laser-based tools and techniques for combustion systems. The
frequency comb is capable of broadband absorption sensing with unprecedented
spectral resolution and speed. This project will overcome the remaining
challenges to practical frequency comb-based sensing in combustion environments,
namely reducing system complexity and improving signal-to-noise ratio. The
project will demonstrate the technique for multi-species, multi-property (e.g.
temperature, pressure, species concentration) measurements in a coal
gasification reactor. The project will also enable mid-infrared frequency comb
measurements in the C-H stretch spectral region of many hydrocarbons, with the
simplicity of in-situ laser absorption spectroscopy as well as the multi-species
capabilities of extractive gas chromatography or mass spectroscopy.