* 1454102
* CAREER: Corrosion Resistance of Nano-meter Graphene Coatings in Aggressive Microbial Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Venkata Gadhamshetty, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 512,000.00

CBET - 1454102 Gadhamshetty

CAREER: Corrosion Resistance of Nano-meter Graphene Coatings in Aggressive
Microbial Environment

The annual costs for the direct and indirect effects of metallic corrosion on
infrastructure have been reported to reach nearly $1 trillion in United States.
Microbial corrosion accounts for nearly 20-40 % of the total corrosion costs.
While there are several protective coatings available for metal protection, the
commercial coatings tend to fail in the aqueous and microbial environments. The
central goal of this project is to investigate a new class of minimally invasive
(thickness of few nanometers), pin-hole-free, robust, and protective coatings
made from conformal graphene for use against microbial corrosion. This CAREER
project enables the rational design of the next generation of minimally
invasive, nanometer-scale, microbial-corrosion resistant coatings featuring
graphene building blocks. It will focus on four broader impact objectives: 1) to
develop an Adobe-director-based virtual laboratory to provide students with
hands-on tutorials on microbial corrosion/Gr experiments; 2) to integrate
graphene research in undergraduate curriculum; 3) to encourage under-represented
American Indians (from 9 SD reservations) to join BS and MS degrees; and 4) to
work with educational experts to evaluate the educational/outreach activities.

This CAREER proposal seeks to make fundamental contributions in our
understanding on why graphene works effectively under microbial conditions.
Towards this end, the PI will use Desulfovibrio vulgaris as a model for sulfate-
reducing bacteria to investigate the effectiveness of graphene-coatings under
varying stimuli related to: i) electrochemical constraints, ii) physiological
parameters, iii) the point defects in graphene, iv) wettability of graphene, v)
cytotoxicity of graphene, and, vi) graphene-production techniques. In
preliminary studies, a detailed electrochemical analysis revealed that the
graphene offers ~100-fold improvement in microbial corrosion resistance compared
to Parylene coatings, ~41-fold compared to bare graphene, and ~10-fold compared
to polyurethane coatings. These findings shows a promise for microbial
corrosion-resistant graphene coatings as their average thickness (1-2 nm) is
25-fold smaller than Parylene (40-50 nm), and 4000-fold smaller than
polyurethane (20-80 micron). The microscopy and spectroscopy techniques revealed
that the microbes observed in this study (e.g. Strenotrophomonas species within
gammaproteobacteria) can attack polymers and induce micron-length tears leading
to non-conformal polymer coatings, while the graphene coating was found to be
electrochemically inert, extremely conformal, and resistant to microbial attack.
The nano-scale graphene coatings also cause minimal changes to the underlying
surface topology.