* 1454036
* CAREER: Atomic-Scale Visualization of Excitonic States in Individual Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2022
* Georgy Nazin, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Elles
* 01/31/2022
* USD 640,933.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program,
Professor George Nazin of the University of Oregon will develop new measurement
techniques for the visualization of the energy states of individual carbon
nanotubes. Carbon nanotubes, or "CNTs" are a form of the element Carbon which
have current applications in composite materials, but also have potential for
interesting applications in electronics, optoelectronics and bioimaging.
Professor Nazin is investigating the electronic and photophysical properties of
CNTs. The Nazin group is employing a spatially-resolved spectroscopic technique
that allows the team to obtain real-space atomic-resolution electronic maps of
individual pristine and chemically-modified CNTs. This work aims to develop a
detailed picture of CNT photophysics, which will help guide the principles for
rational design of applications based on CNTs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to establish a quantitative microscopic model of CNT photophysics
through direct measurements of spectral structures and spatial behaviors of
electronic states corresponding to electronic excitations (excitons) in CNTs.
These studies are enabled by a novel scanning tunneling microscope constructed
recently by the Nazin group. In this experimental approach, tunneling electrons
are used as the excitation source, which allows investigations of CNT
photophysics with atomic-scale spatial resolution, currently inaccessible to any
other experimental technique. In addition to the direct characterization of
excitonic states, spatially-resolved measurements of individual CNTs provide
insights into the fundamentally important processes of exciton transport and
quenching, the role of defects in these processes, and chemical approaches to
controlling these processes. The project is integrated with a middle/high school
outreach program developed by Professor Nazin in collaboration with the
Springfield, Oregon, school district. The program, designed with teacher input
in order to fulfill state science standards, provides year-round engagement of
students through hands-on science activities held at the University of Oregon
campus.