* 1454333
* CAREER: Building a Unified Framework for Galactic Star Formation Rates, Citizen Science, and Minority Students in Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Matthew Povich, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 06/30/2020
* USD 649,853.00

This project plans to build a new calibration and highly detailed map of the
present-day star formation rate in our Galaxy, the Milky Way. These maps are
needed to understand how stars form in our own Galaxy and also in other
unresolved, external galaxies in the universe. The PI will use the global
Citizen Science network known as the Milky Way Project (MWP) to map the spatial
distribution and brightness of low-density clouds of partially ionized atomic
hydrogen gas in the Galaxy, known as H II regions, in order to compile the
largest catalog of Galactic H II regions to date. He will also build a network
of astronomy research collaboration among at Cal Poly Pomona and Cal State
University campuses, and community colleges that target undergraduate students.
A student-led public outreach program BUILD: Bring the Universe Into LA
Districts, will educate families and friends of under-represented students about
astronomy as a science and as a viable career option. This project will use the
NSF-funded California-Arizona Minority Partnership for Astronomy Research and
Education (CAMPARE) and California Bridge to the PhD (Cal-Bridge) programs, to
strengthen STEM research at Cal Poly Pomona, which has a large Hispanic student
population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his team plan to do this work using
bolometric and ionizing continuum luminosities of Galactic H II regions,
calibrated against star-forming rates measured from direct X-ray and infrared
(IR) observations of young population of stars in massive star forming regions.
They will also expand and refine the Galactic HII regions catalog using
supplementary infrared and radio survey data and distance information to measure
luminosities.