* 1454282
* CAREER: Elucidation and modulation of chemotactic signaling after brain injury
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Sarah Stabenfeldt, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2021
* USD 504,909.00

PI: Stabenfeldt, Sarah E.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1454282&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research scope of this CAREER program
significantly impacts the large societal crisis of traumatic brain injury,
particularly since recent studies have shown that even mild brain injuries may
result in chronic effects to a patient. The findings identified in the proposed
research will have profound impact on elucidating key signaling events that may
promote neural regeneration via stem cell recruitment after traumatic brain
injury. Upon understanding these basic signals, the investigator will evaluate
biomaterial-based paradigms to then modulate endogenous stem cell recruitment
and subsequently neural regeneration. A unique educational program will also be
developed in parallel to and integrated with the research program, as students
ranging from high school to graduate school will actively conduct the proposed
research. Additionally, the investigator will develop a guided-inquiry
scientific module for high school students aimed at developing scientific
analytical skills. Collectively, this CAREER proposal will address fundamental
gaps in understanding and modulating neural regeneration after brain injury and
provide substantive research skill sets for the next generation of engineers and
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Injury-related chemokines, such as stromal cell
derived factor-1a (SDF-1a), have been implicated in stimulating endogenous
neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPC) proliferation and ectopic migration toward
pericontused tissue after traumatic brain injury. A transient yet critical
SDF-1a gradient is thought to play a key role in recruitment of endogenous NSPCs
originating from niches located a great distance away from the site of injury
(i.e., subventricular zone). However, the mechanism for the temporal and spatial
propagation of SDF-1a from the pericontused tissue to NSPC niches is largely
unknown. It is postulated that one of two potential&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms may be
occurring: A) simple diffusion of SDF-1a from cells residing within the
pericontused tissue, and/or B) autocrine/paracrine mediated propagation of
SDF-1a gradient. Understanding the mechanisms by which such critical chemotactic
gradients are established, particularly in the injured brain, will better inform
drug delivery strategies aimed at amplifying endogenous NSPC recruitment for
neural regeneration. The long-term research goal of this CAREER program is to
develop regenerative therapies that harness inherent endogenous repair
mechanisms for traumatic brain injury, leading to improved functional outcomes
in cognitive and motor functions. The proposed research is the first step in
achieving this long-term goal whereby the primary research objective is three-
fold: i) elucidate mechanisms of injury-related chemotactic gradients formation,
ii) develop drug delivery strategies that exploit endogenous chemotactic
signaling, and iii) determine the impact of injury-related chemotactic gradients
on recruitment and neuronal integration of endogenous NSPCs. The proposed
research directly addresses current gaps in the knowledge by employing a unique
combination of mathematical modeling and simulation, in vivo animal models, and
whole tissue 3-D confocal microscopy analysis to first predict, then
test/validate proposed diffusion models for SDF-1a gradient formation.
Establishing a valid and reliable model of SDF-1a signaling will enable
modeling/simulation of drug delivery approaches to modulate SDF-1a signaling to
prolong the presence of the gradient (i.e., sustained controlled release vs.
bolus injection). Concurrently, the impact of SDF-1a gradients on the
recruitment and integration of endogenous NSPCs will be evaluated via both
immunohistological and electrophysiological techniques. Collectively, the
integration of modeling/simulation and experimental methodologies demonstrates
the intellectual merit contributions of the proposed studies to the traumatic
brain injury, drug delivery, and regenerative medicine communities.