* 1454450
* CAREER: Experimental and Numerical Study of Nanoscale Evaporation Heat Transfer for Passive-Flow Driven High-Heat Flux Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2015,01/31/2022
* Shalabh Maroo, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2022
* USD 552,952.00

1454450 - Maroo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ability to remove heat in large amounts and
in a very short time (i.e., high heat fluxes) is critical for developing next-
generation heat exchangers, high-speed computing, and renewable energy
technologies. The proposed study is to take advantage that a thin liquid film at
the nanoscale has the potential to achieve the ultra-high heat removal rate with
proper liquid supply. Both experiments and molecular level simulations will be
used to gain fundamental understanding of such heat removal processes. The
integrated educational initiatives of this project will expose students,
including those from underrepresented groups in engineering disciplines, to
multidisciplinary research and nanotechnology. Outreach includes providing
yearly research opportunity to a minority undergraduate student in collaboration
with ULSAMP (Upstate Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation), and
yearly workshops on nanotechnology to middle-school students in Syracuse City
School District as part of ULSAMP outreach to underrepresented and diverse
student groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is
to investigate the fundamental physics associated with nanoscale meniscus
evaporation coupled with passive liquid flow for achieving high heat flux
removal using a synergistic research methodology of molecular simulations with
pool boiling and evaporation experiments. Passive liquid flow can be generated
in a nanoscale meniscus due to the strong capillary and surface-generated
disjoining forces which can lower the meniscus liquid pressure to absolute
negative values. The research plan focuses on (1) performing molecular dynamics
simulations of water nano-meniscus evaporation to elucidate its behavior and
characteristics, (2) pool boiling experiments of water coupled with nanoscale
evaporation to enhance the critical heat flux, and (3) experiments on nanoscale
meniscus evaporation to achieve high heat flux removal with passive flow of
water. The intellectual merits include implementation and validation of a novel
"solid-to-liquid heat transfer model" in molecular dynamics to simulate
evaporation of water from a heated surface, and fabrication of well-defined
novel geometries to achieve nanoscale meniscus evaporation. The education plan
includes development and implementation of a three-week module on "Nano-science
and Nano-engineering" for first-year undergraduate students in Engineering 101.
The module will be based on Model Development Sequences to promote and develop
the need for physical and visual understanding of mathematical models and
engineering concepts while using fundamental building blocks of atoms and
molecules. To assess how novice students use simulation module to explore
physical phenomena, assignments with a data-generating mechanism will also be
designed to collect real-time performance data.