* 1454555
* CAREER: A CMOS Multi-Modality Cellular Interfacing Platform for Drug Screening and Stem Cell Culture
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Hua Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/2021
* USD 507,100.00

1. Title: CAREER: A CMOS Multi-Modality Cellular Interfacing Platform for Drug
Screening and Stem Cell Culture

2. Brief Description of Project Goals: This CAREER project investigates CMOS
cellular interfacing arrays with novel pixelated multi-modality
sensors/actuators and explores their use in transformative bioscience.

3. Abstract: a) Nontechnical Abstract: Fully understanding the physiological
behaviors of cells is a prerequisite to further advance the frontiers in
bioscience. Existing sensors and actuators are mostly of single-modality, which
can only process one single type of physical signals, e.g., electrochemical,
from the cells. However, cells are highly complex systems with numerous
molecules operating in hundreds of pathways to maintain proper functions and
phenotypes. At this scale of complexity, cells often undergo concurrent multi-
physics responses, which cannot possibly be explored by single-modality
platforms. This technology constraint poses a fundamental limit on the
?communication link? between the electronics and cells/tissues. Moreover, many
sensors and actuators require exotic processing steps, limiting their cost,
yield, and scalability in mass production. To address these challenges, this
CAREER project focuses on innovating sensor/actuator technologies as large-
scaled arrays with novel pixel-level multi-modality sensing/actuation
functionalities. Such microelectronics interfaces allow interrogating and
stimulating living cells/tissues via multi-physics signaling at a high
spatiotemporal resolution. Low-cost CMOS (Complementary-Metal-Oxide-
Semiconductor) processes, widely used for manufacturing CPU and memory chips,
will be employed to ensure high-integration, low-cost, and high-yield. The
proposed CMOS multi-modality cellular interfacing platform will lead to broad
societal impacts. For example, capturing the complex cellular responses may
substantially increase the throughput in drug development. As another example,
real-time monitoring the stem cell and enhancing the desired cell
differentiation trajectories may drastically improve the purity in large-scale
stem cell manufacturing and enable low-cost stem cell therapies. In addition,
the cellular interfacing platform may serve as a novel research tool for new
scientific discoveries. The interdisciplinary nature of this CAREER project
makes it an excellent opportunity for education and outreach activities. The PI
proposes a ?Vertical Teaming Approach? to systematically integrate different
education components from K-12 to graduate levels. These components include
mentoring high school teachers to enhance their curricula, performing remote lab
demos to high school students in distance learning programs, and enriching
undergraduate/graduate learning and research. The PI will also develop a Makers
Electronics club at Georgia Tech to provide electronics training/innovation
opportunities to local high school students and inspire their interest to pursue
STEM fields. This program will be integrated with the existing NSF funded
outreach programs at Georgia Tech.

b) Technical Abstract: The goal of this CAREER project is to investigate novel
multi-modality sensor and actuator technologies to interface with complex
biological systems, e.g., living cells and tissues, and explore the use of these
technologies in transformative bioscience and biotechnologies. The research
activities include the following key components. First, the modeling, design,
and prototyping of multi-modality cellular sensor and actuator arrays will be
performed. Different device-level designs and circuit-level techniques will be
investigated to achieve sensor/actuator front-ends with high pixel density and
low power operation. On-chip data convertors as well as on-chip signal
processing/conditioning circuitries will be employed. Next, low-cost, scalable,
and biocompatible packaging solutions will be studied, so that the CMOS multi-
modality cellular interfacing chips can be hosted in a standard form-factor
fully compatible with existing cellular assays. Finally, the PI will demonstrate
the use of the CMOS multi-modality cellular interfacing platform in various
cellular assays. In particular, the experiments will focus on enhancing cell-
based drug/chemical screening and stem-cell culture processes. The research
activities in this CAREER project will explore and establish multi-modality
sensors/actuators as a new paradigm of biosensors and actuators. Such
technologies will enable unprecedented concurrent multi-physical signaling with
living cells/tissues and will eventually pave the way toward hybrid
bioelectronics systems in the future.