* 1454031
* CAREER:   Plants, insects, and the Early Paleogene hothouse: Using the past to assess the future, while challenging the face of science
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2023
* Ellen Currano, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 02/28/2023
* USD 450,519.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;If we continue to burn fossil fuels at the
current rate, by 2100 we may reach a climate state not seen since the early
Eocene Epoch, ~50 million years ago, when the poles were ice-free. Because
fundamental holes remain in our understanding of how such hothouse worlds work,
it is essential to collect new paleontological data from globally warm time
intervals. The PI will assemble teams of students, postdocs, and collaborating
geoscientists to excavate leaf fossils from early Eocene sites across Wyoming
and northern Colorado. Leaf fossils tell us what plants were alive in a
particular time and location, and they can also be used to estimate past
temperature and precipitation levels. Well-preserved leaf fossils even show
traces of ancient insect feeding damage, allowing us to reconstruct plant-insect
food webs, which today account for up to 75% of terrestrial biodiversity.
Comparing fossils from different sites allows the group to test hypotheses about
biodiversity, migrations, and biotic resilience during hothouse conditions.
Understanding past greenhouse worlds and applying this knowledge to today's
warming world is a significant challenge that will require a diverse workforce,
but, at present, the paleontological and geological communities are lacking in
diversity. The research activities that the PI outlines here aim to increase
training opportunities for aspiring female scientists, and the outreach
objectives complement this by showcasing, as role models, inspirational female
field scientists, drawing attention to their trials and triumphs and making them
more accessible to the general public. The cornerstone of these efforts, The
Bearded Lady Project: Challenging the Face of Science, is an innovative
collaboration with professional artists to produce a live-action documentary and
develop and display a touring portrait series that identifies women working in
the geosciences and brings to light the obstacles that they face. Through this
project, the investigator will aim to combat implicit and unintentional gender
biases while inspiring new generations of women to enter the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of the fossil
record permits us to investigate how ecosystems function during very different
climate regimes and to evaluate the effects of climate on ecosystems and
evolution. The warm, equable, and ice-free Early Paleogene (66-50 Ma) is ideal
for study because it simultaneously provides a marked contrast to the present,
as well as insight into what the future may entail. The PI will assemble teams
of students, postdocs, and collaborating geoscientists to collect new
paleobotanical, paleoecological, and paleoclimatic data from understudied Early
Paleogene sedimentary basins of Wyoming and northern Colorado. The group will
synthesize the data they collect with the high-resolution record from the
Bighorn Basin of northwestern Wyoming in order to: (i) assess the diversity,
structure, and ecology of forest ecosystems during the Early Paleogene hothouse;
(ii) test hypotheses about endemism, latitudinal gradients, migrations, and
biotic resilience during hothouse conditions, and (iii) construct regional to
continental-scale biogeographic and paleoclimatic maps. In order to calibrate
the fossil data and to determine which modern macro-ecological patterns are also
characteristic of greenhouse worlds, the group will collect ecological data from
four extant forests, using the same methodologies as for fossil assemblages. The
educational objectives of this proposal complement the strongly field-based
research agenda by showcasing, as role models, some inspirational female field
scientists and providing opportunities for aspiring scientists, particularly
women, to conduct field-based research. The outreach efforts attempt to bring
female geoscientists into the public eye through an innovative project entitled
The Bearded Lady Project: Challenging the Face of Science. In it, the
investigator will collaborate with a professional photographer and film director
to produce both a live-action documentary and a touring portrait series focused
on the challenges and obstacles faced by inspirational women in the geosciences.