* 1454181
* CAREER: An Integrated Research and Educational Program to Understand Nano Additive Manufacturing by Electrochemical Deposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Murali Sundaram, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2021
* USD 568,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award supports
fundamental research on a novel nanoscale additive manufacturing process.
Additive manufacturing makes three-dimensional objects by adding material at
locations specified by the digital computer model of the desired part. Additive
manufacturing processes available now can make metal or plastic parts with sizes
ranging from several meters to few micrometers only. This award supports
fundamental research and education to provide needed knowledge for the
development of an additive manufacturing process capable of making parts at
nanoscale with sizes in the range of few nanometers to several micrometers
through voxel-by-voxel material addition without the need for any support
structures. Such parts made from a wide variety of conductive materials have
potential applications in biomedical, defense, electronics, energy, healthcare,
automotive, or aerospace industries. Therefore, results from this research will
benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research involves several disciplines
including manufacturing, electrochemistry, materials science, and control
theory. The multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering education.
Specific outreach activities targeting K-12 students, parents and general public
are expected to help developing highly educated work force for the next
generation advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The electrochemical
additive manufacturing process can overcome several limitations of existing
additive manufacturing techniques, such as their inability to achieve sub-
micrometer size, intrinsic thermal damage, and inevitable need of support
structures to produce overhanging parts. However, some scientific barriers are
yet to be overcome to realize electrochemical deposition for additive
manufacturing at nanoscale. This research is to fill the knowledge gap on the
mechanism(s) of localization during electrochemical deposition at nanoscale. The
research team will perform molecular dynamics simulation to understand the
mechanism of localization in electrochemical deposition at nanoscale, develop
physics-based models to predict deposition rate and residual stress in nano
electrochemical deposition and conduct experiments to verify the models, test
the hypothesis that nanoscale localization of electro deposition will occur if
an electrochemically activated catalyst is involved in the deposition reaction,
and establish relationships between process parameters and feasible feature
sizes in nanoscale electrochemical deposition.