* 1454360
* CAREER: Water-based Gels containing Polymer and Cement-like Particles for Improved Curing of High-Performance Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Kendra Erk, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 530,201.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will lead to the
development of new internal curing agents to be used for the creation of high-
performance concrete that has increased strength and durability. High-
performance concrete is prone to early-age shrinkage and the subsequent
formation of cracks within the system, resulting in concrete structures with
significantly reduced strength and lifetime. To combat this problem, water-
filled internal curing agents are added to the concrete mixture. As the concrete
cures, the agents release the stored water and fuel the curing reaction,
eliminating the early-age shrinkage and cracking. This award supports
fundamental research on the chemical and physical structure of hydrogel-based
internal curing agents in order to develop new composite hydrogels (water-based
jelly-like materials) that not only release water to promote internal curing but
also chemically enhance the curing reaction and refine the resulting concrete
microstructure. These new internal curing agents will result in concrete with
increased strength and corrosion resistance, allowing for the aging
infrastructure in the U.S. to be repaired and replaced with concrete that has
greater performance and reduced economic and environmental costs over the
increased lifetime of the concrete. Therefore, results from this research
project will directly benefit the U.S. economy as well as the well-being and
safety of the general population. This project will also provide engineering
students with the multidisciplinary education and training required to overcome
performance barriers in infrastructure materials as well as increase societal
awareness of how materials research can address important challenges in
infrastructure construction.

The creation of a new class of hydrogel-based internal curing agents that
simultaneously enhance the curing reaction and refine the concrete
microstructure is only possible through bottom-up synthetic design informed by a
fundamental understanding of molecular-level structure-property relationships.
There is a critical need to identify how the material properties of hydrogel-
based internal curing agents used in high-performance concrete are influenced by
the molecular structure of the hydrogel and the interactions of the hydrogel
with the concrete and pore fluid. To address this critical need, model
superabsorbent polymer-pozzolan composite hydrogels will be custom synthesized
by the research team to determine how the physical and chemical structure of the
composite hydrogels directly controls the swelling mechanisms and mechanical
properties of the hydrogels, the workability of hydrogel-cement mixtures, and
the resulting microstructure and strength of internally cured concrete. Research
activities will involve rheophysical experiments to determine local flow
profiles of hydrogel-cement mixtures as well as advanced imaging of
microstructural changes in early-age mixtures.