* 1454558
* CAREER: Assessing and Improving Online Learning Spaces for Diverse and High-Attrition Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Jennifer DeBoer, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 03/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Evaluating and Improving Online Courses For Engineering Undergraduates from
Diverse Backgrounds Increasing the retention and achievement of women,
minorities, and high attrition groups in engineering is of paramount national
strategic interest, and online learning has emerged as a popular strategy for
expanding access. However, there is limited evidence that online courses work
for the diverse groups of students in engineering classes. In fact, early
findings from other disciplines suggest that virtual instruction exacerbates
achievement gaps. This proposal pushes research and practice to better serve all
of the varieties of engineering students in three major ways. First, it analyzes
underrepresented or high attrition student groups independently, rather than
studying average effects for a whole class. Second, it tracks individual student
behaviors to better explain differences in student success and better recommend
support systems that are tailored to unique students. And, third, it studies
undergraduate online and blended learning in five widely varying contexts,
including two international sites, to greatly expand the spectrum of tools that
can inform undergraduate engineering in the United States, in particular, in a
large public university setting. This is achieved through the investigator's
study of and collaboration with four introductory engineering courses at diverse
institutions. Enhancing digital educational tools to better support unique
groups of students, especially those that have high rates of attrition, can
fulfill the nation's growing need for a highly qualified and diverse engineering
workforce.

Online learning as a policy tool for access to STEM education has abounded -
despite the fact that there is minimal or contradictory evidence that online
learning, as currently practiced, is an effective instrument for increasing
access, equity, or achievement. Research efforts to estimate differential
effects are few, and few studies focus on online learning for high attrition
post-secondary students in the high need discipline of engineering. The primary
goals of this proposal are, first, to carefully examine in situ the
implementation, behaviors, and experiences of diverse sub-groups, in particular,
high-attrition students, in online/blended environments in undergraduate
engineering classes; and, second, to critically evaluate the assertion that
online/blended structures are significantly related to achievement for these
important sub-groups. This leads to four research questions: (1) Are the
estimated quantitative effects of online and blended learning tools and
structures (e.g., MOOCs, flipped classrooms) persistent for high attrition
learner demographics?, (2) What online structures and behaviors significantly
(practically and statistically) predict higher achievement for these students?,
(3) What differences in student behaviors and outcomes might be related to or
mediated by the institutional context in which instruction is taking place?, and
(4) What are the implications for future research design and educational policy?
These questions will be answered using a cross-national multi-case approach,
applying quasi-experimental methods to four online courses from diverse
institutional contexts. In each study, advanced regression techniques are
applied to understand how individual students' backgrounds, access of materials,
and online behaviors predict achievement. Background study with nationally-and
internationally-representative secondary data will contextualize course-specific
findings. Qualitative interviews will complement quantitative findings. Results
will inform iterative improvements of the four study courses and the PI's first-
year engineering course at Purdue over the five-year project lifecycle.