* 1454072
* CAREER: Identifying the Micromechanisms Leading to Hydrogen-Induced Intergranular  Fracture in Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Jaafar El-Awady, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2021
* USD 599,999.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project will identify the
underlying deformation and failure mechanisms of nickel (Ni) and its alloys
under coupled environmental and mechanical conditions. Nickel and nickel-based
alloys are commonly used in many crucial service applications due to their high
strength and fracture toughness. In many cases these materials are used in
energy generating, conversion or storage systems. In such conditions a loss of
toughness associated with exposure to hydrogen can occur. This award supports
fundamental research on the effect of hydrogen on the deformation and fracture
of metals, and will contribute to engineering practice via advances in the
structural integrity of energy systems. The education and outreach tasks through
this grant will contribute to efforts aiming to improve STEM achievement in
Baltimore elementary public schools with a high minority student population.
Practical engineering problems and solutions will be presented and discussed in
the classroom with the goal to stimulate interest in engineering. Undergraduates
from a local historically black college will obtain research internships
allowing for active involvement in this CAREER research project. This will allow
students to develop interest and foundations for careers in mechanics of
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research objectives of this CAREER
project are to fundamentally identify the influence of H-diffusion on
dislocation microstructure evolution, damage accumulation, and subsequent
H-induced intergranular fracture of Ni crystals. We hypothesize that, unlike
conventionally presumed, dislocation plasticity plays a major role in
controlling material response and subsequent failure even in high-pressure H
environments. We will perform unprecedented large scale 3D discrete dislocation
dynamics (DDD) simulations coupled with finite element method to study
dislocation evolution in H-charged single, bi, and poly-crystals. Details of the
dislocation-H interactions, dislocation grain boundary interactions, and H
pipe/bulk diffusion will be identified through molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations, then hierarchically informed into DDD. In particular, this work
will address two fundamental questions: (1) How does H influence dislocation
multiplication/evolution? and (2) What is the role of H-diffusion on the
evolution of the dislocation microstructure? The MD simulations will: (1)
quantify H effects on the activation parameters of cross-slip; and (2) quantify
H-diffusion coefficients and dislocation grain boundary interactions. Coupled
H-diffusion/DDD simulations will be used to identify effects of H concentration
and grain size on: (1) flow strength, and slip-morphology; and (2) dislocation
evolution ahead of H-induced intergranular cracks. Simulations will be validated
by comparisons with key experimental results from literature.