* 1455690
* Community Workshops for Synthesis Studies of the Pan-Arctic/Earth System
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Mark Serreze, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 169,492.00

The Arctic is an integral part of the Earth system where multiple interactions
unite its natural and social domains. The Arctic's significance derives from
growing evidence that it is experiencing rapid and amplified signatures of
global climate change and that the region could itself be a critical throttle on
planetary dynamics. Ongoing assessments of how the Arctic system is wired-
together and how sensitive its environment is to change remain highly uncertain.
We have entered an era when environmental management must confront regional,
whole biome, and pan-Arctic challenges. Consequently, the science and policy
issues surrounding Arctic system change are highly intertwined,
interdisciplinary and constitute a quintessential synthesis challenge.
Understanding this challenge requires the development of a collaborative
research framework that can not only improve our understanding of the Arctic
system, but also promote interdisciplinary science on Arctic coupled systems,
connect science with policy, educate the next generation of students and make
Arctic research relevant to the public. This award will support an effort to
begin that process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this award are to design
an Arctic Synthesis Collaboratory concept through a formal, community-based
planning exercise, which will use a series of four workshops to identify
tractable core science questions that contribute to systems-level Arctic
research. The workshops will also assess linkages to ongoing activities within
the Arctic research community, explore the readiness of modeling, data and
observatory assets, and identify opportunities to apply systems-level thinking
in the policy-formulation realm and in other educational activities. Discussion
would also focus on the appropriate structure and function for such a
collaboratory partnership. These four workshops will bring together members of
different Arctic disciplinary research constituencies and provide input to a
strategic report that will serve as a potential roadmap for a community-designed
Arctic systems synthesis research agenda and supporting collaboratory.
Ultimately this should advance the approach taken by the research community and
help align research efforts with societal needs.