* 1455030
* CAREER: The Quest for Precision in Stratigraphy: Extending Neogene-Scale Resolution into the Paleozoic
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Bradley Cramer, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 03/31/2022
* USD 705,000.00

CAREER: The Quest for Precision in Stratigraphy: Extending Neogene-Scale
Resolution into the Paleozoic&lt;br/&gt;Bradley Cramer, University of
Iowa&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1455030&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biological, chemical, and
environmental history of the Earth is recorded in the rock record of strata
exposed at and below the surface. One of the most critical components to the
ability to read this history of past changes to the Earth is the ability to
determine the precise order of events (chronostratigraphy) as well as the
precise timing and duration of these events (geochronometry/geochronology). In
order to be able to determine the exact cause-and-effect sequences of events
that produced prior biological, chemical, and environmental change, one must be
able to first provide very fine controls on the precise order of events as well
as the precise timing and duration of events. Such precise control is commonly
available when studying events in the comparatively recent history of the Earth.
For example, temporal and stratigraphic control in the order of a few thousand
years or less is common when working on more recent events, but such control for
the much older portions of Earth history are generally unavailable. As a general
rule, the ability to determine the order of events and their timing and duration
gets worse the farther back in time one looks. Therefore, when studying events
that are hundreds of millions of years old, resolution is typically plus/minus
tens to hundreds of thousands of years, or worse. This is a critical roadblock
to determining the natural limits of variability and operational feedbacks
within the ocean-atmosphere-biosphere global climate system during ancient
global change events. The Paleozoic Era (541 Ma to 252 Ma) contains many of the
largest biogeochemical perturbations in Earth history, and one small slice of
the Paleozoic Era is the objective of this CAREER award in an effort to
demonstrate that Neogene-scale resolution of the rock record of biogeochemical
events is possible in deep time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will help to
establish an unparalleled level of chronostratigraphic and geochronologic detail
to provide a framework for high-resolution evaluation of global triggers,
feedbacks, and ultimately, the mechanisms responsible for two major
biogeochemical events that took place during the Wenlock Epoch of the Silurian
Period (431 Ma to 427 Ma). The research conducted by this study will include
unprecedented detail of the early Sheinwoodian (Ireviken) and Homerian (Mulde)
biogeochemical events that had major impacts on the global biosphere (extinction
events) as well as the global carbon cycle. This study will utilize fully
integrated high-resolution event stratigraphy (HiRES) that will include
biostratigraphy (conodonts, chitinozoans), stable isotope chemostratigraphy
(carbon and oxygen), sequence stratigraphy, radioisotope geochronometry (U-Pb
zircons), and XRF elemental data to dramatically improve the calibration of the
Silurian time scale and the ability to globally correlate Wenlock strata and
events, as well as to evaluate several existing models of Silurian global change
and the nature of the Paleozoic Earth-Life system.