* 1455274
* CAREER: Human adaptations to changing environments: Supporting student education and research in anthropological isotopic methodologies
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Rhonda Quinn, Seton Hall University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 454,538.00

Dr. Rhonda Quinn, of Seton Hall University (SHU), will investigate how past
human groups adapted to resource availability and environmental change caused by
global climate perturbations. Archaeology and paleoanthropology offer a deep
time perspective on the impact of climatic and environmental change on human
systems and can be used to elucidate modern human-environment interactions. Dr.
Quinn employs stable isotopic analysis to characterize past human diet and
mobility in the context of environmental conditions and will use her research
program to engage high school, undergraduate, and beginning graduate students
with hands-on research and training experiences. With NSF CAREER support, Dr.
Quinn will provide a laboratory-based, three-week summer short course for
undergraduate and/or beginning graduate students across disciplines. Students
will be drawn from SHU, a primarily undergraduate teaching school serving a
diverse socio-economic and cultural student population, and other area and/or
collaborative institutions. Two annual undergraduate laboratory assistantships
will provide further opportunities for student research project development.
This program will also incorporate area high school students into summer and
yearly laboratory research projects from historically underrepresented
populations through Project SEED (American Chemical Society's summer research
program for economically disadvantaged young people) and SHU's Experiential
Learning Initiative with North Star Academy in Newark, NJ. These activities will
provide student researchers with a solid foundation for understanding and
critically evaluating stable isotopic data through a lens of anthropological
inquiry. A portion of NSF CAREER funding will provide enhanced facilities in Dr.
Quinn's laboratory to increase research productivity and educational
infrastructure and enrich the collaborative research environment at SHU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Quinn will incorporate students into her three
interrelated research areas: environments of human evolution, environmental
influences of human diet and mobility, and stable isotopic actualistic studies.
The first set of projects will examine environmental contexts of early human
ancestors in order to better understand what local and global environmental
factors influenced morphological and behavioral changes in the human lineage.
Environmental selective pressures and habitat preferences are reconstructed by
employing stable isotopic analyses of paleosols and other geological materials
to infer past vegetation communities and environmental conditions at
archaeological and paleoanthropological sites spanning 4-1 Ma in the Turkana
Basin, Kenya. The second area explores how human diet and mobility patterns have
changed with environmental and climatic perturbations, with an emphasis on
Holocene coastal and island archaeological sites. Studies of prehistoric human
diet change and mobility are focused on Pacific Islands and coastal Florida
during times of climatically induced ecosystem collapse and employ stable
isotopes of human and faunal skeletal materials. The third area is concerned
with increasing stable isotopic methodological resolution with actualistic
studies of modern ecosystems. These include isotopically characterizing modern
water, soil, plant and animal samples for building interpretative frameworks in
the vicinity of archaeological and paleoanthropological sites and also from
analogous environments. Samples collected during Dr. Quinn's prior fieldwork
will be utilized for student-involved, laboratory-based research projects.