* 1455527
* Neural Mechanisms underlying Evolvability of Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Paul Katz, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 07/31/2021
* USD 880,084.00

This project examines fundamental questions about the features of neural
circuits that affect the evolution of behavior. The species being examined are
nudibranch sea slugs, which have highly accessible nervous systems that allow
experiments to be conducted that are not feasible in other types of animals. The
brains of nudibranchs contain only about 10,000 nerve cells (neurons), many of
which can be individually identified from animal to animal within a species.
Furthermore, neurons can often be identified across different species.
Electrical activity can be recorded from multiple neurons to reveal neural
circuitry. The connectivity of those circuits can be compared across species.
This research team found that although the species have the same sets of
neurons, they are wired up differently, even when the species produce similar
behaviors. One goal of the project is to artificially rewire the neurons in one
species to produce the neural circuit of another species and to create
mathematical models that do the same. This will establish how easy it is to
convert the behavior of one species into that of another. It also contributes to
understanding the basic rules for generating behavior by comparing across
species instead of focusing on a single species. The project engages the public
by soliciting observations of nudibranch behavior from divers around the world
through social media. It also provides important research opportunities to
under-represented students through a research pipeline and creates resources
that will be available to the scientific community to aid in identifying neurons
and mapping out circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolvability reflects the ability
to evolve. This project examines the features of neural circuits that affect the
evolvability of swimming behaviors in nudibranchs. The project uses a variety of
techniques to achieve its goals. First, transcriptomics is used to resolve the
phylogeny of the Nudibranchia and allow phylogenic hypotheses to be tested. The
brain transcriptomes further aid in the discovery of molecular markers for
identified neurons, which are needed particularly in species that do not swim.
Electrophysiological techniques are used to search for "latent" circuitry, that
is, connectivity that might be present in non-swimmers and potentially activated
by small changes. These changes will be applied using the dynamic clamp
technique to inject artificial synaptic and membrane conductances and through
ectopic expression of serotonin receptors. Finally, mathematical simulations are
used to examine the consequences of different circuit architectures and their
robustness for rhythmic activity.