* 1455815
* EAGER: Interoperability Framework for Future Internet Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Kadangode Ramakrishnan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Information Centric Networks (ICNs) promise to fundamentally change the way we
think of communication, moving from location-specific interactions to name-based
communication. Names identify anything from users and devices, to content and
even virtual entities. ICN has been recognized as a key direction to architect
the Future Internet, as evidenced by the efforts currently supported by the
NSF's Future Internet Architecture (FIA) projects, especially Named Data
Networking (NDN) and MobilityFirst. The two approaches have fundamental
differences in naming (hierarchical human and machine readable names for NDN
versus flat identifiers for MobilityFirst and in name resolution ('in-band'
versus 'out-of-band'). Developing a way to interoperate between these different
network architectures will therefore be an important area on which to
focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will broadly address the
interoperability of network architectures that use differing approaches for
naming and name resolution. This is a fundamental and evolving issue that is
likely to be of increasing and significant concern as networks evolve to become
more information centric. While the NDN and MobilityFirst FIA projects are two
specific approaches for information centric networking, they are symptomatic of
the fundamental ways in which networks may evolve in supporting name resolution
(which is needed not just for information centric environments, but also for
seamless mobility, which MobilityFirst seeks to also achieve) and structuring
names. Examining interoperation of architectures of different types of naming
and name resolution will be of value in the long term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
of the primary reasons for this effort is that approaches to reason about
interoperability of name-based network architectures are at an early stage. This
project uses a somewhat new approach to reasoning about interoperability by
developing both abstractions related to specific issues in network architectures
and also looking at specific examples of the two still evolving FIA
architectures. The outcome of this exploratory effort will be specific
abstractions that can then be used as a design pattern for interoperability
between architectures. Over the last two years, the principal investigator (PI)
has worked with both NDN and MobilityFirst, and is in a unique position to
undertake this effort. The PI expects to find novel ways of integrating
simulation and testbed experiments to evaluate scalability and performance of
the interoperability architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort will have a
beneficial impact on the entire NSF FIA program as a result of the in-depth
understanding of the tradeoffs being made in the different FIA Architectures. It
is expected that the architectural contribution from this project will be the
development of mechanisms and protocols for inter-working between the NDN and
MobilityFirst architectures. This will yield long-term benefits for the
evolution of the Internet to a future information-oriented architecture, as
intended by the FIA program. The project will also directly support two graduate
students at UC Riverside, one of America's most diverse research-intensive
universities and one of only a handful of accredited research-intensive Hispanic
Serving Institutions. The principal investigator will offer a new graduate level
course on FIA, and disseminate his educational materials as well as his research
results.