* 1455210
* CAREER: Understanding of Neutral Particle Physics to Generate a Helicon Wave Driven High Density Laboratory Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2023
* Oliver Schmitz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 02/28/2023
* USD 645,000.00

Plasma - the fourth state of matter - is of abundant presence in the universe.
Plasmas are used by mankind in a broad variety of industrial and scientific
applications, from material processing for food packaging, medical applications,
and the car industry to next generation particle accelerators and new space
propulsion systems. Even in spite of the broad importance of plasma for
scientific and&lt;br/&gt;socio-economical aspects, it is the least addressed
physical science topic from K-12 education up to college level. The central goal
of this CAREER award project of the National Science Foundation is combining a
cutting edge plasma physics research mission with a rigorous outreach activity
to make plasma physics more visible to the general public as an important field
of physical sciences for the development and progress of modern industrial
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central research endeavor of this award
project is the generation and understanding of high density plasma regimes using
highly efficient plasma sources - in this case helicon waves. Active gas fueling
will be explored as a method to overcome the empirical density limit found for
such plasma configurations, and state-of-the-art methods of active laser
spectroscopy will be employed to measure the dynamics of the neutral particles
and of ionization. The Laboratory for Plasma Physics class in the Department of
Engineering Physics at the University of Wisconsin - Madison is employed as a
central element for education and outreach. A teacher summer class will be
developed in collaboration with the Madison Metropolitan School District as a
fertilizing environment to foster implementation of basic plasma physics aspects
as extensions to present high school curricula. This effort will be at the same
time a central training activity for next generation faculty. Two graduate
students are involved in the development and execution of this central outreach
project, transforming the laboratory course into an advanced discovery learning
experience on plasma physics.