* 1455200
* CAREER: Employing ligand exchange reactions involving hypervalent compounds of iodine and other main-group elements in the synthesis of dynamic and functional polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2022
* Nicolay Tsarevsky, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2022
* USD 650,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Nicolay Tsarevsky of Southern
Methodist University (SMU) is developing strategies for the preparation of
dynamic polymers that are able to exchange their building blocks, be degraded
upon chemical, light or thermal treatment, self-repair, or lock in their
structures. Polymers are long chain organic molecules and are found in many
facets of everyday life that utilize plastics, including food packaging,
structural materials for automotive and aerospace transportation, and
lightweight electronic devices. One of the main goals of materials science is to
develop efficient, easy to conduct, and inexpensive methods for the preparation
of well-defined polymers with predetermined structures and compositions, because
these can be translated into materials for specific applications, such as self-
healing materials, composites, coatings, and materials for drug delivery or
tissue engineering. Professor Tsarevsky is studying how compounds that contain
heavy elements form special types of chemical bonds, named hypervalent, that can
easily be cleaved upon heating or irradiation with light. To broaden chemistry
education, Professor Tsarevsky is developing interdisciplinary science-
humanities courses; e.g. "Science on the Stage" and "Chemistry and Technology in
Art: From Antiquity to the Industrial Revolution," exploring methods for general
public science education, and developing a "Chemistry Summer Camp" at
SMU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Tsarevsky is studying how
to use exchange reactions of ligands in hypervalent compounds of iodine,
antimony, bismuth, selenium and tellurium [specifically- I(III), Sb(V), Bi(V),
Se(IV), and Te(IV)] for the synthesis of dynamic covalent polymers, with
controlled macromolecular architecture. The formation of these materials as well
as their ability to exchange building blocks, to degrade and be re-assembled or
self-repair, are being studied in detail. An important feature of the proposed
dynamic polymers is that they have the potential to be converted to fixed
structures with permanent links if and when needed. Professor Tsarevsky is also
studying how these hypervalent compounds can be used to conver nucleophiles into
radicals. The resulting functional radicals can react with a number of
substrates, including polymers or plant oils and fatty acids with some
unsaturation, and graphitic materials to yield various functional reactive
materials and composites. To gain fundamental understanding of the factors that
govern the kinetics and thermodynamics of the exchange reactions, as well as
those of hypervalent bond homolysis, a number of model reactions are being
conducted, in which structure and composition variables are being systematically
varied.