* 1455330
* CAREER: Narrow Graphene Nanoribbons with Tunable Electronic Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Alexander Sinitskii, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2021
* USD 538,477.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry and the Solid-State and Materials Chemistry
Program of the Division of Materials Research, Professor Alexander Sinitskii of
University Nebraska at Lincoln is developing methods to synthesize large
quantities of graphene nanoribbons. Graphene nanoribbons are single atom thick
ribbons of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal pattern, and the ribbons,
individually, are a fraction of the diameter of a human hair in width. The
electronic properties of graphene nanoribbons are very sensitive to their width
and atomic composition along their edges, so it is important to design synthetic
methods that can precisely control the atomic arrangement within the
nanoribbons. Professor Sinitskii is developing methods to prepare graphene
nanoribbons from specifically designed molecular precursors. The synthesis is
performed in solution and can produce large quantities of graphene nanoribbons
where their widths and atomic compositions of their edges can be specified.
Graphene nanoribbons display interesting electronic and magnetic properties, and
therefore have potential applications in electronic technologies, such as field-
effect transistors, logic gates, and photovoltaic devices. To increase public
awareness of the increasing role of carbon-based nanomaterials in everyday life
and disseminate the results of this project, Professor Sinitskii is developing a
series of educational video programs about recent discoveries in carbon-based
nanoscience and nanotechnology. Professor Sinitskii is also developing new
nanoscience courses to promote the education of graduate, undergraduate and high
school students as well as high school teachers in the methods of materials
chemistry and nanochemistry.

In this project, Professor Sinitskii is developing a bottom-up approach to the
synthesis of atomically precise graphene nanoribbons based on the solution
coupling of molecular precursors followed by oxidative cyclodehydrogenation. A
systematic study of graphene nanoribbons with different widths and geometries
will provide a fundamental understanding of the interplay between the structural
parameters of graphene nanoribbons and their band structures. Professor
Sinitskii is also studying how the band structures of graphene nanoribbons can
be further tuned by nitrogen doping along the edges of the ribbon. The
nanoribbons are being tested for applications in electronic devices, including
field-effect transistors and gas sensors. The broader impacts of this project
derive from the potential applications of graphene nanoribbons in carbon-based
electronics and photovoltaics, and the planned educational and outreach
activities.