* 1455810
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Improved Skeletal Age-at-Death Estimation and Its Impact on Archaeological Analyses
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Sara Getz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 23,950.00

Age-at-death estimates from skeletal remains are essential for archaeological
studies of human longevity, mortality patterns, population growth, disease
experience and mortuary practices, as well as medicolegal identifications of
missing persons, crime victims, migrant border deaths, and war-crime victims.
Despite over a century of development, the accuracy (estimated and actual age
correspondence) and precision (age interval length) of adult age estimates
produced by existing methods are insufficient to reach these ends. That means
much current understanding of the age-structure of past populations, long-term
population trends, pathogen load and its effect on human hosts, and human
longevity may be seriously flawed by age-estimation error. In response to this
pressing theoretical and practical need, an international research team that
includes Dr. George Milner and his doctoral student Sara Getz (Penn State
University) are developing a method to produce more accurate, precise, and
unbiased skeletal age estimates for the entire adult lifespan, building on their
earlier statistical procedure (Transition Analysis, TA). This ongoing work will
significantly reduce age-estimation error, describe and quantify skeletal
variation, and refine statistical methods. It involves a fundamental shift from
assessing only a few skeletal characteristics with simple statistics to
analyzing traits throughout the skeleton using sophisticated statistical methods
to extract the most information possible from age-related changes in bones. This
project will validate the newly expanded TA method on a large number of modern
known-age European skeletons, and then apply the procedure to two large medieval
and early modern samples as a proof of concept for archaeological applications.
At the conclusion of the project, revised TA will be disseminated as a free,
downloadable, and easy-to-use program and illustrated scoring manual. Data will
be maintained and made available for other researchers' use. The project PI and
Co-PI will train students (undergraduate and graduate) and professionals through
peer-reviewed publications, professional meeting presentations, and invited
lectures and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Validation on numerous known-age
European skeletons will demonstrate the increased accuracy and precision of
revised TA. This focused study is the first step in expanding the research
team?s method to a wide range of geographically diverse populations. After
validation, two urban cemetery samples from the Danish city of Horsens - Ole
Worms Gade (1100 -1500 CE) and Monastery Church (1500 -1800 CE) - will be used
to investigate the potential implications of improved age estimates for our
understanding of important social and demographic trends over time, such as
changes in migration and adult life expectancy. This application will
demonstrate how better skeletal data can bridge the gap between archaeological
and historical sources. In particular, it will provide information about the
characteristics of past populations that cannot be obtained through historical
documents or from skeletons where ages were estimated using standard methods.