* 1455671
* Shedding new light on cell-matrix interactions: instrumentation development for non-invasive, real-time microscopic elasticity imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Roland Kaunas, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 10/31/2020
* USD 554,810.00

An award is made to Texas A&amp;M University to develop new instrumentation for
a Brillouin imaging system that will measure the elastic properties of cells and
extracellular matrix in a 3D cell culture system. Elastic properties of
molecular, sub-cellular and cellular structures play a crucial role in many
areas of Biology. A prominent example is in embryonic development, where changes
in the elastic properties of cells and extracellular matrix contribute to tissue
reorganization necessary for organ development. While mechanical interactions
between cells and surrounding matrix plays a critical role in many physiological
and pathophysiological processes, measurements within 3D tissues have been
difficult. Conventional techniques have limited spatial resolution and/or
require physical contact with the sample. Brillouin spectroscopy is truly non-
invasive and provides information on the elastic properties of biological
samples at the subcellular level. While Brillouin spectroscopy has been widely
used for elasticity measurements in inorganic materials, the technique has been
very slow to catch on in the biological community due to weak signal and
difficulty dealing with light scattering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project builds upon recent advances in spontaneous and coherent Brillouin
scattering microscopies that provide more than three orders of magnitude
increase in signal, improving spatial resolution and overcoming strong light
scattering. The investigators will apply their optimized Brillouin imaging set-
up to characterize dynamic changes in the local mechanical properties of
collagen matrices caused by internally generated contractile forces as well as
externally applied loads. Imaging the time-varying distribution of stiffness in
the matrix will shed new light on the local mechanical environment to which
cells ultimately respond to regulate their function. In parallel to these
important applications, they aim to develop the next generation nonlinear
Brillouin imaging to double spatial resolution and increase temporal resolution
by 100-fold.