* 1455802
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Socio-ecological influences on the development of primate social behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Corinna Most, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2016
* USD 10,700.00

What factors help and hinder individuals in becoming socially competent and
successful members of their community? This is an important but difficult
question to tackle in humans. One way to approach the question is to look at
closely related and socially sophisticated primates to focus on how competence
develops at the start of an individual's life. This project draws upon
anthropology, psychology, and cognitive research to study wild olive baboons,
their social and ecological environments during infancy, and the way these
interact to influence social development. In addition to providing important
comparative data for understanding human social development, the project also
supports graduate student training, ongoing primate conservation efforts, and
community education and outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this 12-month
project, behavioral data will be collected on approximately 60 infants across
two baboon troops at the Uaso Ngiro Baboon Project (UNBP) in Kenya, to study the
effects of maternal responsiveness and secondary attachments on the development
of social awareness. The mother is the first contact and the first social model
for an infant, but baboons also form strong relationships with adult males in
their group. These latter relationships may be particularly important in one
troop in which mothers are weaning their infants early since the spread of an
invasive cactus that provides plentiful food year-round. There is therefore an
opportunity to compare the development of social competence in a group not yet
affected by the extra food and one that is. Rich ecological and historical data
on these groups is available from UNBP, providing context for interpreting the
results of the study and clarifying how infant social development is influenced
by the group's and the mother's broader ecological setting. This research will
add to the body of knowledge on primate development, may inform human caregiving
practices, supports training of a female graduate student, and contributes to
local community education and conservation efforts.