* 1455461
* OPUS: Collaborative Research: Analysis of Cross-Boundary Fluxes, Trophic Cascades and Ecosystem Stability Based on 32 Years of Whole-Lake Experiments
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Stephen Carpenter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2020
* USD 128,809.00

Large-bodied, long-lived fishes sometimes dominate aquatic food webs. Their rise
to dominance causes declines in abundance of small-bodied fishes, rise in
abundance of invertebrates, and high concentrations of algae, including noxious
species that form toxic blooms in nutrient-rich lakes. These modifications are
accompanied by changes in lake productivity and availability of nutrients that
limit the productivity in many lakes. Often the populations of top predators and
the food web structure that they enforce appear to be stable, persisting for
many years. However, the factors that stabilize dominant populations of top
predators are not well understood. The researchers will investigate if material
transported from land, including dissolved as well as large particles such as
leaves, help to support the production of top predators and thereby stabilize
their dominance in lake food webs. The investigators will archive data collected
from the study lakes since 1984 and make them available to the public. Multiple
students will be trained during the course of this project and the findings from
this study will be communicated to the public through blog postings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators in a series of experiments from
1984-2015 in a suite of lakes investigated stability and change in food webs in
response to predator harvest and stocking as well as nutrient enrichment. Other
experiments studied the contributions of terrestrial organic matter to
production of many consumers including large-bodied long-lived fishes. So far,
however, the individual experiments have been analyzed separately. A
comprehensive evaluation of the full set of experiments is needed to determine
the role of terrestrial organic matter in food web patterns and the response of
food webs to harvest, stocking and nutrient enrichment. More specifically,
existing data from whole lake experiments will be used to investigate: (1) the
interactive effects of nutrients, terrestrial dissolved organic matter (DOM),
and consumer assimilation of terrestrial organic matter (allochthony) on the
biomass of herbivorous zooplankton and the capacity of large-bodied grazers to
withstand predation, (2) the effects of terrestrial prey on the stability and
resilience of lake food webs and the strength of trophic cascades, and (3) the
regulation of whole-ecosystem respiration by nutrients, terrestrial DOM, and
food web structure. Beyond this contribution to basic science, the project will
create an online, publicly-available database of data from the 32 years of whole
lake experiments, train students in the use of large-scale experimental data,
and create blog posts that present results of the research for a general
audience.