* 1455634
* Expanding Career Opportunities in Wildlife and Environmental Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Margaret Nordlie, University of Mary
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 04/30/2021
* USD 501,250.00

Over the past decade, the Bakken oil boom has had a significant impact on the
western North Dakota economy and landscape, resulting in an increased need for
wildlife conservationists and environmental scientists to study the energy
industry's interactions with the environment. To address this need, The
University of Mary's Expanding Career Opportunities in Wildlife and
Environmental Biology (ECOWEB) project will recruit and enroll 12 academically
talented students with financial need in the UM biology program's wildlife
conservation or environmental science track. The ECOWEB project will award
scholarships ranging from $8,000 to $10,000 per year and enhance student support
structures and connections to work-based, research, and graduate school
opportunities, so as to ensure students obtain a bachelor's degree and
successfully transition to STEM employment or graduate school. The ECOWEB
Project will have broad and significant impacts in the following ways: 1)
enhancing collaborations between UM and other institutions by providing graduate
school visits and collaborative research opportunities for S-STEM scholars; 2)
enhancing the Biology Department's partnerships with regional biology-related
industries and agencies by establishing internship opportunities and seminar
events; 3) increasing the number and quality of research opportunities for
biology students as well as opportunities to participate and present at
professional conferences; 4) increasing the number of biology graduates from
populations traditionally underrepresented in STEM; and 5) strategically
disseminating evaluation findings within the UM community and to other
postsecondary institutions and STEM professionals to advance knowledge and
practice about student recruitment and support structures that increase
retention to graduation and career preparation.

The ECOWEB project will accomplish three objectives that address local needs.
Objective 1: Identify and recruit a diverse population of 12 academically
talented students with financial need for the UM biology program's wildlife
conservation or environmental science track. The recruitment plan includes
digital and print marketing, local and regional high school recruitment, and
Open House events that encourage students from groups traditionally
underrepresented in STEM. Objective 2: Enhance student support structures to
ensure wildlife conservation and environmental science students obtain a
bachelor's degree within four years. The project will employ strategies and
support structures that increase student retention to graduation, enable
students to complete their degree in four years, and prepare graduates for
successful transition into the wildlife conservation and environmental science
workforce or graduate programs. UM Biology Department faculty and student
support administrators will collaboratively develop, implement, and assess an
array of new and enhanced support services, including: a) an S-STEM cohort model
that emphasizes an S-STEM identity and community learning, b) an S-STEM-specific
First Year Experience course, c) faculty and peer mentorships, d) a monthly
seminar series with industry experts and researchers working in wildlife
conservation and environmental science fields, e) biology-related service-
learning projects, f) summer research and internship opportunities, and g)
student participation in national and regional professional conferences.
Objective 3: Enable S-STEM scholars to secure employment in target fields or
enter a biology graduate program within one year of graduation. The ECOWEB
project will prepare scholars for the STEM workforce or graduate school by
providing key support services and activities, including career counseling, GRE
preparation, a seminar series, internship opportunities, and field trips to
graduate programs. Assessment of the efficacy of these different activities will
help contribute to expanding the knowledge base regarding the circumstances
under which scholarship projects of this type are successful.