* 1455202
* CAREER: Study of the Most Energetic SEPs from Space with the State-of-the-Art Experiment AMS-02
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2022
* Veronica Bindi, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2022
* USD 577,010.00

The goal of this project is to improve our understanding of Solar Energetic
Particle (SEP) events. An SEP event is a situation in which the sun produces a
stream of highly energetic particles with velocities approaching the speed of
light. SEP events are severe space weather phenomena that can be physically
harmful to astronauts in space and have the potential to damage satellites. They
also lead to increased ionization in Earth's upper atmosphere and can lead to
communications problems and can affect GPS location services. This project will
analyze a comprehensive set of SEP measurements to improve our understanding of
the mechanisms that produce SEP events. By combining data from several sources,
the project will generate a baseline for modeling these events. The project will
also include educational activities geared toward K-12 students and in
particular will include outreach to young women and under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary source of data for this project
will be the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS-02) that was installed on the
International Space Station in 2011. The AMS-02 instrument will provide
unprecedented measurements of solar protons and helium in the highest energy
range of solar particles. Coupling the AMS-02 data with data from other
instruments such as neutron monitors will make it possible to generate complete
particle spectrograms from a few hundred MeV to almost 1 TeV. Analysis of the
spectrograms of protons and He++ ions will make it possible to determine the
roles that different acceleration mechanisms play in producing these high energy
particles. The researchers will generate a database of SEP events that will be
made available to the entire space physics community. They will also generate
educational tools including online tools that can be used for public outreach.
These tools will become a part of the Quarknet education and outreach program
that is funded by NSF and DOE.