* 1455154
* CAREER: Linking the Forward and Reverse Vapor-Liquid-Solid Mechanisms to Synthesize Ordered Integrated Metal Oxide Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Beth Guiton, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2021
* USD 625,000.00

Non-technical Description.&lt;br/&gt;We live in a society with reliance on
materials, in particular those that enable the generation or storage of energy,
for which the efficiencies that are required are ever growing. The function of
such materials increasingly relies on creating highly-efficient and closely-
spaced crystal interfaces including, for example, large area p-n junction arrays
for solar devices. This project to understand and exploit the solid-iquid-vapor
mechanism should provide a new approach to engineer nanostructured composite
materials with highly efficient single-crystalline components, thus having a
significant positive impact on the directed design of metal oxide materials, and
on the society that relies on them. Based on this research and the
infrastructure developed to support it, are a series of educational and outreach
activities, designed to increase participation in research experiences by
University of Kentucky undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description.&lt;br/&gt;Though the vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) mechanism has been
extensively studied in its role in metal-catalyzed nanowire growth, the reverse
of this process - the solid-liquid-vapor (SLV) mechanism - is not well
understood, yet it could well provide the key to understanding and utilizing
VLS-grown wires. Thus, there is a critical need to determine the key factors
governing the SLV mechanism and its fundamental relationship to VLS growth. The
objective in this project is to determine the key parameters that govern the SLV
mechanism in metal oxides, and the relationship linking SLV to the VLS
mechanism. The central hypothesis is that if a single metal nanodroplet can be
used in the VLS growth of a nanowire, it will also catalyze the SLV dissolution
of the same material, with crystallographic specificity equivalent to that of
the original growth. The rationale is that a greater understanding of SLV and
its relation to VLS could provide a route to highly-specified porous materials,
as well as a method of precise placement for high-quality nanowires synthesized
with a "bottom-up" approach. The successful completion of these studies is
expected to have a significant positive impact on the directed design of
functional metal oxide materials since it will enable the production of
structures, compositions, and arrangements of interfaces with a high degree of
control and complexity. This research is significant because combining SLV with
VLS will for the first time enable control of the nanowire-template interface,
essentially "synthesizing" interfaces with specific chemistry, crystallography,
and spacing.