* 1455901
* Transcriptional Regulation of Left/Right Asymmetry in the Zebrafish Embryo
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Bernard Thisse, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 04/30/2019
* USD 727,000.00

All vertebrate embryos develop along recognizable axes: antero-posterior (head
to tail), dorso-ventral (back to belly) and, even less obvious, a left-right
(LR) axis characterized by the left or right position of internal organs. The
embryonic structure responsible for generating the LR asymmetry has been
identified recently, and its function has been analyzed. However the mechanisms
leading to its formation are poorly understood. These studies aims to identify
and understand the function of novel essential players involved in that process
and to characterize the molecular activities that are involved during the
different developmental steps leading to the formation of the structure that
produces the LR axis.

The establishment of LR asymmetry in the zebrafish embryo depends on the
activity of motile cilia, present on an epithelium inside a fluid-filled organ
called Kupffer's vesicle (KV) that generates a vectorial leftward fluid flow.
Formation and differentiation of the KV have been shown to be regulated by
several signaling pathways but very little is known about the transcriptional
regulation of genes involved in the formation and differentiation of the KV from
its precursors, the dorsal forerunner cells (DFCs). This project will
characterize the function of novel key players amongst the small set of
transcription factors involved in the regulation of KV organogenesis. It will
define the developmental step(s) in KV formation that require a functional
TEAD1a-Vgll4l transcription complex and identify its relationship with signaling
pathways and transcription factors that have been shown to be involved in the
formation and/or function of the KV. This project will also generate a complete
description of the transcriptome of DFCs and the KV at the different
developmental steps of KV organogenesis. It will provide a detailed description
of the temporal dynamics of gene expression as well as of the specific role of
the transcription factors involved in the KV organogenesis, bringing us close to
a complete description, at the molecular level, of the formation of a simple but
essential organ of a vertebrate embryo. This project will offer one post-
doctoral fellow and two undergraduate students opportunities to engage in
cutting-edge research in Developmental Biology and will expose students at all
levels of education to the scientific process. It will include: (a) outreach
educational activities to local high school students (seminars, science fairs,
biowebconferences, workshops at the lab), (b) research experience for
undergraduate students and (c) postdoctoral training in a broad range of
technologies as well as communication skills essential for career advancement.
The scientific results coming out of this project will be communicated through
publications in highly ranked journals, presentations at national and
international conferences.