* 1455554
* IDBR: TYPE A Development of On-Chip Electrochemical Cross-Linking Mass Spectrometry for Probing Protein-Protein Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Hao Chen, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2019
* USD 322,727.00

An Award is made to Ohio University to develop an on-chip electrochemical cross-
linking mass spectrometry which will be used to identify protein-protein
interactions (PPIs) in vivo. The study of PPIs is very important to understand
protein biological functions as the biological functions of almost all proteins
are provided by specific, non-covalent interactions with other molecules. The
identification of interacting partners and interaction sites of protein
complexes or aggregates will shed light on the elucidation of biological process
mechanisms. This instrumentation project will provide opportunities for students
to be trained in interdisciplinary research involving analytical chemistry,
biochemistry, and instrumentation. The proposed instrument for biological
research will first be used for the study of UV-induced apoptotic signaling
pathways. Following instrument construction and software training, many other
biological research groups in structural and molecular biology at Ohio
University will have access to the developed instrument. The instrument will
also serve as a prototype instrument for commercialization, enabling
dissemination to the biological research community. It is expected that the
proposed research will benefit the research communities of structural biology,
molecular biology, and drug discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Cross-linking mass
spectrometry (MS) has become a useful technique for mapping protein-protein
interactions and elucidating protein networks in living cells. However, several
experimental obstacles limit the usefulness of cross-linking MS, including
difficulty in the identification of cross-linked peptides in the complex
mixture, the complexity of the fragmentation patterns of cross-linked peptide
ions and the inability to quantify cross-links. This project proposes a new
approach using electrochemistry (EC)-assisted cross-linking MS for probing
protein-protein interactions in vivo, based on an electrochemical cross-linking
reagent, diselenide [succinimidyl propionate] (SSP). Following online digestion,
the cross-linked protein complexes will undergo capillary electrolysis (CE)
separation, online EC reduction and online MS detection. The EC reduction
provides a novel way to quickly identify and quantify cross-links based on the
reduction current (also on MS signal), significantly reducing time required for
data analysis by more than one order of magnitude. The online EC reduction takes
seconds, which is much faster than hours required in chemical reduction.
Furthermore, EC reduction yields easily identifiable linear peptides,
facilitating MS/MS identification of cross-link structures for pinpointing out
the interaction sites in the protein complexes.