* 1455015
* CAREER: Solving Olfactory Circuits in the Drosophila Larva
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Marc Gershow, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2022
* USD 785,678.00

The sense of smell is important to humans? daily lives, and its loss is often a
precursor to neurodegenerative diseases, but studying the human olfactory system
directly, like all studies of human neural function, faces challenges due to the
brain?s complexity, large number of neurons, and ethical and technical
obstacles. Studying the larva's simplified olfactory system will advance
understanding of the basic principles of human sense of smell. Insects are
mportant disease vectors and agricultural pests who rely extensively on smells
to locate food, hosts, and mates, so this work will have important applications
in pest control. Undergraduates and high school students, especially from
underrepresented groups, will be actively involved in the research. An
additional component of this project is outreach to local elementary students,
especially the creation of a program to engage students in tinkering and
construction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do brains make decisions based on noisy
and often conflicting sensory input? Why does the same input elicit variable
behaviors, even in the simplest organisms? This project aims to use the fruit
fly larva's sense of smell as a model to explore these questions by studying the
olfactory system of the Drosophila larva. A given odor stimulates or inhibits a
set of odor receptor neurons, yet on the basis of this pattern of stimulation,
organisms from flies to humans recognize and classify odors rapidly and
reliably. The PI will image the responses of odorant receptor neurons in the
larva's dorsal organ (its "nose") to understand how olfactory information is
first presented to the brain, taking advantage of the genetic tools available in
Drosophila, the larva's transparency, and custom built apparatus developed in
the PI's lab. A second goal of this project is to develop the technology
necessary to take full advantage of the larva as a model for decoding the neural
circuitry of olfaction. To move towards or away from an odor, the larva uses
sensory input to drive motor output. In this process, it modulates a number of
behaviors, e.g. moving forward, stopping, and sweeping the head to one side or
the other. The rules by which the larva changes its motor output in response to
sensory input in order to move towards a goal represent a navigational strategy.
Using light activated ion channels the PI will evoke activity directly in the
sensory neurons in order to measure the computations involved in transforming
temporal variations in sensory input into directed motor output. The promise of
the larva, a small crawling animal with a transparent skin, is that the neural
activity in freely behaving animals can be visualized. In practice, we do not
have a microscope capable of keeping up with a moving animal. The project will
develop a microscope that can track individual neurons in a moving larva making
possible to "read the larva's mind" as it goes about its business, allowing us
to link together sensory input, neural activity, and evoked behavior in order to
understand the function of neural circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the
Division of Physics the Neural Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrated
Orgamismal System, and the Emerging Frontiers program in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.