* 1455071
* CAREER:  Understanding the Role of Oceans in the Planetry Energy Budget
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Brian Rose, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2021
* USD 544,681.00

This is a CAREER proposal in which the research goal is to understand the roles
of ocean heat transport (OHT) and ocean heat uptake (OHU) in the planetary
energy budget. Here OHU refers to the transfer of heat from the ocean surface to
depths at which the heat no longer longer affects the overlying atmosphere, thus
effectively removing heat from the surface climate for a period of years to
decades or longer. OHT refers to heat transport in which heat is removed from
the surface in one region, transported by the subsurface ocean, and resurfaces
in another. The role of OHU in climate change has become a topic of some
interest, as increased OHU could explain the hiatus in global warming following
the end of the 20th century. Further motivation for the project comes from
modeling studies showing that different spatial patterns of OHU can cause
different amounts of global warming suppression, even when the total heat uptake
is the same. To some extent these differences can be explained in terms of
regional climate feedbacks. For example the sea ice albedo feedback can play a
significant role in amplifying the global warming caused by greenhouse gas (GHG)
increases, but sea ice only occurs in cold regions near the poles. Removal of
surface heat from high latitudes by OHU or OHT could reduce GHG-induced warming
in these regions and thus reduce the amplifying effect of the sea ice albedo
feedback. But previous work by the PI and others suggests that the effects of
OHU and OHT cannot be entirely explained in terms of regional climate feedbacks
activated to a greater or lesser extent depending on how the oceans redirect
heat. In addition, the effects of OHU and OHT cannot be understood without
considering the role of atmospheric energy transport. A previous study found
that if OHU removes heat from the tropical oceans (or if OHT transfers heat out
of the tropics), atmospheric transport of moist static energy will be quite
efficient in spreading the effect beyond the tropics and evenly cooling the
globe. But an equivalent heat removal in high latitudes instead produces
concentrated high latitude cooling, a difference which can be explained in terms
of the strong background moisture contrast between the warm tropics and the cold
poles. The work is primarily concerned with the ocean's role in current and
future climate change, but it will also consider the role of OHT in producing
past climates in which the temperature contrast between low and high latitudes
was reduced, such as occurred in the Phanerozoic and early Eocene. The research
will also consider the response of the hydrological cycle to OHU and OHT, with a
focus on the subtropics. Past work suggests that while global warming
simulations often find subtropical drying, subtropical warming due to OHT can
produce the opposite effect. Thus OHT could counteract GHG-induced drying to the
extent that heat absorbed by the tropical oceans is transported to the
subtropics, a potentially relevant effect given recent results relating the
warming hiatus to OHU in the equatorial Pacific.

The research agenda for the project has two key components. First, much of the
work will be conducted using simplified climate models in which the ocean
component model is replaced by a "slab ocean", which can absorb heat and
interact thermally with the atmosphere, but which cannot transport heat. In this
context heat OHT and OHU are externally imposed in the form of heat sources and
sinks applied to regions where OHT converges and diverges, and where heat is
sequestered in the deep ocean. Such external forcing is commonly used and is
generally referred to as Q-flux forcing. The experiments allow the feedbacks and
atmospheric transports to be examined in isolation, without the complications
introduced by an interactive ocean. Second, the results of such experiments are
often model dependent, and thus an ensemble of models is required to determine
which aspects of the response to imposed OHT and OHU forcing are robust. To
address this issue, the PI will organize a model intercomparison project (MIP),
in which a common set of experiments will be performed using several different
models. Some experiments will be performed by the PI, but he will also solicit
contributions to the MIP by other researchers. Further research will include an
examination of global warming simulations from state-of-the-art climate models
in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project version 5 (CMIP5), as well as
perturbed physics sensitivity experiments with a single slab ocean climate
model.

The educational component of this CAREER project is centered on the development
of a flexible climate modeling and analysis package in the Python language. The
educational activity is intended to address the lack of computing skills
commonly found among undergraduate and graduate students enrolled in atmospheric
science departments. Specific tasks are 1) to develop a short introductory
course in practical scientific computing in the Python language; 2) to develop a
modular Python-based climate modeling and analysis toolkit; and 3) to develop a
series of interactive educational modules illustrating fundamental principles of
climate and atmospheric science. Several factors motivate the choice of Python
as the language of choice, including its inherent modularity, its ability to
serve as a "wrapper" for compiled Fortran and C codes, thereby promoting
seamless use of established codes, and the numerous visualization and software
development tools available for the language. The software to be developed will
be open source, freely available online, and well documented. It will consist of
a number of simplified dynamical core and process models (for radiative
transfer, boundary layer turbulent fluxes, etc.), which can be integrated alone
or combined in various ways to form simple a simple climate model. In addition
to the on-campus teaching activities, Python-based modules will be developed for
use in a summer camp for local high school students.