* 1455369
* CAREER: Understanding Surface Redox Activity of Atomically-Flat Electroceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* William Chueh, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Oxide electroceramics are crucial in
energy and conversion technologies such as batteries and fuel cells. Examples of
their applications include electrodes for lithium-ion batteries and
electrocatalysts for solid-oxide fuel cells. Increasing, the performance of
these electroceramics is limited by the characteristics of their surface. This
project aims to identify the relationship between the surface atomic structure
and the processes involved in the electrochemistry. Advancements in this area
support a more energy sufficient economy. An integrated educational plan
provides research opportunities to underrepresented high school and
undergraduate students, as well as community outreach to Grade 7-12 students
that builds on the Magic School Bus concept. Specifically, this project supports
the development of three-dimensional slideshows featuring images of everyday
objects at the nanoscale, highlighting the importance of ceramic materials and
research to take students on "A Journey to the Inside of Materials". &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;Transition-metal and rare-earth
electroceramics based on the perovskite and fluorite crystal structures exhibit
significant reactivity with molecules such as oxygen, carbon dioxide and water,
and are used extensively as electrocatalysts at both room and elevated
temperatures. This project addresses the complex relationships between the redox
activity and the surface structure using atomically-flat electroceramic surfaces
primarily with controlled crystal termination, step density and extended
defects. Ultra-thin overlayers deposited via physical-vapor deposition further
enable precise compositional and structure control. The crystallographic and
electronic structure of these atomically-controlled surfaces are characterized
using synchrotron surface X-ray diffraction and surface-sensitive X-ray
spectroscopy under a wide range of temperatures and pressures. Community
outreach/education - A Journey to the Inside of Materials - emphasizing the
magnificence and functionality of ceramic material involves curating three-
dimensional slideshows featuring images of everyday objects at the nanoscale,
and projecting them via the unique visualization facility at the Kavli Institute
for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology at the SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory.