* 1455017
* CAREER: Synthesis of molecular electronic-spin based qubits enabled by new empirically derived design principles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Danna Freedman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2020
* USD 600,000.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division is supporting the research of Professor Danna
Freedman at Northwestern University to develop and understand the smallest unit
of a quantum computer, the qubit. Quantum computers can be vastly more efficient
than current computers. Research on quantum computer is at the very early stages
and focuses on creating the qubit. Toward this goal, Professor Freedman is using
synthetic chemistry with the aim of addressing the fundamental questions
surrounding the creation of a qubit at the molecular level. Professor Freedman
will integrate research and education through three new initiatives. In the
first initiative, the primary literature will be incorporated into the
introductory chemistry curriculum through a combination of demonstrations,
lecture examples and student created Wikipedia pages. In a separate initiative,
Professor Freedman will continue her work with the Museum of Science and
Industry to design and implement a new exhibit, which features her research on
magnetic anisotropy. Finally, Professor Freedman will be creating opportunities
for students to present their research, including organizing a colloquium for
inorganic students in the Chicago area, a symposium at an American Chemical
Society conference, and a symposium at an European Materials Research Society
conference symposium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any object that can be placed into a
superposition of two states can be used as a qubit. Electronic spin is an
appealing qubit candidate because the qubits can be manipulated by electron
paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, and their parameters can be tuned using
chemical synthesis. Yet, the synthesis of viable candidate qubits has been
stymied by rapid decoherence of electronic spin in molecules. As such, the
synthesis and fundamental study of molecules with long-lived quantum coherences
necessitates rational synthetic design principles to inform and enable the
design of future long-lived qubits. Professor Freedman will continue to develop
empirically derived design principles, employ these principles to synthesize
candidate qubits, and scale new systems to develop multiple qubits in a single
molecule. Her research program could provide important insights into
decoherence.