* 1455127
* CAREER:Molecular level interrogations of metal-organic frameworks using electronic and structurally sensitive spectroscopy methods
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Jenny Lockard, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 04/30/2021
* USD 625,000.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The research activities in this project
involve the investigation of an emerging class of porous materials called metal-
organic frameworks that have potential applications ranging from carbon
sequestration to industrial chemical production to solar energy conversion.
While significant progress has been made in developing novel frameworks for
these uses, basic insight on exactly how these materials work is often sorely
lacking. The research activities in this project meet this need by targeting a
fundamental understanding of the processes behind the applications of these
materials. The outcome of this work is crucial for facilitating the rational
design of the next generation of these materials with improved performances and,
therefore, has far reaching implications for a broad range of energy and
environmental sustainability applications. Furthermore, as part of a broader
mission to integrate research and education, the educational component of the
project will provide not only hands-on research experiences for high school
science teachers in the Newark region, but a mechanism for translating those
experiences into meaningful high school science curricula that meet the specific
needs of the students in this community. This outreach initiative stands to have
a large impact on the students in these schools since it targets the educators
that teach them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Metal
organic frameworks are hybrid materials that are composed of metal ions or
clusters connected by organic molecules to form crystalline microporous
networks. These materials have great potential for adsorption-based functions
since their intrinsic porosity and tunable architecture allows bandgap
manipulation, gas/substrate selectivity and the incorporation of other
synergistic characteristics. Synthetic strides in developing new frameworks with
these properties have, however, far outpaced the progress in advancing the
fundamental understanding of their adsorption-based processes, reaction
mechanisms and photoactive properties. Consequently, there are often significant
ambiguities in the structure/function relationships that give rise to their
utility. This research aims to make those connections by producing molecular
level understanding of metal organic framework behavior. The project focuses on
framework systems with energy and environmental sustainability implications.
This broad underlying theme allows the exploration of several exploitable
properties ranging from gas adsorption to heterogeneous catalysis to light
harvesting and photocatalysis. The objectives in studying these systems are to
expose pertinent electronic and molecular level structural changes associated
with the observed properties and to use these insights to help elucidate the
mechanisms behind their functionalities. To accomplish these goals, a targeted
set of vibrational, optical, and X-ray spectroscopy methods are employed for in
situ, and in some cases time-resolved, studies of these systems to garner real
time information on the important host-guest interactions and structural
changes.