* 1455215
* CAREER: From Cradle to Grave: Radiative Properties of Biomass Burning Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Rajan Chakrabarty, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 05/31/2021
* USD 736,168.00

The proposed research seeks to develop a systematic understanding of the
fundamental optical and life-cycle properties of biomass-burning aerosols from
freshly emitted to several days of aging. The variations in aerosol properties
will be quantified as a function of various combustion processes, such as: phase
of burning, fuel type, and moisture content; as well as atmospheric processes
such as oxidation, relative humidity and condensation of volatile organics. The
significance of this research is to improve our understanding of the role that
biomass-burning aerosols play in the direct radiative effects. Current models
assume a spherical shape for these aerosols, whereas this research will combine
laboratory and field experiments focused on the fractal shape of biomass-burning
aerosols. This research has the potential to lead to two important societal
benefits: reduced uncertainty in direct radiative forcing (DRF) effects from
biomass-burning aerosols and the development of modules to enhance K-12
education through internet-based learning. This research and education plan uses
the resources of Washington University's Institute for School Partnership (ISP),
providing outreach to K-12 students and teachers in underrepresented minority
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research combines a significant
theoretical component coupled with well-conceived laboratory experiments. The
goal is to develop a look-up-table (LUT) to replace the Mie-theory based
modeling efforts currently in use. This study proposes a significant effort
aimed at reconciling predicted refractive index and asymmetry parameter
determined experimentally and using numerically exact T-matrix codes. If
successful, this could lead to transformative understanding of the physical and
optic properties of biomass-burning aerosols. Specifically this new knowledge
may help reduce uncertainties associated with direct radiative forcing due to
biomass-burning aerosols. Datasets resulting from this research will improve
parameterization of aerosol radiative transfer interaction in global and
regional modeling efforts.