* 1455009
* CAREER:  Structural and solvent control of nonadiabatic bond formation probed with ultrafast time-resolved spectroscopies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2022
* Arthur Bragg, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2022
* USD 676,600.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Arthur Bragg of Johns
Hopkins University to conduct experimental investigations on how the course of
light-driven nonadiabatic bond formation is controlled by reactant structure and
chemical environment. Nonadiabatic processes are fundamental relaxation pathways
of energetically excited molecules and give rise to fast and efficient
photochemical processes. Aims include improved understanding of energy
conversion mechanisms, for example, in photochemistry and photobiology, and
determination of conditions under which light-driven chemical processes can be
controlled. Multiple state-of-the-art research methods are employed, providing
high level training opportunities for student researchers. These students are
also involved in development of webcam-based spectrometers and associated
secondary-level chemistry curricula, enabling exploration of basic concepts in
chemistry, spectroscopy, and instrument design. Educational objectives are met
through development of curricular units and professional development workshops
for training educators, with administrative program assistance provided by the
Center for Educational Outreach (CEO) at JHU. Curriculum development targets
integration of basic quantitative spectroscopic experimentation into classroom
projects that meet new targets outlined in the Next Generation Science
Standards. The spectrometers and curricular materials will be provided to
teachers and students in the Baltimore City Schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research is to determine how the nature of nuclear dynamics
associated with nonadiabatic electrocyclic bond formation and its overall
efficacy are affected fundamentally by reactant structure and chemical
environment. The work focuses specifically on the photochemical dynamics of
ortho-arenes and related systems, as these are tractable systems for detailed
experimental interrogation. Time-resolved absorption and Raman spectroscopies
are used to probe dynamics of excited molecules on timescales down to tens of
femtoseconds, as these are the timescales on which bonds form and break. These
measurements and supportive quantum chemical computations target
characterization of molecular dynamics that occur on the approach to and
crossing through intersections between electronic states upon excitation, giving
rise to bond formation or other energy deactivation pathways. The photoinduced
dynamics of these systems is also studied to probe solvent-solute interactions
that impact the course of solution-phase chemistry. Findings are expected to
provide experimental benchmarks on the structure and solvent dependence of these
processes, supporting prediction of relaxation and energy transfer pathways of
large molecules both empirically and computationally.