* 1455050
* CAREER: Two-Dimensional Phase Change Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Evan Reed, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2021
* USD 569,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase change materials have the
property that they can be switched between multiple atomic configurations,
yielding different properties like electrical conductivity. They are critical
for electronic and energy applications, but it is rare for nature to provide one
that can be readily switched near ambient conditions. This project builds on the
recent prediction that some two-dimensional materials exhibit phase change
properties near ambient conditions. These materials are nearly atomically thin,
an aspect that provides potentially useful properties that ordinary phase change
materials lack. The two-dimensional nature of these materials provides
fundamentally new physical mechanisms for controlling the transformations that
do not exist in known, bulk materials. In this project, the PI and his team will
explore the phase change properties of two-dimensional materials and their
potential for applications in energy, information storage, electronic, optical,
and other important applications with broad societal benefit. The project will
also elucidate the scientific theory of two-dimensional structural phase
transformations, which is likely to be quite different from conventional
theories for bulk materials. In the process, the research team will tackle some
of the most challenging problems in computational materials science by extending
the accuracy and scale of computational methods for predicting the properties of
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To integrate outreach with this research, the
PI will host and mentor a group of college-bound, under-represented minority
high school students during the summers and involve them in aspects of this
project. The PI will develop interactive Java applications that run real-time
atomistic materials simulations aimed at broad research dissemination and
materials education at the undergraduate and K-12 levels. These applications
represent an exciting new paradigm for materials education that has potential to
transform the way in which students learn about materials by putting them in the
driver seat. These activities will have a high quality mentoring impact on a few
students as well as broad dissemination of the research and teaching tools,
potentially reaching thousands or more students. Some of the activities will be
facilitated by Stanford's Office of Science Outreach which will assist the
research team with post-experience success metrics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase change
materials like GeSbTe alloys are critical for electronic and energy applications
but it is rare for nature to provide one with phase boundaries close enough to
ambient conditions to be useful. Phase change materials can be switched between
multiple atomic configurations that have different properties. This project
builds on the recent prediction that some of the newly discovered two-
dimensional (2D) materials exhibit such phase change properties and may provide
new opportunities for energy, electronic, information storage, optical, and
other important applications with broad societal benefit. The nearly atomically-
thin nature of these materials provides fundamentally new physical mechanisms
for controlling the transformations that do not exist in known, bulk materials.
Furthermore, this project will elucidate the purely scientific theory of 2D
structural phase transformations, which is likely to be quite different from
conventional theories for bulk materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
are to discover how 2D phase change materials can be controlled and reduced to
practice in experiments and device applications. This project seeks to
understand the role of substrate interactions, electrostatic gating,
temperature, and chemical alloys in the control and stabilization of these
phases. In the process, the research team will tackle some of the most
challenging problems in computational materials science by exploring new
statistical techniques for systematically improvable analytical interatomic
potentials and advancing density functional theory approaches for monolayers on
substrates with van der Waals interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To integrate
outreach with this research, the PI will host and mentor a group of college-
bound, under-represented minority high school students during the summers and
involve them in aspects of this project. The PI will develop interactive Java
applications that run real-time atomistic materials simulations aimed at broad
research dissemination and materials education at the undergraduate and K-12
levels. These applications represent an exciting new paradigm for materials
education that has potential to transform the way in which students learn about
materials by putting them in the driver seat. These activities will have high
quality mentoring impact on a few students as well as broad dissemination of the
research and teaching tools, potentially reaching thousands or more students.
Some of the activities will be facilitated by Stanford's Office of Science
Outreach which will assist the research team with post-experience success
metrics.