* 1455501
* Collaborative Research: IDBR: Type A: A High-resolution Bio-Sensor to Simultaneously Measure the Behavior, Vital Rates, and Environment of Key Marine Organisms
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Kakani Young, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2019
* USD 74,624.00

An award is made to the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution to develop an
innovative, high-resolution, biosensor for soft-bodied marine invertebrates and
other ecologically key taxa. Squid and jellies are critical components of many
marine ecosystems that simultaneously support and pressure important commercial
fisheries. Access to, and observations of, jellies and squid are particularly
timely given climate-associated habitat modifications and range changes. The
ITAG will provide information to address how the marine environment is changing
and how key taxa are responding to these changes, supporting the needs of the
scientific community, commercial fisheries, resource managers, and policy
makers. This research will support the career development of young scientists.
Undergraduate students will be directly involved in all aspects of the research
and outreach. Results of this work will be broadly disseminated to the
scientific community and the public through direct collaborations, workshops,
tutorials, open-access data and tools, media releases, and already well-followed
blogs. This project will leverage the Communication and Outreach Departments of
multiple institutions and the public's inherent interest in jellies and squid to
broaden the awareness of marine science and engineering through: (a) public
presentations, (b) direct communication and interaction with journalists and
teachers, and (c) education in local schools for preschool, grade-school and
college students.

The purpose of the new ITAG (invertebrate tag) bio-sensor is to simultaneously
record a suite of fine-scale behavioral and environmental data. Soft-bodied
invertebrates such as such as jellies and squid are the most abundant and
diverse animals in the ocean, the world's largest habitat. As keystone taxa,
these soft-bodied invertebrates make up important global fisheries and are a
vital link in the ocean food web, connecting top predators and smaller prey.
However, we know surprisingly little about the linkages between the physical
conditions of their environment and physiological and behavioral patterns of
jellies and squid. This new technology will incorporate new physical sensors as
well as animal-based orientation and acceleration measurements thereby proving a
unique and inclusive bio-sensor. The ITAG will be constructed with a modular
framework that will enable the flexibility required to apply the device across
taxa. Once secured to the animal, the ITAG will provide vital data on animal
associations with environmental features and responses to ocean acidification
and warming. As such, tagged animals will become mobile sensing platforms
capable of observing their surrounding environment. The tools and data developed
for this award will be broadly applicable in both the research and conservation
communities who face a paucity of information about these animals and the
environments they inhabit. Leveraging key and abundant taxa provides an
efficient means to circumvent the challenges and costs of traditional sampling
and observing platforms, thus transforming our measurement capabilities, data
resolution, breadth of application, and understanding of the ocean and its
resources.