* 1455607
* The Role of Protein Phosphatases in Plant Stem Cell Production
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Zachary Nimchuk, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

All plant biomass on the planet is derived ultimately from the production of
stem cells, populations of self-renewing cells that drive plant development in
every tissue. The maintenance of plant stem cell populations depends on
communication pathways between the stem cells and neighboring accessory cells.
Determining how these communication pathways function is critical to
understanding how plant stem cell function has been altered during domestication
and evolution, and how it might be harnessed to drive further crop improvement.
This project aims to understand the signaling pathways that control
communication between stem cells and neighboring cells. It uses novel genetic
systems and biochemical approaches to look at key regulators of receptors that
control stem cell production in order to elucidate how they control receptor
signaling. This project is also identifying critical signals that are involved
after receptors in stem cell control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant domestication
and evolution are associated with changes in stem cell proliferation. Despite
the importance of plant stem cells, there is little understanding of the
signaling pathways that control plant stem cell proliferation. This research is
helping fill that gap by identifying signaling components and target genes that
regulate plant stem cell production in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. It
is creating genome-wide datasets and identifying new loci that will help dissect
how stem cell pathways have shaped plant form and function. Altering plant
development, through the manipulation of stem cell activity, has the promise to
boost crop and biofuel production. This research focuses directly on this
target, by identifying key regulators of plant stem cell production that can
ultimately be deployed to enhance crop growth and yield. In addition, the
project is advancing scientific outreach by creating a high school learning
program to educate students on the coming global food crisis, and about how
scientists are using biotechnology and plant development to create solutions to
this challenge. This project will also train a graduate student and multiple
undergraduate students.