* 1455630
* IDBR: TYPE A:  Quantitative Polarization and Phase Microscope for label-free imaging of live cell and tissue dynamics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Stanley Pau, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 613,839.00

An award is made to The University of Arizona to develop a Quantitative
Polarization and Phase Microscope (QP2M). QP2M can measure the spectral
dependent quantitative polarization properties and phase information of cell and
tissue in real time; it is insensitive to motion and vibration because all
information is acquired in a single shot. The microscope measures all four
properties of light interacting with cell and tissue: intensity, wavelength,
polarization, and phase. The ability to instantaneously measure live cells and
follow motions and processes over time provides valuable information to the
study of cellular dynamics, motility, and cell and tissue morphology. This
project will bring multidisciplinary research and education in optical sciences
and biology to both undergraduates and graduates students through the research
in microfabrication, optical instrumentation, and
bioimaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to integrate
quantitative polarization and phase imaging techniques for label-free imaging of
live cell dynamics. Novel color polarization sensor will be developed to detect
right circular polarized light and three linearly polarized light at 0, 45, and
90 degree angles, at three wavelengths in a single shot. The sensor will be
integrated with a microscope that can simultaneously capture 3 phase-shift
images for quantitative phase measurement or 4 images with different
polarization states for quantitative polarization measurement. The fast
acquisition capacity of polarization and phase imaging will allow the coupling
of spectral, phase, and polarization analysis and may reveal previously
unattained vital information about the dynamics in living cells, tissues, and
whole organisms, leading to new discoveries not possible before. The
polarization and phase imaging techniques being developed for this project also
enable new applications and experiments in cancer detection, diseases diagnosis
and surgery.