* 1455405
* The Genomic Basis of Electric Signal Diversity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Jason Gallant, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2020
* USD 699,000.00

Communication signals are important in the evolution of new species, as
evidenced by many groups of species with elaborate variation in songs, color
patterns, and pheromones. In many of these systems, the mechanisms that produce
this variation are poorly understood, limiting the ability to understand how
selection acts on communication signals to facilitate the speciation process.
Electric fish, such as mormyrid fishes from Africa, produce weak electric fields
for the purposes of communication and navigation through their environments.
There are more than 200 species of mormyrid electric fish; most species have a
specific electric discharge, and the mechanisms underlying the production are
well understood. In this project, the researchers seek to identify the genetic
basis of electric signal diversity by leveraging the recent discovery of a
"hybrid zone" between populations of mormyrid electric fish with distinct
electric signals to identify genes responsible for differences in electric
signals. The project will draw on next-generation genomic sequencing
technologies, as well the development of new transgenic techniques in electric
fish. This research is important because electric discharges are critical in
species recognition, and identifying genes responsible for behavioral
differences within species will ultimately help biologists understand how
changes in behavior can facilitate, or perhaps cause, one species to become
multiple species. In connection with this work, this project will establish a
new educational outreach program, focusing on "forms of energy," to middle
school students in Olivet, MI.

The more than 200 nominal species of mormyrids produce easily measured and
quantified electric discharge signals (EODs), which have a discrete anatomical
and physiological basis. EOD signals are typically species-specific and have
been demonstrated to be a necessary component of courtship behavior,
particularly for a rapidly evolved "species flock" of mormyrids in the genus
Paramormyrops. Recent work has focused on linking these macroevolutionary
patterns of electric signal diversity to population-level processes. Recent
discoveries have identified a population level polymorphism in EOD signals
within the species Paramormyrops kingsleyae that reflects macroevolutionary
patterns of EOD diversity in Paramormyrops and other mormyrids. The objective of
this project is to determine the genetic basis of divergent signals in P.
kingsleyae. The researchers will achieve this objective by completing three
specific aims. The first aim is to determine the divergent genomic regions
between sympatric, polymorphic species of electric fish by assembling a
reference P. kingsleyae genome, and then align low-coverage whole genome
resequencing data from individuals with divergent EOD types. The hypothesis is
that these divergent genomic regions between populations are responsible for
differences in EOD complexity. The second aim is to identify patterns of gene
expression correlated with EOD complexity among closely related Paramormyrops
species. The hypothesis is that differences in EOD complexity will be associated
with changes in expression of genes relating to electrocyte cell shape and
structure. The third aim is to test the putative effects of candidate genomic
regions and/or changes in gene expression identified by interfering with gene
function in vivo. By achieving these three aims, this project will provide the
first demonstration of the genetic basis of a vertebrate communication behavior.
EOD diversity is maintained by P. kingsleyae despite the fact that both signal
types are maintained in sympatric, fully interbreeding populations. These
differences represent the same EOD characteristics that have been strongly
implicated in the evolution of reproductive isolation between species and
genera. The outcomes of this project will contribute broadly to understanding
how evolutionary novelty arises in natural populations, a substrate for
speciation. This project will enhance infrastructure for research by
constructing web-based tools for exchanging phenotypic and genomic data in
electric fish on the website http://efishgenomics.zoology.msu.edu. The
international component of this research is supported in part by the National
Science Foundation's Office of International Science and Engineering.