* 1455125
* CAREER: Extremal Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Po-Shen Loh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 01/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Combinatorics, which concerns the study of discrete structures such as sets and
networks, is as ancient as humanity's ability to count. Although in the
beginning combinatorial problems were solved by pure ingenuity, today that alone
is not enough. A rich variety of powerful methods have been developed, often
drawing inspiration from other fields such as probability, analysis, algorithms,
and even algebra and topology. This proposal aims to further develop the toolbox
of available approaches, through investigating central problems in extremal
combinatorics. Simultaneously, it integrates these research problems and themes
into educational and outreach activities that extend from the graduate to the
K-12 level, and from coast to coast. The PI is the national coach of the USA
International Mathematical Olympiad team. He actively leverages this leadership
position to address the public about mathematics, engaging underrepresented
groups as well as some of the world's brightest students, and mentoring students
in their transition from K-12 mathematics into
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of this research is to use a problem-
driven philosophy to inspire innovations in the development of new techniques.
This project focuses on topics of extremal nature, which investigate the
relationships between useful parameters of discrete systems, and characterizes
their extreme values over various families of those systems. Such problems often
have applications in computer science and other areas of mathematics, but are
also elegant and interesting in their own right. The proposed work on Ramsey
theory includes specific problems which may lead to the development of new
probabilistic approaches, and new connections with the theory around Szemeredi's
Regularity Lemma. The proposed work on Turan theory highlights a particularly
natural maximum-degree version of the fundamental Kruskal-Katona theorem, which
is surprisingly still open. In addition, it proposes questions which inspire
work on finding Regularity-free approaches, and on analytical and computational
methods. The PI has prior experience in all of these areas, and has built a
local research group, spanning from post-docs to extremely talented
undergraduates.