* 1455265
* CAREER: Fukaya categories, mirror symmetry, and low-dimensional topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Timothy Perutz, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Around 1989, a number of mathematical physicists, studying hypothetical string-
theoretical models of the universe, discovered that certain such models come in
pairs, with versions "A" and "B" of the theory based on different equations yet
sharing the same physically observable quantities. This phenomenon, which
acquired the metaphorical name "mirror symmetry," led to extraordinarily
prescient mathematical predictions about the geometries ("Calabi-Yau manifolds")
involved in such theories. In 1994, Maxim Kontsevich proposed an organizing
framework for multiple mathematical aspects of mirror symmetry in his
"homological mirror symmetry" (HMS) conjecture, which, he said, would "unveil
the mystery of mirror symmetry." At the time, one of the two main mathematical
notions invoked by HMS, the "Fukaya category of a symplectic manifold," was new
and undeveloped, and it was very difficult both to prove instances of
Kontsevich's conjecture and to deduce consequences of it. Recent developments in
the mathematics of Fukaya categories have changed that. At the center of this
CAREER project is a program to realize Kontsevich's vision. The PI and
collaborators have formulated a notion of "core homological mirror symmetry,"
and the program aims to show that if core HMS holds for a particular mirror pair
then many other facets of mirror symmetry naturally follow as logical
consequences. The project includes support for graduate students working with
the PI, which will assist them at the beginning of their research careers, and
support for the development of a coherent honors program for mathematics
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main strand of the research program
concerns mirror symmetry, primarily for Calabi-Yau (CY) manifolds. The program
(underway in work of the PI and collaborators Sheridan and Ganatra) studies the
consequences of "core homological mirror symmetry" for a given pair of polarized
CY manifolds, which roughly says that one can match the tensor powers of the
polarizing line bundle over one of these two with some collection of Lagrangian
submanifolds of the other in a way that respects categorical structures. This
hypothesis is quite natural in light of geometric approaches to mirror pairs
based on the Strominger-Yau-Zaslow philosophy, though currently only proven in a
few cases. We aim to show that core HMS implies full HMS and several aspects of
"closed-string" mirror symmetry, notably the normalization of the holomorphic
volume form and the precise form of the mirror map. This has become feasible in
light of recents developments, due principally to Abouzaid, relating the
geometric "open-closed string map," from quantum cohomology to Hochschild
homology of the Fukaya category, to the categorical property of "homological
smoothness" of the Fukaya category. A key aim is to give a "conceptual" proof
that the generating function for the numbers of rational curves on a quintic
3-fold equals the Yukawa coupling of its mirror -- a proof that does not rely on
calculating the two sides. This research gives key roles to symplectic topology,
pseudo-holomorphic curves, and symplectic Floer cohomology. Those techniques are
equally important in a second strand, which is to develop Floer-thoeretic
3-manifold invariants on similar lines to Heegaard Floer theory but based not on
symmetric products of a Heegaard surface (viewed as a complex curve), but rather
on moduli spaces of rank 2 holomorphic bundles with section over such curves.
Such invariants may serve to mediate between Heegaard and instanton versions of
Floer theory for 3-manifolds.