* 1455668
* IDBR: TYPE A Ultrahigh Spatial Resolution Sub-organelle Molecular Mass Spectrometry Imaging Using Liquid Metal Ion Beam Desorption and Radiofrequency Ionization
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Patrick Farmer, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2019
* USD 684,793.00

An award is made to Baylor University to develop an ultrahigh spatial resolution
mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) instrument. The potential impact of this
research is far-reaching because no current technology is available to address
the existing shortcomings in high spatial resolution MSI. The direct
beneficiaries of this state-of-the-art technology will include students,
researchers, and the society as a whole. This work is expected to open the door
for a variety of technology transfer opportunities and potential industry
collaborations with the university for mass production that will yield
significant economic and societal benefits. Two qualified undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups from Baylor outreach programs will be recruited to
gain quality research experience. Moreover, two graduate students and a
scientist will be trained in research activities and develop expertise in MSI to
broaden their scientific knowledge. Research findings and presentations of all
mentees in the project will be highlighted in annual Advanced Instrumentation
Workshops that target undergraduate students and faculty mentors from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Hispanic-serving institutions
in Texas and nearby states. Virtual scientific networks will be used to
disseminate research findings and promote new collaborations. These NSF
supported activities will be used to broaden underrepresented student group
participation in future biological MSI research. This research will allow
construction of a cutting-edge molecular imaging instrument that will be
accessed by Baylor faculty and students and utilized for teaching advanced
instrumentation classes and to promote inter-institution collaborations.
Outcomes from this research will be disseminated through publications and
conference presentations to boost broader use of the new ultrahigh spatial
resolution MSI.

Mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) provides information on surface morphology but
also generates highly desired details about specific molecular identities of
different sample components. In conventional MSI, a primary laser or desorption
beam is rastered across a sample surface to desorb and subsequently analyze
different components of biological tissues to construct three-dimensional
images. Hence, the spatial resolution in MSI is limited by desorption beam's
dimensions (or laser footprint) and energy threshold required to desorb a
sufficient number of substrate molecules from the surface for subsequent
ionization and mass analysis. Moreover, low ionization efficiencies can severely
limit both sensitivity and spatial resolution (typically to several microns) for
characterization of cellular components. The purpose of this research is to
provide novel analytical capabilities for highly specific and sensitive
characterization of cell organelles at the molecular level. This project will
create a new frontier in MSI by combining focused ion beam (FIB) neutral
desorption with a newly discovered and highly efficient radio frequency
ionization (RFI). Persistent challenges in subcellular MSI include achievement
of adequate detection sensitivity, overcoming ionization bias, minimizing
potential migration of substrate constituents during the analysis, and improving
spatial resolution. Current MSI strategies typically address one of these
challenges at the expense of another. To ameliorate current trade-offs in MSI,
geometry of an RFI source will be optimized to ionize substantially larger
portion of the desorbed neutral plume than currently possible. The unparalleled
sensitivity of RFI is expected to reduce the primary beam power requirements for
a liquid metal ion source (LMIS) to such an extent that imaging resolution in
the x-y (surface) and z (depth) dimensions will support molecular level
characterization. It will be possible to record 3D images and characterize cell
structures and compositions to an unprecedented level of detail, with spatial
resolutions an order of magnitude better than current MSI approaches.