* 1455848
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Microbial Community Assembly in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Erin McKenney, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2017
* USD 29,586.00

The gut is home to tens of trillions of bacteria that are integral for nutrient
digestion, gut development, and defense against disease. But it is not clear how
these communities of microbes are established, how they respond to diet and
disease, and how they may change through an individual's life. This project will
characterize and compare the colonization process from birth to weaning in
infants of three lemur species, each with a unique gut morphology and life
history. Additional sampling from the weaned infants of one lemur species will
track the re-colonization process after infection with Cryptosporidium, an
intestinal pathogen. Colonization after birth and disease will be compared to
elucidate the rules governing gut community development. Because lemurs and
humans are both primates, the study findings may have a profound impact on
current understanding of the role of microbiota in human health and development.
Additional broader impacts include training of a female graduate student in the
STEM sciences, and extensive public science education and outreach efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year project will analyze bacterial 16S rDNA and
metagenomic profiles to tease apart the potentially divergent effects of host
phylogenetic history and diet on the gut microbiota community structure and to
examine the associated microbial signatures for potential effects on lemur
health and nutritional uptake. Fecal samples will be collected at the Duke Lemur
Center from Varecia variegata (frugivorous), Lemur catta (generalist), and
Propithecus coquereli (folivorous). DNA will be extracted and sequenced using
two different approaches to determine which bacterial species are present and
what functions each community can perform. First, the v4 region of the 16S gene
will be sequenced and analyzed to identify bacterial taxa and measure their
frequencies in each community. Next, the investigators will sequence genomic
reads from the entire microbiome, which includes viruses, fungi, protozoans, and
other organisms in addition to bacteria. Metagenomic reads will be compared to
NCBI databases to identify all (bacterial and non-bacterial) community members,
as well as the functions encoded by the genes from each community. This will be
the first project to intensively and longitudinally study the composition and
community development of gut microbiota across multiple species within a
phylogenetically related but ecologically diverse group of mammals, thus
enabling modeling of ecological processes in the gut for application to other
primates, including humans. A novel bioinformatics pipeline for metagenomic data
analysis will be made publicly available as an open source tool through an
online repository. The proposed activities will not only shed light on microbial
contributions to primate evolution and ecology, but the results will provide a
springboard for public education through local outreach.