* 1455894
* SG: Continental and Century Scale Assessment of Forest Nitrogen Cycling in the United States Using Dendroisotopes
* BIO,EF
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Douglas Goodin, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Binford
* 03/31/2018
* USD 149,963.00

Nitrogen is one of the most important substances on Earth. Modern agriculture
depends on it because it is the key component of fertilizer. However, much of
the nitrogen used by humans can escape to water and the air, where it can cause
problems for human and ecosystem health. Although nitrogen supply to ecosystems
is increasing due to human activities, many ecosystems seem to have a high
capacity to retain or remove nitrogen from harmful pathways. This project will
identify which places have this capacity, and what is causing these patterns, by
measuring long-term records of nitrogen cycling. Trees in most forests of the
U.S. form annual growth rings that preserve the history experienced by that
tree. A portion of nitrogen taken up by an individual tree is preserved in its
wood, providing a record of past nutrient conditions in that place. This
research will greatly expand the few individual data points that have been
measured from nitrogen in wood, and it will extend the timeframe of study much
longer than previous efforts. Further, this project will deliver benefits to
society and the larger scientific community through outreach about tree ring
research to middle school students, open access of the data and research
findings, and increased understanding of how to better manage nitrogen so that
it does not cause harm to people or ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will generate the first continental-scale sampling of coupled tree-ring
growth and nitrogen isotope records by sampling trees at 47 sites across the
United States. This will produce three key data sets about the nitrogen isotopic
composition of wood and the terrestrial nitrogen cycle. The three research goals
are: (1) to generate the first continental-scale reconstructions of long-term
patterns of nitrogen availability, particularly testing whether forests are
experiencing increasing or decreasing nitrogen availability, (2) to identify the
key mechanisms and drivers of trajectories in nitrogen availability over the
past century, especially slow processes that are difficult to study with other
approaches, and (3) to accomplish three methodological advances for broader use
of wood nitrogen isotopes.