* 1455804
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Conceptualizing the Adaptive Significance of Brown Adipose Tissue in Cold Climates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Stephanie Levy, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2018
* USD 25,156.00

Arctic regions present extreme environmental stresses, such as severe cold and
low biodiversity; yet, human populations have managed to survive in these
territories for thousands of years. As human populations migrated into high-
latitude regions, they underwent an adaptive shift that included cultural,
behavioral and biological dimensions. Contemporary circumpolar populations
appear to adapt to cold temperatures physiologically by generating high
metabolic rates; however, the mechanisms that control this biological adaptation
are poorly understood. Brown adipose tissue (BAT), a special type of fat that is
highly metabolically active, has been recognized for decades as the primary
source of heat production among infants. However, it was previously assumed that
as humans develop, BAT levels decrease to trace amounts. Within recent years,
BAT has been discovered to be present and active among many adults. Furthermore,
due its ability to convert stored fats and sugars into heat, the presence of BAT
may have protective effects against obesity. It is not known why some adults
have BAT while others do not, and whether BAT activity is adaptive against cold
temperatures. This project will examine variation in BAT activity among
indigenous and non-indigenous populations living in cold climates to enhance our
understanding of biological adaptations to cold; early-life factors that may
shape adult metabolism; and population variation in metabolic disease risk. In
addition, the project will support training of a female graduate student in the
STEM sciences, foster research collaborations, and provide a new, portable
method for quantifying fat metabolic activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An elevated
resting metabolic rate (RMR) and efficient non-shivering thermogenesis (NST) are
central biological adaptations to cold climates, but the mechanisms that dictate
these metabolic adaptations are poorly understood. Researchers have recently
discovered that brown adipose tissue (BAT), a form of fat that is highly
thermogenic, is present among adults. This study investigates multiple levels of
adaptation to cold stress by testing hypotheses regarding variation in adult BAT
heat production. The proposed one-year study will compare groups living in
Siberia that have been exposed to cold stress over various time depths. BAT
activity will be quantified using infrared thermal imaging of the neck and
shoulders. RMR will be measured using indirect calorimetry. Participants will
wear temperature loggers for 72 hours to quantify average daily cold exposure.
Anthropometric measurements will be taken using standardized techniques.
Finally, a modified survey will be used to collect data on lifestyle,
socioeconomic status and early-life cold exposure.