* 1455425
* Standard Research Grant: Probing Public Understanding and Acceptance of Evolution
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Michael Weisberg, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 310,112.00

General Audience Summary

The purpose of this project is to gain a fuller picture of what people in the
United States know about the theory of evolution, to what extent they accept
this theory, and what explains their beliefs and their degree of acceptance. The
project thus has the potential to make a huge impact on important social issues,
such as conflicts over biology education. Understanding the nature and source of
resistance to evolutionary biology is critical for changing not only public
dialogue, but also the way in which public dialogue is framed. The PIs are
committed to disseminating the findings of this project so that they will reach
those involved in science policy and in formal and informal science education.
They will do so by contributing materials to and reviewing materials for the
Understanding Evolution project at the University of California Museum of
Paleontology (which provides lesson plans and other resources to teachers),
giving public lectures, leading professional development workshops for teachers,
and writing articles for the policy journal Science Progress. The PIs will also
involve at least four undergraduate research assistants from Penn's diverse
student body in every stage of the project.

Technical Summary

The PIs propose a systematic investigation of the public's knowledge about and
attitudes towards evolution. This project will approach the question of the
public's understanding and acceptance of evolution by first conducting a series
of preliminary surveys focusing on what people know about various aspects of the
theory of evolution, the extent to which they accept these aspects, and any
demographic factors that systematically impact their understanding and
acceptance. These surveys will ask about the extent to which they appreciate
descent with modification, their ability to reason about phylogenetic
relationships, and whether they preferentially accept adaptive explanations. The
results of these surveys will then be used to construct a single questionnaire,
which will be administered to a demographically representative panel of 1,000
U.S. citizens. The PIs will additionally conducted targeted interviews with
individuals who accept evolution without understanding it, as well as
individuals who do not accept evolution, to gain a deeper understanding of
sources of misconceptions about evolution. The PIs will investigate several
hypotheses about why Americans resist accepting evolution. Using the same
procedure indicated, the PIs will develop a second survey instrument, which will
be administered to a second demographically balanced panel of Americans.
Together, the results of these two surveys will produce the most highly refined
data about Americans' views on evolution that have ever been collected.