* 1455803
* PhantomNet Users' Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Jacobus VAN DER MERWE, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,623.00

This project aims to support a 1.5 day workshop for potential users of the newly
created PhantomNet Mobile Testbed, that is being supported by an NSF CISE
Research Infrastructure (CRI) Community Infrastructure Award. This workshop will
be held on the campus of the University of Utah in fall 2014. PhantomNet is a
testbed facility aiming to enable research and teaching at the intersection of
mobile networking, cloud computing and software defined networking. PhantomNet
leverages the time-tested Emulab testbed control stack and is integrated with
the Emulab instance at the University of Utah. There are two primary goals for
the workshop. The first is to provide potential users of the facility with
hands-on exposure to the testbed to enable them to understand how PhantomNet can
be used in their research and teaching. The second is to garner input from the
target user community about the desired functionality of the testbed to enable
the PhantomNet team to prioritize development tasks for the remainder of the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As it is freely and remotely available to all
academic institutions, the hands-on teaching that PhantomNet enables as part of
this workshop is expected to better equip teachers and students alike in domains
that are critically important to modern society. In addition, getting input from
the user community relatively early in the development of the facility will help
the PhantomNet team adjust their development priorities to better serve the
community needs.