* 1455679
* Exploring the Use of British Slave Trade Ships to Gather Biological Specimens and Data
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Kathleen Murphy, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 152,787.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The legacy of slavery and the
slave trade is an important topic for understanding modern cultures. Literature
about their legacy typically focus only on social and economic impacts without
considering intellectual and scientific consequences. The proposed study will
examine these consequences by focusing on the transatlantic, British-dominated,
slave trade in the eighteenth century. During this period, British naturalists
recruited slave ship surgeons and captains to gather insects, plants, shells,
and other specimens in West Africa and in American ports of slave transfer
points enabling the collection of specimens from regions typically off-limits to
them. This project will explore how the circulation of objects, ideas, and
individuals through the networks of the slave trade engendered new scientific
knowledge. To do so, it will examine scientific treatises and correspondence,
institutional records of slaving companies, personal correspondence, and the
records of the Royal Society to tell the stories of British slaving and science
largely absent from existing scholarship. By examining the entangled histories
of science and the slave trade, this project encourages broader discussions
about issues of race, colonialism, science, and the ethical implications of
scientific practices. The eventual outcome of this research will be a book aimed
at a wide audience, including the general public and historians, as well as
science and cultural studies scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars all too often overlook the interdependency
between science and slavery. And, most importantly, minimal research has been
done on how scientists exploited the slave trade to produce new natural
knowledge. This project argues that the networks of the transatlantic slave
trade should be understood as a space of natural history and, like all
localities of science, the social and material contexts of that space shaped and
were shaped by the natural knowledge produced within it. The project also offers
a new way to understand a classic question in the literature of the slave trade.
For seventy years, slave trade scholars have debated the profitability of the
trade and its role in Britain's economic development and industrialization. This
project suggests that the debate has been too narrowly framed. To fully
understand how Europeans profited from the slave trade, we must include
collections of rare specimens and the scientific knowledge that resulted from
their study among slaving profits.