* 1455506
* OPUS: Geographical gradients and contemporary end points of organic evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* William Bradshaw, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2018
* USD 208,416.00

OPUS awards fund previously supported NSF scientists to re-evaluate several
years of projects and synthesize them into a product to stimulate the research
community. This project will synthesize the PIs' forty years of experimental
studies on the evolutionary ecology of the pitcher plant mosquito, a model
system for understanding climate-driven evolution of a disease vector. This work
will include the first evidence that the effects of recent rapid climate change
have penetrated to the level of the gene. These data explain not only ongoing
changes observed in the timing of seasonal events in the surrounding world, but
also help direct new research into shifting patterns of host/vector interactions
of some of Earth's most debilitating diseases: malaria, dengue, yellow fever,
and West Nile virus. The synthesis will focus on how the physiological capacity
of mosquitos to function within a given environment determines whether or not
they can transmit disease. This laboratories' work has had a major impact on
research examining geographic variation and local adaptation and this synthesis
ls likely to expand that influence. The themes of the book will demonstrate how
knowing a specific organism well is key to developing the backbone for discovery
and transformational research as new challenges emerge over time. The combined
results from biogeography, seasonal timing, physiology, population biology,
evolutionary genetics, and genomics will be woven into each chapter, punctuated
by an on-line video describing pattern and process in both natural field and
controlled laboratory environments. This project will provide a unique
perspective on this approach to science that will serve as inspiration and
education for graduate students and early-career researchers.