* 1455138
* CAREER: Fish-derived nutrients in a coral reef ecosystem - impacts on benthic communities and importance for coral restoration
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2015
* Deron Burkepile, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2015
* USD 177,744.00

Coral reefs are currently imperiled from a variety of human-induced threats from
climate change, coral diseases, overexploitation of important fish species, and
enrichment with excessive amounts of nutrients. These threats can result in the
decline in corals and fishes and the rise in seaweeds, turning coral reefs into
seaweed reefs. One important aspect of understanding how human-mediated changes
impact the ecology of reefs is to understand how fishes impact important
nutrient cycles on reefs. The investigators prior research suggests that fishes
may be one of the most important sources of nitrogen and phosphorus on reefs via
their daily excretions. These fish-derived nutrients may help corals grow faster
but could also help seaweeds grow faster if corals are killed by other processes
such as climate change or disease. However, nutrients from human-derived sources
such as runoff from agriculture or sewage discharge can be harmful to corals as
these nutrients are often of different types than those in fish excretions. The
investigator seeks to understand how the different effects of fish-derived vs.
human-derived nutrients impact coral growth, seaweed growth, and, ultimately,
the health of coral reef ecosystems. This research will also facilitate a number
of training and outreach opportunities including: (1) training graduate and
undergraduate students, (2) creating a partnership between FIU and MAST@FIU, a
new science and technology magnet high school, to educate underrepresented
minorities in marine biology, (3) taking marine science to the masses with
widely distributed videos, and (4) creating a citizen science initiative that
will get interested marine biology students involved with helping to monitor
some of the field experiments. Further, this work will generate much needed
information on the science of coral reef restoration. Restoration of reefs is a
growing field but many restoration efforts have little solid grounding in
understanding the ecological processes that keep reefs healthy. Thus, this work
will be able to make significant contribution to educating managers and
restoration practitioners as to the processes that can help facilitate
successful restoration efforts.

This research will address fundamental and untested questions of how nutrient
excretion by fishes impacts coral reef communities. Prior data suggest that the
ecology of reefs is critically linked to the role of fishes as providers of
limiting nutrients since fishes are one of, if not the most important, sources
of N on reefs. This research is not only unique in its scope but also timely due
to the global threats to reefs. As overfishing removes important fishes (and
their role as nutrient providers) and anthropogenic nutrient loading increases
the abundance of potentially harmful nutrients, the nutrient regimes on reefs
may be changing for the worse. The goal of this project is to quantify how
nutrients from fish excretion impact coral reef community structure and how this
effect varies across environmental context. Specifically, the investigator
outlines research to focus on three general sets of objectives that will be
approached on reefs in the Florida Keys, USA: (1) Assess how fish-derived
nutrients influence benthic community structure and coral growth and health both
across and within reefs and how this influence varies with abiotic context, (2)
Test how the physiology and growth of individual corals and algae respond to the
different nutrient sources in fish excretion vs. anthropogenic nutrient loading,
and (3) Examine how fish-derived nutrients impact coral restoration and how to
design restoration programs to take advantage of important of fish-derived
nutrients for coral growth. These questions will be addressed with: (1) a field
monitoring program (Objective 1), (2) mechanistic nutrient enrichment
experiments (Objective 2), and (3) coral restoration experiments (Objective 3).