* 1455466
* RSB: Performance-based Decision Support System for Resilient and Sustainable Multi-Hazard Building Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Guney Olgun, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,375,084.00

The high social, economic, and environmental impacts associated with events such
as the 2011 Tohoku, Japan earthquake and tsunami, and 2012 Hurricane Sandy are
unsustainable. To increase community resilience against such extreme events,
building engineers and architects must select designs that will perform
satisfactorily under any and all hazard scenarios that may occur during a
building's lifetime. Designers of resilient and sustainable buildings must
therefore balance multiple competing interests. They must minimize both initial
construction impacts and reconstruction impacts associated with unknown future
extreme events. They must make tradeoffs between designs that optimize for one
hazard to the detriment of performance under a different hazard. Finally, they
must account for interdependencies within and between hazards and building
performance, such as the effect of a natural hazard event on long-term
durability as well as performance during a subsequent event. This research will
investigate an integrated framework to support early building design decisions
by identifying building systems that are consistent with stakeholder preferences
and optimal over multiple hazards as well as multiple indicators of resiliency
and sustainability. The decision support system will synthesize best practices
in building design and research in performance-based design, life-cycle
assessment, and decision support methodologies. Results of this research will
inform the design of mid-rise commercial buildings exposed to coastal and
seismic hazards. These buildings are essential to community and governmental
disaster-response functions as well as community economic resiliency.
Educational and outreach activities will increase awareness of multi-hazard
resiliency and sustainability issues in practice and graduate study, will foster
interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields among K-12
and undergraduate students, including three research experiences for
undergraduate students supported annually, and will enhance the diversity of the
science and engineering student community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently
available methods adequately address the independent design of resilient and
sustainable soil, foundation, structure, and envelope (SFSE) building
subsystems. However, an integrated decision support methodology is required to
account for interdependencies between hazards and SFSE system performance. An
outcome of this research will be a decision support framework for multi-hazard
building design that will provide robust estimates of resiliency and full life-
cycle sustainability over a broad set of SFSE systems and multiple hazards. The
decision support framework will integrate the full spectrum of hazard intensity
as well as interdependent hazards and performance to identify optimal and
preference-consistent candidate SFSE systems. Assessment of SFSE systems will
occur in three phases: (1) generation of site-appropriate SFSE alternatives
using a rating method to identify applicable systems and their subsystem
interdependencies, (2) probabilistic multi-hazard resiliency and sustainability
performance assessment based on site- and SFSE-specific hazard, fragility, and
loss curves, and (3) multi-objective and multi-criteria optimization of
performance metrics to prioritize candidate systems. This research will create
the decision framework and develop methodologies for incorporating hazards and
SFSE systems, generate models and datasets for mid-rise office buildings under
hurricane, earthquake and tsunami hazards, study the sensitivity of results to
uncertainty, and apply the framework to a case study building.