* 1455362
* CAREER: The role of organic particulates in controlling the growth of river deltas: a field, experimental, and numerical modeling study
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Laurel Larsen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 02/29/2020
* USD 715,559.00

A non-technical description of the project, which explains the project's
significance and importance

Coastal land loss through the combined effects of sea-level rise and land
subsidence is a major concern of the 21st century. The retention of sediment
upstream behind dams and confinement of major rivers by levees have resulted in
diminished sediment delivery to coastal regions, exacerbating problems of land
subsidence. Along the US Gulf Coast this loss of land may be lessened through
engineered diversions of the Mississippi River that would deliver sediment to a
larger portion of the delta plain. Simulation modeling is an essential tool for
planning such diversions and evaluating impacts of different management
scenarios on rates of coastal sedimentation and erosion. However, a gap in
knowledge of the different processes contributing to coastal sediment budgets
could lead to inaccurate model predictions of these rates. One of these unknown
processes is the direct capture of particles by the stems and leaves of coastal
vegetation, which in deltaic marshes might add substantially to overall
sedimentation rates. This research will quantify the importance of vegetation
capture for coastal sedimentation budgets, leading to improved prediction of
coastal growth or submersion.

A technical description of the project

This project addresses three outstanding topics in documenting the role of fine
sediment in coastal land building processes: (i) It develops a quantitative
relationship between hydrodynamic properties, biofilm and vegetation properties,
and sedimentation through direct capture by vegetation. (ii) It tests the
hypothesis that the presence of biofilm within vegetation arrays substantially
increases sedimentation rates. (iii) It improves the representation of particle
capture by vegetation in models of delta land dynamics and uses the model to
evaluate the overall significance of particle capture in large-scale delta
evolution. A combination of laboratory and field experimentation and numerical
modeling will be used to elucidate these topics. Laboratory experiments in the
Biogeomorphology Research and Teaching (BRAT) flume will test emerging theory
about the functional relationship between flow conditions, particle
characteristics, and vegetation canopy structure. Biofilms cultivated within the
flume will enable testing of the effects of different surficial properties on
sedimentation. These results will be tested in the field, within in situ flumes
constructed around intact vegetation communities in the Wax Lake Delta, an
actively growing portion of the Louisiana coast. Functional relationships
developed in the field and laboratory flumes will be incorporated into a Delft
3D model of delta sedimentation dynamics. Sensitivity analyses conducted with
the model will evaluate the importance of fine sediment-vegetation interactions
for large-scale delta growth. Educational components of the project include
development of experiential course modules that use the BRAT flume, development
of a summer short course on fine sediment-vegetation interactions at the
National Center for Earth Dynamics, and development of an exhibit for the San
Francisco Exploratorium on the role of coastal marshes in land building
processes. Delta modeling efforts will be developed in collaboration with
coastal resource managers and disseminated broadly for Louisiana coastal marsh
restoration planning.