* 1455450
* RSB: A Decision and Design Framework for Multi-Hazard Resilient and Sustainable Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2015,09/30/2021
* David Fannon, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,172,687.00

Buildings are among the most complex and resource-intensive objects designed and
built by humans. Buildings shelter occupants from multiple natural hazards, such
as windstorms and earthquakes. Constructing and operating buildings for daily
use consumes considerable energy, water, and material resources, and has
associated environmental effects on ecosystems, human health, and the global
climate. Current research and design approaches neither treat the risks from
multiple hazards in a uniform way nor comprehensively address the environmental
impacts of buildings. Most critically, these approaches do not systematically
integrate sustainability and resilience over the lifespan of the various systems
in a building. This research will create a science-based framework to design
buildings that are both resilient to preserve their function in the face of
multiple hazards and are also sustainable to reduce the adverse impacts on
occupants and the environment. Designing healthier, more efficient, adaptable,
and resilient buildings benefits the nation's ecological health, economic
prosperity, and human welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing, building, and
operating resilient and sustainable buildings requires interdisciplinary
expertise from the fields of architecture, engineering, economics, and social
science to carefully weigh various options and make informed decisions. This
research will investigate a framework to support decision makers by drawing
together a number of interdisciplinary research activities that quantify the
functional performance of buildings in the face of adverse events, aim at a
consistent resilience across multiple hazards (including earthquakes, wind, and
floods), and measure the environmental impact of buildings during their
lifespan. Given the risks due to multiple hazards, the response of each element
of the soil, foundation, structure, and envelope system and their interactions
wiil be evaluated to quantify damage, and in turn translate it into the primary
resilience metrics: degradation of building function and time to recovery. A
probabilistic approach will be used to account for uncertainties in demands and
capacities and quantify resilience over a building's lifespan, factoring in the
multiple hazards it will face as well as normal deterioration. As part of this
process, resilience will be quantified for multiple hazards of buildings
designed according to current codes and the results will be used to propose a
new design concept for consistent resilience. Life-cycle assessment will be used
to quantify environmental impacts and economic costs to evaluate sustainability.
Finally, the results will be integrated into a decision framework in which
resilience, sustainability, and economic costs are quantified over the lifespan
of the building and used with social impacts to select among alternative soil-
foundation-structure-envelope building system designs that are both resilient
and sustainable.