* 1455865
* Collaborative Research: Sensorimotor control of hand-object interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Andrew Gordon, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 371,734.00

How people use their hands to interact with objects is one of the most complex
and least understood sensorimotor skills. For example, when people pick up the
same object multiple times they use different fingertip forces to compensate for
differences in their fingertip positions. This compensation is important because
it allows people to manipulate an object skillfully without having always to
grasp it at the exact same points. Several important questions remain: What is
the relative contribution of individual sensory modalities, such as touch and
vision, in enabling the compensatory modulation of fingertip force and position?
Are fingertip forces and positions represented separately by the central nervous
system? What are the mechanisms underlying their generalization to different
limbs or tasks? These questions represent a major gap in our understanding of
how the central nervous system learns, plans, and executes complex motor
behaviors. An understanding of how sensory modalities are seamlessly integrated
to enable the development and implementation of high-level internal
representations of hand-object interactions should inspire the design of more
dexterous robotic manipulators endowed with sensory feedback, improve
neuroprosthetics, and aid development of advanced bioengineering research tools
to quantify biological control mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this collaborative research is to elucidate the mechanisms responsible for
building high-level representations of hand-object interactions accounting for
end-effector position and force. The aims are 1) to quantify the mechanisms
underlying the weighting of sensorimotor integration during hand-object
interactions and 2) to determine the principles underlying generalization of a
learned hand-object interaction to a new context. The investigators will test
three hypotheses: 1) the weighting of different sensory modalities is time
dependent according to its role within a given task epoch; 2) co-variation
between end-effector force and position is a general feature of hand-object
interactions, independent of the effectors used (fingertip, whole hand, or two-
hands); and 3) generalization of learned hand-object interactions is sensitive
to the frame of reference in which they were learned.