* 1455540
* IDBR: TYPE A: Automated protein analysis: Gel-to-Mass Spectrometer Coupling Device
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Jonathan Minden, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2018
* USD 557,150.00

An award is made to Carnegie Mellon University to advance the field of protein
discovery for basic biological and medical research. Cells contain thousands of
different types of proteins. The goal of comparative proteomics is to discover
important proteins that differ between cells, tissues and organisms grown under
different conditions, with different genetic backgrounds, or at different stages
of development or disease. These "difference-proteins" represent what makes
these cells behave differently under different circumstances. Because cells
contain thousands of proteins, individual proteins are routinely separated from
one another in thin "Jello"-like slabs by a process called gel electrophoresis,
which allows us discover the difference-proteins. To figure out what genes
encode the proteins-of-interest, the proteins need to be removed from the gel
and injected into a mass spectrometer, a machine that very accurately determines
the identity of the protein. There is a severe bottleneck in moving proteins
from the gel to the mass spectrometer. This project will build a device to
greatly increases the speed and efficiency of this transfer process. A key
element of this project is to introduce undergraduate students to these complex,
highly technical experiments. The goal is to build the students' identity as
professional scientists. The unique feature of this program is that the students
work as an integrated team to work on collaborative projects. They progress from
trainees to trainers as they move through their academic careers. They learn
valuable team management and communication skills. All of the students
graduating from this group to date have gone onto STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a device
whose purpose is to couple the transfer of proteins out of electrophoresis gels,
to enzymatically digest the isolated proteins into peptides, and to the transfer
the resultant peptides into a mass spectrometer (MS) for protein identification.
We will develop an automated device for enhanced protein identification that
will enable the identification of proteins isolated from electrophoresis gels
down to 0.1 fmol (10-16 moles), representing a 100-fold improvement over
existing methods. In addition, this automated system will accelerate the entire
process from 24-48 hours per sample to about 1 hour. Thus enabling researchers
to perform their proteomics experiments with far greater sensitivity and speed.
This will be accomplished by developing a disposal tip for electrophoresing
proteins-of-interest out the electrophoresis gel. The isolated proteins will be
digested into peptides within the tip. The peptides will then be introduced into
the MS through a microfluidic device. This device will benefit any biologist
doing MS identification of proteins isolated from electrophoresis gels.