* 1455492
* Global Transport of Magnetic Energy in Active Regions on the Sun
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2018
* William Abbett, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 11/30/2018
* USD 430,804.00

Unstable magnetic structures in the atmosphere of the Sun are the root source of
eruptive events at the Sun that can cause severe perturbations in the near-Earth
space environment and upper atmosphere. Our society is becoming increasingly
dependent on technological assets that are vulnerable to these, so-called, space
weather events. Consequently, predicting the occurrence and detailed nature of
such events is of critical importance to minimizing their damage. Understanding
the creation and dynamic development of large-scale magnetically active regions
in the solar atmosphere is currently a topic of intense research in solar
physics. This project will perform a series of highly complex and
computationally demanding numerical simulations to illuminate the basic physical
processes and interactions at play. The investigation is the first to describe
the coupling between the solar interior and atmosphere over the entire range of
physical conditions and disparate spatial and temporal scales characteristic of
large active regions. It will do so by utilizing newly developed advanced
computational techniques and access to supercomputer resources. The further
development and test of this active region model constitute a critical step
towards establishing a predictive capability for solar events. The numerical
experiments performed in this study will generate data sets that are useful to
other ongoing efforts to model solar magnetic activity and the numerical
techniques have many additional applications, particularly in the field of
astrophysics. Finally, the work product will be made publicly available under an
OpenSource license allowing it to be used by other researchers or educators with
an interest in describing physical systems using a three-dimensional, Cartesian
or spherical, radiative magneto-hydro-dynamic model.

The principal scientific objective is to better understand both the coupling
between the solar interior and atmosphere as active regions emerge and evolve,
and the transport of magnetic energy over the range of physical conditions, and
the disparate spatial and temporal scales of the convection zone-to-corona
system. To address this objective, the newly developed spherical version of the
radiative-magneto-hydro-dynamic code RADMHD will be used to perform numerical
simulations of active region magnetic flux emergence through the upper
convection into the corona. The simulations are unique in that they will, for
the first time, produce self-consistent and self-contained models of the
emergence and evolution of large-scale active region magnetic fields spanning
the upper convection zone-to-corona in spherical geometry. Magnetic flux will be
introduced into the domain from below, using data from existing calculations of
magnetic flux emergence through the deep interior, and the transport of
electromagnetic energy throughout the domain will be studied as active region
magnetic fields interact with convective turbulence and make their way radially
outward into the model atmosphere. Three sets of numerical simulations of flux
emergence on three distinct spatial scales will be performed: (1) a single
active region, (2) two active regions in close proximity, and (3) two widely
separated active regions in a global magnetic environment.