* 1455086
* CAREER: Nonlinear Waves and Fluctuations in Jammed Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Justin Burton, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 01/31/2020
* USD 625,910.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;As a society, we are very good at putting things in
order: cars parked in designated rows in a garage, oranges piled neatly at the
local grocer, or papers stacked in perfect bundles on an office desk. We do
this, perhaps unconsciously, because ordered arrangement often saves the most
space. Similarly, out of all of the solid forms of matter, physicists perhaps
know the most about crystalline materials; the structural order makes them
easier to conceptualize and to define mathematically. However, many solid
materials can be rigid, yet have no well-defined order. These materials often
behave in peculiar ways in response to external stimuli. Consider a pile of sand
at the bottom of an hourglass. What seems stable enough can suddenly avalanche
upon the addition of a few extra grains. Or even a snarled traffic jam: what
determines the boundary between a flowing state and a rigid one? Our world is
full of similar examples where systems exist in a region near marginal
stability. This project aims to understand the ways in which a jammed, amorphous
solid can vibrate and fluctuate. By using "model" systems such as colloidal dust
suspended in a gaseous plasma, the principal investigator and research team can
visualize the individual motion of particles which constitute the near-
effortless structural rearrangements in amorphous systems. Not only do the
research activities shed light on the individual molecular motions common in
amorphous solids such as glasses, but they provide a connection between dynamics
and disorder in a broad range of physical systems. In parallel to this research
effort, the project includes the creation of an after-school science club at a
local elementary school in Dekalb county, which hosts the 3rd largest school
system and is the most diverse county in
Georgia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
nature and origin of mechanical rigidity in amorphous solids, a subject which
permeates many areas of condensed matter physics and materials science. Both
experiments and simulations are used to investigate the dynamics of low-
frequency vibrational modes and the role of geometric confinement in jammed and
glassy systems, where small changes in temperature or density result in an
enormous increase in the kinetic timescales of motion. The project addresses two
major topics, the first of which is the origin of low-frequency vibrational
modes in disordered solids. It has been known for 40 years that molecular
glasses have excess vibrational modes at low frequencies. An ideal model system
to study this phenomena is an under-damped ensemble of colloidal particles
suspended in a plasma, commonly known as a "dusty plasma". This system is used
to directly visualize and characterize the T = 0 vibrational modes in a way not
possible in molecular glasses. The second project addresses fluctuation-induced
forces in jammed systems. The jamming transition has many similarities to 2nd-
order phase transitions, such as a diverging length scale near the critical
point. By implementing geometric confinement to control the spectrum of force
chains that can exist near jamming, in analogy to critical Casimir forces in
thermal systems, the research team can quantify this length. The experiments use
soft, slippery, polymer hydrogel particles whose size can be varied with salt
concentration as a "sandbox" for studying the jamming transition in the absence
of particle friction. In parallel to both research efforts, the project includes
the creation of an after-school science club at a local elementary school in
Dekalb county, which hosts the 3rd largest school system and is the most diverse
county in Georgia.