* 1455136
* CAREER: Controlled Polycondensation Techniques as a Route to Novel Semiconducting Polymer Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Kevin Noonan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2021
* USD 650,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
of the Division of Chemistry, is funding Professor Kevin Noonan of Carnegie
Mellon University to develop new methods for the synthesis of organic conducting
polymers. Polymers are long chain organic molecules and are found in many facets
of everyday life, and the research team is developing new electronic materials
that are organic, meaning they are made from carbon-based molecules rather than
the more commonly used inorganic materials, such as those based on silicon.
Electrically conducting carbon-based (organic) molecules hold enormous promise
for realizing highly efficient, affordable, and broadly available electronic and
optical devices. The precision synthesis being developed requires advances in
catalyst design and a fundamental insight into how the different chemical steps
of the polymer chain growth occur. This work is expected to have broader
scientific impact on the science and technology of organic electronics, and will
also provide an interdisciplinary research experience for both undergraduate and
graduate students. The educational activities being pursued include the
integration of metal-based catalysis into required undergraduate laboratories.
Videos of the lab development are being made available online to aid in adoption
at other universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Noonan
is developing new methods for the controlled polymerization of donor-acceptor
building blocks. The incorporation of electron-accepting aromatic units into
polymer materials has led to great improvements in organic solar cell devices,
but variability in performance is often observed with these systems due to
differences in polymer batches. The aim of this research is to utilize
controlled polycondensation methods to polymerize highly functional aromatic
building blocks. Precision synthesis incorporating these units into polymers
will require advances in metal-ligand design, an understanding of how metals
interact with the growing polymer chain and, insight into how different
functional groups (i.e., ketones, esters, amides) can alter the chain-growth
reaction. A library of monomers is being developed and explored with efforts
towards enhanced mechanistic understanding of catalyst-transfer polycondensation
and rational design of new acceptor systems amenable to this controlled
polymerization approach.