* 1455084
* CAREER:  Empirical Studies of Electricity Markets: The Impacts of Renewable Energy
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Mar Reguant, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2022
* USD 457,800.00

Empirical Studies of Electricity Markets: The Impact of Renewable
Energy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Renewable power is expected to rise to 25% of gross
power generation worldwide in 2018, with a substantial increase in onshore wind
generation (IEA, 2013). The share of non-hydro renewable power, mainly wind and
solar power, is forecasted to increase to 8% of gross generation in 2018, up
from 4% in 2011 and 2% in 2006. One of the reasons for the fast growth in
renewable energy is the raising amount of public funds destined to promote
cleaner technologies. In the United States, the federal government and many
states have adopted several renewable energy policies to promote the development
of renewable energy.&lt;br/&gt;Recent economic studies argue that wind and solar
energy create new challenges (Joskow 2011; Borenstein 2012; Baker et al., 2013).
First, renewable energy is "intermittent"; it supplies electricity in a volatile
and non-controllable fashion. For example, wind speed, wind direction, cloud
cover, and other weather characteristics, affect wind and solar generation. As a
result, renewable energy generally cannot provide a stable and continuous amount
of electricity to a grid system. Second, it is difficult to exactly predict
production from renewable sources in advance, creating substantial uncertainty.
Uncertainty in production is particularly problematic in electricity markets
because electricity is not a commodity that can be easily stored, and therefore
the system operator needs to ensure that demand and supply are balanced at any
given time. As the share of renewable energy is growing, intermittency and
uncertainty are becoming a concern to regulators and market
participants.&lt;br/&gt;This research program will develop new theoretical and
empirical strategies to assess the impact of renewable energy. The goal is to
empirically quantify the impact of renewable energy by analyzing recent relevant
experiences in wind and solar integration. Given the practical relevance of this
effort, the principal investigator will develop open-access programs to enable
other researchers to work with the data.&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three
parts. First, the PI will construct a series of new datasets and the use of
methods of applied microeconomics to disentangle the effects of renewable energy
to the costs of electricity. This will allow the measurement of the ex-post
benefits and costs of renewable energy in a context were renewable penetration
is very large. These measurements can be an important complement to simulation
studies, which are typically performed ex-ante. For example, this study can help
identify in which dimensions simulation models work, and in which dimensions
they could be improved.&lt;br/&gt;Second, the PI will incorporate these data
into a series of research projects to test and evaluate the performance of
electricity markets at integrating renewable energy. In particular, the PI
proposes to develop a theoretical and empirical framework that will allow us to
understand how to better integrate renewable energy in a market-based
environment. These frameworks will rely on game-theoretic models of competition,
and will contribute to the literature in empirical industrial organization. The
project will emphasize the interaction of renewable producers with pre-existing
distortions in the market, such as market power or information externalities.
These effects have been typically overlooked in the literature, which is often
based on centralized planning models. However, evidence suggests that economic
incentives drive important daily "biases" in wind planning that we commonly
observe in electricity markets (for example, in California, New England or
Spain).&lt;br/&gt;Third, the PI will develop teaching materials to provide both
master and PhD students with the necessary tools to model and understand
electricity markets. Electricity is a key input to the production of goods and
services. However, students are oftentimes overwhelmed by the complexity of how
electricity markets are organized. These classes and materials will encourage
future work in this area, which is expected to become even more relevant as we
search for economic solutions to the energy challenge.