* 1455758
* MicroRNA Regulation of Neuronal Connectivity in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/16/2014,08/31/2019
* Chieh Chang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2019
* USD 426,600.00

Anatomical precision of inter-neuronal connections is essential for the normal
development and function of our brain. These connections are established through
the extensions of subcellular cable-like structures, called axons that form
synaptic connections with the dendrites of their target neurons. This process
involves sequential events, from sending out axonal cables to the correct
target, to docking of the cable terminal at the appropriate synaptic site on its
target dendrite. The transition of these events requires precise timing
mechanisms, but the timing devises used by neurons for making precise
connections are only partly understood. This research focuses on studying this
question in an experimental animal, called Caenorhabditis elegans, using a
combined genetic, molecular, and optic approach. C. elegans, a soil worm, is a
well-established experimental system for which its neuronal map is completely
known. A recent surprising discovery revealed existence of a timing device
involving microRNAs used in neurons to time when their connections actually form
during development of the C. elegans brain. The goal of this project is to
understand how this neuronal timer controls the precisely timed events required
for making specific connections between neurons. Genes that allow neurons to
connect with each other to form functional units are highly similar between
worms and humans. Thus, what the outcomes of this work in worms will likely be
relevant to understanding the human brain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All proposed
experiments will be carried out by postdoctoral fellows, graduate and
undergraduate students. This research will be an important component of their
training for careers in scientific disciplines. The PI's lab is currently one of
the only two labs in the greater Cincinnati area using C. elegans as an
experimental platform for discovery and thus is well-positioned to introduce
research on this model organism to students at many levels. The PI makes strong
efforts to recruit members of underrepresented groups and has demonstrated a
strong track record to disseminate scientific knowledge to broad audiences.
Thus, the proposed project integrates scientific discovery with broad promotion
of teaching, learning and training.