* 1455306
* CAREER: Chemical Genetic Dissection of Cell Signaling
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Chao Zhang, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 01/31/2020
* USD 650,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Chao Zhang from the University of Southern California to
develop a chemical approach to investigate the mechanism by which information is
transduced in cells. To adjust and adapt their behavior to external
environments, cells rely on intricate communication and control networks
comprised of thousands of proteins. While some of the proteins which participate
in these communication networks are very similar to each other in sequence and
structure, they frequently have non-overlapping functions. How proteins similar
in sequence and structure carry out distinct functions in the cell is poorly
understood, partly due to a lack of tools that can effectively distinguish
between these proteins. Dr. Zhang will work on a novel approach to address this
problem. The method is based on the introduction of a reactive feature into a
protein of interest, which would enable the selective binding to the protein of
small molecules that recognize this feature. The new method will be applied in
the study of the roles of closely-related proteins in cell signal transduction.
The graduate and undergraduate students who will work on this project will
receive an interdisciplinary training in diverse fields including synthetic
chemistry, biochemistry and cell biology. The research project will also be
related to an outreach program aimed at the education of students from high
schools and colleges on the mechanism and development of AIDS
drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a
chemical-genetic approach for the study of the cellular functions of closely-
related, cell-signaling proteins. The central premise is that a reactive
cysteine residue introduced in the target protein can serve as an affinity- and
specificity element, making possible the identification of potent and specific
small molecules that bind to the proteins. Building upon preliminary results
obtained at the University of Southern California, the researchers will test
this premise. First specific electrophilic inhibitors for a cysteine-mutant of
BRAF kinase will be identified first in vitro and then studied in vivo. The
isoform-specific inhibitors will be used to determine the roles of two RAF
isoforms in the cell cycle. The research is expected to provide new knowledge
about a fundamental cell-signaling pathway and to reveal novel functions of
vital signaling proteins.