* 1455357
* CAREER: Finessing Optical Frequency Combs for Direct Cooling and Trapping of Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Wesley Campbell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 01/31/2020
* USD 699,991.00

While lasers are typically thought of as heating objects they shine upon, they
have also come to be routinely used in scientific laboratories to make things
extremely cold. Laser cooling is capable of refrigerating vapors of atoms to
fractions of a degree above absolute zero, where their behavior is governed by
quantum physics. In the past three decades, scientists have used these cold
atomic vapors as a scientific platform for learning about this quantum regime,
and the field has given birth to applications such as atomic clocks and sensors.
The chemicals that can be investigated in this way, however, are limited to only
a handful by the laser colors available. Extending laser cooling to a broader
array of atoms and molecules is desirable for learning about these species and
how they interact at a level of detail not possible at room temperature. The
research team supported by this program will be studying the application of a
different type of laser to cool these difficult species. These so-called
"ultrafast" lasers can be made to emit an entire rainbow of colors at once, and
this program will study how to finesse these sources into laser cooling a wider
array of atoms and molecules. Successful extension of laser cooling to these
species is expected to find use in the next generation of sensors, computers,
and platforms for future science.

Direct laser cooling and trapping using optical frequency combs has the
potential to extend laser cooling to more diverse species of atoms and molecules
than are currently accessible. This potential arises due to their utility in
creating many optical frequencies in parallel in parts of the optical spectrum
where doing this with continuous-wave lasers is impractical, such as the deep
ultraviolet. The enhanced efficiency with which mode-locked lasers can drive
two-photon transitions or be converted to desired wavelengths via nonlinear
processes results in utilization of the full power in the comb even if only one
tooth is used, making this process efficient. Specifically, researchers
supported by this program will use picosecond mode-locked optical frequency
combs for direct laser cooling and magneto-optical trapping of atoms on two-
photon transitions (rubidium, nitrogen) and single-photon laser cooling of
diatomic molecules (Strontium Hydride). Time-dependent sweeps of the comb will
also be investigated as a method for beam slowing and trap capture that would be
applicable to a wider array of species than Zeeman slowing, such as diatomics.
Development of a widely-applicable technique for cooling of molecules would have
payoffs, including the ability to address significant unknowns in the fields of
dipolar quantum gases, quantum simulations, controlled chemistry, and quantum
computing.