* 1455838
* A Study for Improving Animal Welfare by Focusing on Scientific Publications on Research with Laboratory Animals that Include a Discussion of Pain Management Practice
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Lawrence Carbone, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 101,215.00

General Audience Summary

The project aims both to improve the life of laboratory animals, and to improve
the data that comes from experimentation on them. To accomplish these aims, the
investigator will analyze the reporting of pain management in research involving
animal subjects. The results of this analysis will be used to recommend
guidelines on improved data gathering and publication practices as integral
components of responsible use of animal subjects and improved animal welfare.
The results will also be incorporated into the investigator's teaching (of
veterinarians, laboratory technicians, and scientists) and they will be
presented in publications for lay audiences interested in science and in animal
welfare.

Technical Summary

The investigator and his team will weave together two strands of concern, data
quality and the ethical treatment of animals in animal research. They will
review 250 publications using animal subjects and analyze their description of
pain management. The resulting database will then serve as the basis for an
analysis of the varied approaches to pain management with the goal of
illuminating some of the most significant motivating factors in the researchers
reports (and underreports) of pain management. The goal of this project is to
expand the conversation regarding the role of pain management in animal
research. The formal analysis of published research with a focus on the
description of pain management practice will provide new insight to this
fundamental component of all animal research.