* 1455211
* CAREER: SusChem: Catalytic Selective Oxidation of Benzene and Related Aromatics with Earth-Abundant Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Cora MacBeth, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2017
* USD 175,608.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Christopher C. Scarborough of Emory University is developing
novel catalysts for oxidation reactions. The catalytic transformation generates
commodity chemicals at significantly diminished environmental and economic cost
compared to current industrial routes. The catalysts are novel cluster catalysts
derived from earth abundant elements and are designed to use oxygen from ambient
air to drive the oxidation reactions. Detailed studies correlating structure,
reactivity, and catalytic performance are ongoing with the long-term goal of
generating optimal catalysts for replacing energy-intensive industrial
processes, in particular the Hock Process that is currently employed in the
annual production of seven billion kilograms of phenol. This project seeks to
develop novel inorganic catalysts, built around Ca and Cu centers with the
potential to achieve arene oxidation, initially with hydrogen peroxide, and
eventually, if successful, with molecular oxygen. This approach to phenol
oxidation represents a fundamentally new direction, and as such, the Division
sees this as an important direction to explore from the point of view of
developing sustainable chemistry, in general, and new catalytic processses with
earth abundant metals, in particular. Professor Scarborough's outreach efforts
are designed to improve inclusion of underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines
and to inspire high-achieving students to pursue advanced studies in chemistry.
He has established a collaborative symposium for inorganic chemists in the
greater Atlanta area that brings together faculty, postdoctoral scholars, and
students from colleges and universities across the region, with participation
from primarily undergraduate institutions (including those serving under-
represented groups in STEM fields) and major research institutions. Professor
Scarborough is working to inspire young people to pursue advanced studies in
STEM disciplines through a mentorship program that trains gifted high school
students through laboratory internships as well as through participation in a
team that is revising the undergraduate chemical curriculum.