* 1455198
* CAREER: Significance of Cenozoic climate and environmental changes on the ecology and evolution of marsupials in Australia: A multi-proxy approach
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2023
* Larisa Grawe DeSantis, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 02/28/2023
* USD 511,706.00

New Title:&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Significance of climate and environmental changes
on the ecology and evolution of marsupials in Australia: evidence from the
analysis of fossil teeth over deep-time&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Assessing how mammals have responded to past climate and
environmental change can help clarify how living mammals may respond to current
climate change. As Australia is projected to experience more extreme drought and
intense precipitation events and extreme temperature increases by 2050, it is
critical to assess the effects of climate change and habitat modification on
living and fossil mammals. Throughout deep-time, landscapes in Australia have
change from primarily moist forests to more temperate and drier regions.
Increased aridity likely had profound impacts on the evolution and extinction of
marsupial mammals; however, critical work is needed to better understand the
ecology of marsupial mammals both today and in the past. Using an integrative
approach that combines data resulting from a diversity of analytical methods,
these data can clarify long-term responses to climate change and reveal
potential reasons as to why many mammals went extinct. This research will be
integrated with educational activities, including the involvement of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students (including gender and/or ethnic
minorities, with involvement of student from the Tennessee School for the
Blind). Through a combination of student research experiences that include
conducting primary research and digital outreach products, formal mentoring, and
a diversity of educational outreach programs, this CAREER research will be
broadly disseminated to both local and global
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of this CAREER research is to clarify the ecology and biology of marsupial
mammals in Australia during the Cenozoic to: (1) assess changes in environmental
and climatic conditions, including potential declines in forested environments;
and (2) clarify how mammals have responded to climate change, including
increased aridity since the Miocene and more pronounced aridification since ~350
thousand years ago. Through the integration of stable isotope analyses of fossil
tooth enamel, 3D dental microwear texture analysis, dental mesowear analysis,
and morphological analysis, the paleoecology and paleobiology of numerous
herbivorous and carnivorous mammals can be used to test a multitude of
hypotheses regarding the evolution and extinction of marsupial mammals in
Australia - including clarifying long-term responses to climate change. The
integration of long-term paleontological evidence with modern ecological studies
of extant macropodid responses to recent drought events, can synergistically
clarify biotic responses to aridification. The research will be integrated with
all proposed educational activities, including: 1) conducting primary research
projects as part of undergraduate and graduate coursework; 2) mentor high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students in both primary research and
educational outreach activities; 3) work with the Tennessee School for the Blind
to conduct primary mesowear research and engage in educational outreach, 4)
encourage females and/or underrepresented minorities to consider STEM careers
via participation in both the Girls and Science Camp at Vanderbilt University
and TWISTER at the Adventure Science Center, and 5) increase scientific literacy
and visibility of research activities and outcomes through the development of
docent carts and training at the Nashville Zoo and through public outreach
events at local venues.