* 1455099
* CAREER: Structure of Inorganic Nanoparticle Surface Interfaces Plus Multidisciplinary Nanochemistry Undergraduate Teaching Lab
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Christopher Ackerson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 507,053.00

With this CAREER Award, the Macromolecular Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division is funding Professor Christopher J. Ackerson
of Colorado State University to develop a better understanding of metal
nanoparticle surfaces. Metal nanoparticles have dimensions of 1 billionth of a
meter. At this small scale, metallic particles have properties that are
different than those of familiar bulk metals. Understanding what the surfaces of
nanoparticles look like, and how these surfaces behave pose special challenges
for scientific study. This project aims to produce an improved picture of metal
nanoparticle surfaces, with improved understanding of how these surfaces behave.
This improved understanding may yield dividends in applications of nanoparticles
for catalysis, medicines, and research enabling tools. The educational goal of
this project is to enhance undergraduate scientific education by developing a
nanoscience teaching laboratory course that covers the synthesis and
characterization of nanostructured materials. The majority of the class uses
methods that are not part of the undergraduate chemistry curriculum, but are
widely used in the research science setting. The broader impacts of the project
developing a gold nanoparticle outreach activity at the Fort Collins Museum of
Science and Discoverys annual 4th Grade Rendezvous, where Ackerson and team
members will relate the history of gold mining in Colorado to the modern
scientific study of gold chemistry.

The research objective of this project is to improve understanding of the
structure and reactivity of metal nanoparticle surfaces. The Ackerson group will
endeavor to establish the structural basis of ligand exchange on inorganic
nanoparticles, beginning with thiolate protected gold nanoparticles. The
research team will use the surprisingly low symmetry nanomolecules Au102(SR)44
and Au25(SR)18 as starting points to establish a mechanistic understanding of
ligand exchange. These studies are also directed at understanding weak ligand
binding and how multivalent weak ligands can create dynamic assemblies of
nanoclusters with emergent optical and spin properties. The broader impacts of
this work include the generation of atomisitic models of mixed ligand shells
that will underpin theory work done by others, as well as the dissemination of
materials and expertise into disciplinary labs in biological electron microscopy
and nano-biomedicine.