* 1455328
* OPUS: Intrinsic Dynamics of the Regional Community
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Robert Ricklefs, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 137,917.00

This research seeks to determine how three types of factors -- climate,
competitors, and disease -- influence where animals are found and how common
they are. Understanding the influence of these factors is important for
predicting how animals may react to climate change, introduced species, and
emerging diseases. Pathogens (organisms that cause disease) exert unique
influence because they are typically specialized on a few species, whereas the
impacts of competing species and climate change are typically felt by many
species. The interaction between pathogens and hosts (animals susceptible to
pathogens) can change over time. The populations of hosts can grow as they
become resistant to the pathogens and can shrink as the pathogens become more
deadly. These phases of expansion and contraction are likely important in
determining where species occur and may even promote the formation of new
species. Thus, investigating the dynamic interactions between hosts and
pathogens can help us understand major patterns of life on earth.

This research will result in a book-length synthesis of the factors that
determine patterns of distribution and abundance of species of birds. Unique
predictions from the potential effects of climate, competitors, and pathogens on
populations and their distributions will be tested using data on avian
populations obtained from the literature, a variety of databases from monitoring
programs, and data from the Principal Investigator's laboratory on the host and
geographic distribution of avian malaria parasites (Apicomplexa: Haemosporida).
Genetic analyses of populations of birds over their geographic distributions
around the Caribbean Basin will provide insight into the temporal dynamics of
population expansion and contraction and their role in species formation.
Results of these analyses, including a review and synthesis of the related
literature, will be described in a book that emphasizes the intrinsic dynamics
of ecological communities. Insights arising from the coevolutionary dynamics of
pathogens and their hosts have not been explored in either an evolutionary or
community context, and will provide a framework for interpreting patterns in
community diversity and understanding the responses of species to a changing
environment.