* 1455399
* Testing Adaptive Radiation Theory in Penstemon (Plantaginaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Andrea Wolfe, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2019
* USD 772,208.00

Many groups of animals and plants are very diverse and species rich but are
closely related to a group of organisms that are not diverse and are species
poor. Diversification can be a slow process or a rapid one, and the dynamics of
why some groups become very diverse with hundreds of species, while others have
just a few is an especially relevant field of study given a dynamically changing
environment. Adaptive radiation theory predicts an increase in speciation rates
resulting from adaptations in response to ecological opportunity, and that
speciation rates are initially high, but decrease as ecological niches fill or
extinction rates increase. Several iconic groups of animals have served as
testing grounds for adaptive radiation theory, but few plant studies have
focused on testing predictions of the theory. Penstemon (Plantaginaceae) is the
largest plant genus native to North America, with nearly 300 species, and is an
excellent example of a group that had undergone rapid diversification since the
Pleistocene. Penstemon, diversified rapidly, with hundreds of species, during
the Pleistocene when changing climatic conditions resulted in the melting of
massive ice sheets covering much of the northern hemisphere. This research will
study the effect of changing environment on organisms and how they adapt to
climatic niches through speciation. The project will integrate systematics and
bioinformatics training for graduate students and will result in open-source
bioinformatics tools and web-based biodiversity data for the general public,
scientists, and educators.

This project will generate next-generation sequencing data and develop novel
species trees methods to test adaptive radiation theory in Penstemon. The
project will generate next-generation targeted amplicon sequencing data from
multiple loci, however handling the large volumes of data associated with
collecting genomic data has been a technological challenge. To solve this issue
the project will develop new methods of analyses to handle data sets with many
taxa and large amounts of data and the project will develop a coalescent-based
approach for estimating a species tree from multi-locus data. The species tree
inferred will be used to examine rates of species diversification across the
genus, specifically elucidating whether clades exhibit patterns consistent with
those predicted by adaptive radiation theory. Morphological characters,
ecological habitats, seed germination requirements, incidence of hybridization,
and geographical data will be analyzed to determine if there are key innovations
and/or ecological opportunities that may explain differences in speciation rates
across the genus. Additionally, new methods of analyses will be developed for
detecting patterns of hybridization in a genus that has a rapid rate of
diversification.