* 1455647
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Re-articulating The Voice - Vocal Correction Technology in Design and Practice
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* William Marshall, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 14,994.00

General Audience Summary

This doctoral dissertation improvement grant supports historical and social
research on the design and use of vocal tuning and correcting technologies. Over
the last two decades, the practice of digitally correcting timing and intonation
in live or recorded voices has become commonplace. Widespread instances of
creative misuse have led to challenges of the standards used in determining what
counts as a well-tuned voice. This research will trace the emergence and
diffusion of novel modifications of the voice across a number of fields
including signal processing, electro-acoustics, speech pathology, recording
engineering, and computer music research. It will identify and analyze the
social stakes underlying the development of vocal correction standards in studio
technology. The social and historical study is both timely and important in
light of recent disruptions in the political economy of music production. Those
disruptions include the collapse of the major label business model in the
context of online file-sharing, the democratization of recording technology and
resulting contraction of studio recording infrastructure, the recasting of the
expertise of recording engineers, and the radically changing sound of popular
music in response to new modes of intervention. It will provide important
insights concerning these developments and their effects on the bodies and
livelihoods of performers, engineers, and listeners.

Technical Summary

The researcher will conduct semi-structured oral historical interviews with key
innovators and practitioners in fields associated with corrective vocal
processing, as well as analyses of archival material on the development of
antecedent technologies such as analog pitch-time compression, pitch estimation,
and cybernetic models of the speech-hearing system. These findings will be
incorporated with existing ethnographic data concerning the innovative and
improvisational use of vocal correction technologies in order to produce a
deeper account of their initial and ongoing development. Interview subjects will
be selected via chain-referral sampling, with the aim of tracing the movement of
knowledge and techniques between and within communities of practice. This
research will improve understanding of an increasingly wide-spread yet
critically unexamined area of technological practice by showing the social and
practical contexts that have shaped understandings about what the key aspects of
the voice are, how they are to be evaluated, and how best to correct them. It
will also contribute to conversations in constructionist sociology of technology
and embodied perception by investigating the construction of a key
infrastructure for representing and intervening in the speech-hearing system.