* 1455675
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human cultural and ecological influences on foraging and social relationships in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Joanna Lambert, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2016
* USD 25,200.00

To fully understand how humans impact the environment and influence species
change, it is necessary to apply a holistic perspective that views humans as
members of an ecological community and recognize that human impacts on the
environment are intimately tied to cultural beliefs. In this project, the
researchers examine how human attitudes and behavior influence foraging and
social relationships of chacma baboons that range through a mixed-use landscape
that has been shaped by human culture. People's attitudes towards and
interactions with the environment and animals are formed by a combination of
factors, including personal experience, demographic context, and cultural
knowledge transmission (e.g., parent to child). Variation in attitudes among
different people can either promote conflict or facilitate existence with the
baboons. When humans alter the environment, they impact food availability and
predation risk for baboons. The impact of predation risk on nonhuman primate
sociality, particularly risk stemming from human ecological activities and
cultural beliefs, could have significant consequences for baboon relationship
quality, reproduction, and survival. This research will support primate
conservation efforts and student mentoring and training. This project uses an
integrative methodology including ethnographic interview techniques,
phenological assessment, and baboon behavioral observations to examine the
influence of human attitudes and behavior on chacma baboon (Papio hamadryas
ursinus) predator sensitive foraging and social relationships. Results from this
research will inform our understanding of community ecology by providing data on
the complex interactions between humans and nonhuman primates and provide
insight into how people and nonhuman primates mutually influence each other's
social and ecological landscapes. The broader impacts of this research will
result in new collaborations, research methodology training and mentoring for
students and collaborators, and scientific data to support conservation and
management of human-baboon interactions.