* 1455818
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genomics of Speciation and Diversification in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2015,06/30/2016
* David Watts, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2016
* USD 17,892.00

Questions about how and why new species form are central to evolutionary biology
because speciation is the primary process responsible for our planet's amazing
variety of plants and animals, including our own species. This project explores
the genomic causes and consequences of speciation in the macaque (genus Macaca).
During the past 5 million years, this genus of monkeys has diversified rapidly
and radiated into at least 22 species occupying a wide range of environments and
habitats across northern Africa, Europe, and Asia. Given the wealth of data
already available on biological, morphological, and ecological variation among
macaques, the genomic data generated by this study will allow detailed analysis
of the links among genomic change, biological change, natural selection and
speciation in primates. Further, the diversification of Macaca resembles, and
was roughly contemporary with, that of the hominins, and therefore serves as a
comparative model for human evolution. Findings from this project will also
inform primate conservation efforts and medical models of human health and
disease, and the investigators are highly invested in student training and
public scientific outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this 18-month project, the
entire coding region of the genome will be sequenced (exome sequencing) for
species across the macaque genus. The data will allow identification of genomic
'islands' that show relatively high divergence among species and determine
whether a few large or many small islands drive genomic isolation. Examination
of sequence changes and variation in the copy number of protein-coding regions
of the genome will address the extent to which natural selection has shaped this
radiation. The project will be able to address links between micro- and
macroevolutionary processes, place this primate adaptive radiation within a
spatial and environmental context, and generate new hypotheses about speciation
in other clades such as hominins. The scientific and societal impact of this
project is amplified through extensive training and outreach efforts, as well as
sharing of data relevant to biomedical research and conservation.