* 1455470
* Dynamics of the Inner Radiation Belt Near the Trapping Limit
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Brian Kress, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 374,999.00

This proposal plans to investigate the processes that trap high-energy protons
in a torus called the inner radiation belt at altitudes of 1-3 Earth radii.
These trapped protons represent a hazard for satellites traveling through the
inner magnetosphere, damaging solar cells, sensors and integrated circuits,
exacerbated by the progress in miniaturization and digitization of satellite
electronics. The trapping of high-energy protons in the inner belt results
because the magnetic field configuration in this region is analogous to a
magnetic bottle. The energetic protons spiral along magnetic field lines towards
the magnetic poles, where the increase in magnetic field strength causes them to
be reflected. As a result they bounce back and forth between these "mirror
points" for long periods of time and are effectively trapped. For a dangerous
inner belt to form, high-energy protons must be supplied to the region of the
magnetic bottle. Protons that are created as a by-produce of collisions between
cosmic rays and atmospheric particles appear deep within the magnetosphere and
are immediately trapped in the magnetic bottle. Solar protons released in solar
flares or accelerated by interplanetary shock waves must penetrate into the
magnetic bubble (called the magnetosphere) that shields the Earth. These
energetic protons follow curved paths around interplanetary magnetic field lines
and if the radius of curvature is large enough they are able to penetrate into
the magnetosphere. The extent of this penetration is described by a parameter
called the geomagnetic cutoff. The interaction with the solar wind disturbs the
magnetic field continually changing the location of the geomagnetic cutoff.
During space storms, the geomagnetic cutoff moves earthward allowing solar
protons to penetrate deeper into the magnetosphere and as the activity calms,
the geomagnetic cutoff retreats leaving the protons behind in the magnetic
bottle. The formation of the inner belt depends on the dynamical interplay
between the changing location of the geomagnetic cutoff, the configuration of
the magnetic bottle, and the sources of energetic protons. The present proposal
uses models and observations to better understand this interplay. As a broader
impact, this work will contribute to the training of a graduate student and a
female postdoc at Dartmouth College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digging more deeply
into the details of the investigation, the proposal undertakes a numerical study
of the effects of solar wind driven changes in the Earth's magnetic field and
the resultant changes in the location of geomagnetic cutoffs on the growth and
decay of the inner radiation belt. Energetic protons in the inner belt are
followed backwards in time in these changing magnetic fields to determine
whether or not they originated in the un-trapped solar protons outside of
Earth's magnetosphere. Comparison of the models to changes in the trapped inner
belt proton flux during magnetic storms by spacecraft (most notably NASA's Van
Allen Probes) will be used as stringent tests of the model realism. The
increased sophistication of the numerical models along with the more detailed
observations by the Van Allen Probes are the new elements in this investigation
that are expected to produce advances in our understanding of the dynamics of
the inner radiation belt.