* 1455258
* CAREER: Nitrogen Biogeochemistry during Oceanic Anoxic Events
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2023
* Christopher Junium, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2023
* USD 524,435.00

CAREER: Nitrogen Biogeochemistry During Oceanic Anoxic Events
&lt;br/&gt;Christopher Junium, Syracuse University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How the
Earth and life have interacted through time is central to our understanding of
the Earth system, particularly during significant transitions such as mass
extinctions and intervals of rapid climate change. Oceanic Anoxic Events (OAEs)
were extraordinary disturbances in Earth's climatic and ecological balance,
initiated by rapid increases in the concentrations of greenhouse gases. The
Earth system responded to rapid warming by sequestering added carbon dioxide as
organic carbon rich shales deposited in anoxic marine environments. The key link
between greenhouse gas induced warming hand productivity is in how nutrients,
particularly nitrogen, phosphorus and biolimiting trace metals, are cycled and
redistributed in marine environments. Indeed, what we know about how the N and P
cycles respond during OAEs makes it clear that nutrient cycling was drastically
different during OAEs than for much of Earth's history. Over the course of the
coming centuries the extent of marine anoxia is likely to expand as a direct
result of warming and increased agricultural nutrient runoff. The future
trajectory of marine anoxia is best constrained by examining intervals of the
past, such as OAEs, where warming and the expansion of anoxia are linked and
life in the ocean was directly impacted. This study will address this research
challenge through development and application of nitrogen and carbon isotope
techniques focused on the Cretaceous, Cenomanian-Turonian OAE 2 and Syracuse-
region anoxic lakes as principal study areas. The educational component of this
project will involve undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented
groups in field research during the early stages of their STEM education.
Opportunities for hands-on research transcend what can be accomplished in the
Earth science classroom, and increases the likelihood that students will
continue in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will aim to
resolve outstanding issues that remain regarding how marine productivity and
Oceanic Anoxic Events are linked. The primary questions addressed in this study
are: Why are nitrogen isotope values anomalously low during Phanoerozoic OAEs'
How do marine food webs and ecology respond to rapid warming and expansion of
water-column anoxia? How does the depth of the oxic/anoxic transition (the
chemocline) affect the ecology of marine communities? This work will be achieved
by analyzing stable carbon and nitrogen isotopic composition of trace organic
constituents in the shells of marine macroinvertebrates, the tests of
foraminifera and organic microfossils. Field research and education will be
focused on the extraordinary, meromictic Fayetteville Green Lake, just a few
miles from the Syracuse University campus. Through collaboration with the
Upstate Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation and Onondaga Community
College we will host summer research interns through the duration of the project
and will run a short course that focuses on the geochemistry of Fayetteville
Green Lake for STEM students from Onondaga Community College.