* 1455368
* CAREER: "Geometry, topology and symmetry in strongly correlated materials"
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Rahul Roy, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2020
* USD 475,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education aimed to study the properties of certain materials called topological
phases. These are states of matter which unlike most others have physical
properties that are robust and are not affected by deformation and impurities.
This leads to the possibility that some topological phases can be profitably
used to store information and manipulate its flow in ways that are not possible
in today's computers. Most kinds of materials that might lend themselves to
these applications have so far been engineered in conditions which are quite
hard to achieve under ordinary conditions; they require very high magnetic
fields and very low temperatures.

The PI will perform theoretical research aimed to understand better the physics
of the materials that host topological phases of electrons and to explore the
conditions that most favor the realization of topological phases in the absence
of large magnetic fields. Robust phenomena similar to those that occur in
electronic topological phases are also predicted to occur in systems which are
acted on by a periodic external perturbation. The PI aims to understand these
better and to classify the types of behavior that are possible. This research
may contribute to eventual useful applications in metrology and in computation,
and may help develop and improve open source quantum many-body computer
programs. It could also lead to the development of new photonic devices.

The PI will work with existing outreach programs at University of California,
Los Angeles to introduce new experiments to the pre-collegiate curriculum. The
PI will tap into an existing "Research Experience for Undergraduates" program to
involve undergraduate students in research and build interest in physics among
female students through the Clare Booth Luce foundation. The PI will continue
development of course materials on topological phenomena and also help in
dissemination of new ideas through introductory talks and a journal club.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education
on strongly correlated systems focusing on the interplay among geometry,
symmetry and topology. Topological phases lie outside the conventional paradigm
of organizing phases by symmetry; nevertheless, they hold potential for enabling
new device technologies and realizing quantum computation by virtue of their
novel electronic properties. To advance understanding of topological phases, the
PI will focus on the following thrusts:

1.) Developing a unified theory of the fractional quantum Hall effect and
fractional Chern insulators. By incorporating aspects of the quantum geometry of
the single particle Hilbert space in these systems, the PI proposes to design
and develop new analytic and numerical tools which should aid the search for
more experimentally accessible realizations of quantum Hall phenomena.

2.) Investigating the role of crystal symmetries in topological phenomena. Using
topological arguments, the PI plans to improve constraints on symmetry enforced
degeneracies and complete the classification of short-range entangled
topological states with crystal symmetries.

3.) Exploring topological phenomena in periodically driven systems. The PI will
aim to characterize these topologically robust phenomena, study the effects of
interactions, the physical consequences of the classification, and connect these
with experiments.

The PI's education and outreach activities will promote diversity and improve
science education at the elementary, undergraduate and graduate levels. The PI
will work with existing outreach programs at the University of California, Los
Angeles to introduce new experiments to the pre-collegiate curriculum. The PI
will involve undergraduates in summer research programs through an existing
"Research Experience for Undergraduates" program and build interest in physics
among female students through the Clare Booth Luce foundation. The PI will
continue developing course materials on topological phenomena. New developments
in ongoing research will be disseminated through introductory talks and a
journal club.