* 1455365
* CAREER: SusChem: Multiscale Modeling for Fluid Separation Across Two-Dimensional Molecular Sieves and Student-Centered Course Reform
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Joel Eaves, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 03/31/2022
* USD 625,000.00

Joel Eaves of the University of Colorado at Boulder is funded by the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division to
develop fundamental principles, methods, and models for next-generation water
purification strategies. Water security is an emerging problem that necessitates
the development of new technologies for obtaining potable water. Novel,
atomically thin two-dimensional crystals show great promise in water
desalination applications, and computer simulations might be effective tools for
computational discovery in this endeavor. But with current gaps in both
knowledge and methodology, simulations are fundamentally limited in their
applicability and scope, and are unable to reliably describe how microscopic
motions and interactions connect to figures of merit for reverse osmosis. Eaves
and his research group address these gaps by developing concepts, theories, and
computational tools that significantly extend computational predictability and
utility in modeling and understanding fluid separation across porous two-
dimensional crystals. In addition, as part of this CAREER award, Eaves is
developing student-centered problem-based learning (PBL) pedagogies at the
graduate and undergraduate levels, respectively. PBL is a pedagogy that
facilitates active learning by engaging students with real world problems. Eaves
plans to develop several PBL modules using some of the computational tools
proposed as a virtual laboratory to encourage the kind of student-directed
questioning and curiosity that characterizes scientific research. Both the PBL
modules and evaluative tools developed will be disseminated over the
web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Porous two-dimensional crystals are the
ultimate limit in thin semipermeable membranes, but the same length scale
disparity that makes them attractive for reverse osmosis applications also makes
them challenging to describe using theory and simulation. Using a series of test
systems and models, the Eaves and coworkers study fluid separation and passage
through atomically thin two-dimensional crystals in regimes of low flow, where
near-equilibrium theories apply, and in regimes of high flow, where the system
is intrinsically out of equilibrium and current simulation methods are limited.
They are testing the hypothesis that the hydrophobicity of the membrane, which
can be altered in graphene by electrical, doping, has a measurable and
controllable effect on water throughput. In the near equilibrium case, the focus
is on a stochastic theory to relate water throughput and ion rejection to
spontaneous fluctuations at equilibrium and investigate the reaction coordinates
and transition states for water passage and ion rejection. Away from
equilibrium, Eaves is developing novel mesoscopic simulation methods that bridge
the gap between atomistic simulations and larger scale hydrodynamic and
collective variables. In addition, he plans to investigate two-dimensional
crystals for water desalination applications other than functionalized, porous
graphene.