* 1455867
* Standard Research Grant:  Public Interpretations of and Responses to Scientific Disputes
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Branden Johnson, Decision Science Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2019
* USD 381,318.00

Disputes are usually deemed fruitful to scientific process, but can confuse
publics who learn about and attend to such disputes as to "the truth,"
regardless of contenders' relative numbers or persuasive evidence, so that
disagreements among experts may individually or collectively undermine lay trust
in and support for science and scientists. Potential outcomes may include
misconstruing the true nature of a field's uncertainties, ignoring expert advice
on protecting oneself, or reducing support for use of science in polic ymaking
or education. This research systematically assesses across varied topics how
laypeople interpret, process, and are affected by scientific disputes: 1) How do
lay people interpret disagreements among scientists in terms of dispute origins
and cues to which of the contending sides is most credible?; 2) What beliefs,
attitudes, and behaviors about the disputed topic or science stem from these lay
interpretations?; and 3) How malleable are such interpretations and responses to
interventions (e.g., education on scientific process)? This project advances
theory in public understanding of science, including conditions that alter
public interpretations of and responses to expert disputes; helps scientists
tailor their messages to remove ambiguities, reduce errors among observers, and
enhance public discourse on science and science-based policy; and makes a novel
and substantial contribution to our understanding of the place of science in
contemporary society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research shows public samples
scenarios involving two-sided mass disputes on topics varying in public
salience, impacts, and familiarity, such as the nature of dark matter, desirable
dietary salt intake, or nanotechnology. Focus groups probe people's reactions to
sample scenarios, and their rationales for how they determine answers to such
questions as which side is "correct," and why experts might disagree. An
experiment then probes how people's responses (e.g., trust, intentions to comply
with expert advice, support for federal funding of science) vary according to
whether experts are split 50-50, are 99% in support of one side, or somewhere in
between, to determine if different proportions drive shifts from one response to
another. A survey probes the relative role of knowledge, values, self-interest,
history, and vote-counting (i.e., the proportion of support for a given side in
the dispute) as factors in lay beliefs about why scientific disputes occur
(e.g., self-interest, incompetence, inherent complexity of the topic), cues to
disputants' credibility (e.g., perceived uncertainty of the field, credentials,
salient value similarity, self-interest), and lay responses to disputes among
scientists. A subsequent experiment manipulates several of these factors to
further test the causal relationship between dispute attributes and public
responses.