* 1455517
* Collaborative Research: IDBR: TYPE A : The NANAPHID:  A novel aphid-like nanosensor network for real-time measurements of carbohydrates in live plant tissue
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Pamela Templer, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2018
* USD 33,810.00

An award is made to the University at Albany (SUNY) and several collaborating
organizations, including two other SUNY campuses (SUNY Polytechnic Institute and
SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry) and Boston University, to
construct and test an aphid-like nanobiosensor whose purpose is to enable real-
time monitoring of sugars in living plant tissues. Graduate and undergraduate
students will participate in the development of NANAPHID technology. The results
obtained in the process of NANAPHID development will be disseminated to the
community through lectures, student laboratory exercises and field trips. The
project will include a unique Website used to broadcast webinars addressing
NANAPHID design, its capabilities, and the latest research results. The NANAPHID
will make routine measurements of sugars that will benefit many biological
research communities including plant ecologists, investigators at NSF-funded
Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites, and scientists involved in a broad
range of experimental and modelling studies of terrestrial carbon cycling.
Applications in crop plant research and management are also promising. For
example, the sensor has the potential to replace refractometry as the method of
choice for volumetric analysis of sugars.

Non-structural carbohydrates (NSCs) are the currency of energy and growth
allocation within plants. These products of photosynthesis are circulated as
soluble sugars, whose concentrations are estimated using destructive analytical
techniques that have difficulties distinguishing sugars in plant sap from
associated cellular materials that get mixed into samples. NANAPHID technology
will make real-time in situ measurements of NSC using concentrations in stems,
roots, and branches and provide biologists with many new opportunities to
monitor critical changes in resource allocation in plants. Tracking these
changes in living plants is necessary for directly testing the effect of many
environmental changes such as climate, diseases, atmospheric nutrient loads, and
acidic deposition.