* 1455474
* IDBR: TYPE A - Development of an In situ Single-cell Mass Spectrometer for Mapping Small-molecule Expression in the Developing Embryo
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Sally Moody, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2018
* USD 395,854.00

An award is made to the George Washington University to develop a device that
will be able to measure the production of broad types of biomolecules in
multiple, individual cells of the developing embryo. This project will enhance
education by integrating biology and chemistry, and provide new investigative
tools to raise creative research opportunities in basic and applied research.
Development of the single-cell mass spectrometer will require regular
interactions between analytical chemists, biologists, mass spectrometrists, and
curators of data repositories, essentially creating an interdisciplinary
environment for students and researchers to accomplish training beyond the
classical curriculum in these disciplines. By demonstrating the device at the
George Washington University and discussing its design, performance, and use at
national conferences and publications, this work will broaden scientific
literacy and inform of the availability of the device to a broader base of
users. Data resulting from measurements on the production of biomolecules during
embryogenesis will be disseminated in publicly accessible data repositories,
providing a larger number of users with access to facilitate research and
education in cell and developmental biology and neuroscience. Notably, the
combination of these scientific and outreach elements, including participation
of local high-school students in the project, will enhance research and
education at the interface of biology, instrument development, and analytical
chemistry, providing interdisciplinary solutions to current and future
challenges in science and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterization of
biomolecular expression in single cells of the embryo will provide new insights
into basic biochemical mechanisms that orchestrate embryonic development, the
complex suite of processes by which a fertilized egg gives rise to an entire,
fully functioning organism such as the frog, fish, or human. Although it has
been technologically feasible to measure genes and transcripts in single
embryonic cells, a lack of analytical technology has so far hindered the
characterization of proteins, peptides, and metabolites in single embryonic
cells. This project will provide one such technological innovation, a single-
cell mass spectrometer, by combining traditional tools in cell and developmental
biology and neuroscience with next-generation instrumentation from bioanalytical
chemistry. Specifically, optical microscopy, microinjection, microcapillary
electrophoresis, and nanoelectrospray ionization will be adapted to high-
resolution tandem mass spectrometry to determine the production of biomolecules,
proteins to metabolites, in multiple cells of the embryo using the frog Xenopus
laevis and zebrafish as models. The instrument will be developed in
collaboration with leading mass spectrometric industry, biologists, and
students, and will be tested by biologists and students working with these
important developmental models.