* 1455859
* Private Digital Currencies and Closed Payment Communities: Law, Regulation and Financial Exclusion After Bitcoin
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* William Maurer, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2020
* USD 319,705.00

Bitcoin is the most famous of several new online, cryptographic currency or
electronic payment system experiments based on an open-source database protocol
referred to as a blockchain. The blockchain permits transactions to take place
without a central authority, relying instead on a decentralized network of peers
verifying and authorizing them. It permits "trust" without trusted third-parties
or mediators. In addition, Bitcoin and systems like it are membership-based
means of value transfer and only work if people actively join them. This project
examines new forms of private digital currency, exploring shifts in blockchain-
based systems, and how innovators and regulators have participated in, advanced,
and challenged them. The research examines how a new cadre of corporate and
regulatory professionals are creating, understanding, monitoring, and regulating
blockchain-based experiments in payment and in legal services. Studying the
interface between law and technology, this research is important not just for
what it will reveal about law and regulation in the context of rapid
technological change. It is also important because innovations with the bitcoin
protocol raise broad questions about the changing nature of money, property, and
law, and throw open for debate questions lawmakers thought settled at the end of
the 19th century about the state's role in issuing money and the nature of
contract. Broader impacts include training of graduate students and the creation
and opening of a public-facing portal to a database and archive of compiled
regulatory, policy, and industry documents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As bitcoin-
like systems move into the domain of law to create law-like substitutes, this
research is designed to answer several questions. Do new digital currencies
create new social and economic exclusions? What do these innovations say about
changing understandings of money and law? What happens when new corporate
entrants into payment imagine they are innovating in money, not just its
transmission, and seek to "disrupt" not just payment, but professions like
notaries and escrow agents? How do regulators respond to concomitant challenges
to the public interest in payment and in law itself? The principal research
activities are interviews with lawyers, regulators, and payments industry
professionals, participant-observation at industry conferences, and code
walkthroughs during which the researcher will follow programmers as they build
new functionality into the blockchain.