* 1455611
* Discovery and analysis of Aphelidea and Rozella species of the Cryptomycota phylum
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Martha Powell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 02/28/2019
* USD 494,487.00

The Cryptomycota is a recently discovered phylum of organisms that parasitize
algae and fungi hosts. As first described, the Cryptomycota included only two
organisms of known morphologies and over 40 other organisms known only from DNA
sequences collected from freshwater, sediments and soils, which suggested that
this enigmatic group might be genetically as diverse as the whole Kingdom Fungi.
New molecular techniques have the power to identify novel organisms such as
these in the environment but the challenge to link the DNA data with physical
organisms remains. This project puts a face on these environmental molecular
markers with the isolation, culture and structural and molecular
characterization of these seemingly ubiquitous, but poorly known, organisms. The
known organisms have characteristics of fungi and protists and the project will
resolve the intriguing question whether these parasites are fungi or protists.
Because Cryptomycota have recently been identified as primary pests of
commercially grown algae for production of biofuel, food and pharmaceuticals,
this research is important to development of protection strategies for these
industries. With greater knowledge of Cryptomycota diversity, their
environmental impacts on host populations, food webs, and sustainability of life
in nature can be explored. This project will train graduate students and
undergraduate students in methods to collect, observe, and describe
Cryptomycota, providing the next generation of experts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to discover and culture described and
new species of Cryptomycota, characterizing them with developmental,
ultrastructural and molecular features. Algal and zoosporic fungal hosts of
Cryptomycota will be collected from diverse habitats in eastern and southern
United States. It is hypothesized that motile cells of Cryptomycota harbor
ultrastructural architectural patterns in organellar arrangements which reflect
evolutionary relationships. Analyses of seven genes will reveal phylogenetic
relationships and permit mapping of host, nutritional and ultrastructural
character state evolution, thereby generating hypotheses about early fungal
evolution and divergence of Cryptomycota from protists and animals. A
Cryptomycota website will include images, taxonomic summaries, interactive
identification keys, and applications of ultrastructural and molecular
characters in phylogenetic analyses, making this group more tractable for future
studies. The research is transformative because cultures of Cryptomycota will be
available to the community for even more extensive research. Undergraduate
students in freshman biology will be given an authentic research experience
making field collections of host organisms, screening for presence of
Cryptomycota endoparasites, and characterizing with gene sequences, stimulating
students' interest in research careers in biodiversity and conservation.