* 1455756
* Language Variation and Historical Change in Sign Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Ted Supalla, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 09/30/2022
* USD 583,747.00

A central question in the study of signed and spoken languages is where
languages display universal properties, and where the modalities of production
and perception alter the structure and processing of language. Signed languages
arise wherever there are profoundly deaf individuals who communicate using
vision and gesture. It has been thought that, due to their modality, signed
languages display much simultaneous structure (compared with the predominantly
sequential structure of spoken languages). However, the present research shows
striking similarities between signed and spoken languages in their earliest
forms and also in their processes of historical change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the U.S., the sign language used throughout the Deaf community is American Sign
Language (ASL), a natural language that began in 1817 when the first school for
the deaf was formed and brought deaf adults and children together. Prior NSF
funding supported transcribing films of Early ASL from 1910 to 1921 (some of the
earliest films of ASL in existence); making these linguistic materials publicly
available as a Historical Sign Language Database (HSLDB); and analyzing the
structure and change in Early ASL from these films through modern ASL in 3
generations of contemporary signers. Historical materials from Old French Sign
Language (LSF), the antecedent of many ASL forms, have also been collected. This
research has shown that Early ASL and Old LSF were highly sequential, with
separate words in phrases as the antecedents of many modern simultaneous word
forms. These findings suggest that the principles of historical change in spoken
languages, including the common shift from separate words to complex morphology,
apply to signed languages as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the upcoming funding
period, the researchers will continue collecting and analyzing historical and
modern linguistic data in American and French native signers, and will expand
their work to include Japanese Sign Language, an unrelated sign language, to
examine the universality of these linguistic processes. The research team is
headed by a principal investigator who is a Deaf native signer of ASL and who
will train Deaf native users of American, French, and Japanese Sign Language to
conduct linguistic research, contributing to the diversity and span of research
in cognitive science and linguistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is the
first major historical linguistic work on lexicon, syntax, and morphology in ASL
and French Sign Language during the full course of their 250-year history, and
also comparing them to Japanese Sign Language (JSL) historical lexicon and
grammar, a language unrelated to ASL and LSF. The specific aims are to expand
data on modern ASL, by adding forms and phonological notation and by collecting
data on variation and change in three generations of modern ASL users; to expand
data on early and contemporary LSF; and to begin historical and contemporary
work on JSL, a mature language with 150 years of history. This project will
provide data and infrastructure for comparative work on sign language structure,
variation and historical change, and typology. All materials, including
linguistic transcription and coding, will be available in a digital format so
that they are preserved and available to other researchers.