* 1455264
* CAREER: Study of Emergent Ground States and Bosonic Excitations in Materials with Strong Spin-Lattice Coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Gregory MacDougall, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 612,631.00

*Non-technical Abstract*&lt;br/&gt;Our current understanding of materials is
that they are a rigid lattice of atomic nuclei, which can vibrate, but largely
serve as an impartial backdrop for the motion and spinning of charged electrons.
In materials where the vibrations of nuclei strongly interact with the electron
spins, a number of novel behaviors have been recently reported, which are poorly
understood but potentially useful for future electronic devices and energy
technologies. The current project seeks to understand these behaviors through
the identification of key model systems in which the effects of strong spin-
lattice coupling are prominent and can be studied without additional
complicating factors. Powders and large single crystals of novel materials are
being prepared using equipment and expertise at the University of Illinois, and
atomic motion and magnetic properties are subsequently being studied using
cutting edge facilities at national laboratories. The research team is focusing
specifically on behaviors deemed most promising from preliminary explorations.
This work is pertinent to the understanding and control of common material
properties and will help further the development of a number of new
technologies. A major theme of this project is also to drive new states of
matter, which might have untold useful or interesting properties. These
activities provide an ideal environment for the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in the methods of materials production and
characterization, which is in line with current national priorities. The
principal investigator is also developing a graduate course on experimental
methods for studying materials at the University of Illinois, to provide greater
understanding for the next generation of scientists of research opportunities
open to them and to foster collaboration among student researchers. Through a
series of public lectures and online exchanges, the principal investigator is
also helping to educate the general populace about the science of materials,
magnetism and modern experimental probes of
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*Technical Abstract*&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks
to identify, characterize and control the magnetic properties of materials
containing a strong coupling between lattice and spin degrees-of-freedom. A
joint materials development and experimental program is being pursued, where
specific materials strategies will be employed to synthesize model spin-lattice
coupled systems and to grow crystals, and subsequently to study them via neutron
scattering and muon spin rotation using facilities at national laboratories. To
maximize impact, the proposal focuses on four specific areas deemed promising
from preliminary work. These include driving transitions to novel magnetic
ground states with field, doping or pressure; investigating phase separation and
long length-scale ordering of domains in materials; exploring how spin-lattice
coupling modifies collective excitations; and creating new superconductors
having strong coupling between spin and orbit angular momentum. Spin-lattice
coupling effects are relevant to the discussion of a wide range of physics
topics, including colossal response functions, multiferroism, superconductivity,
and thermal conductivity. The current work will further discussion of these
phenomena through the identification and development of model materials, where
spin-lattice coupling effects can be isolated, controlled and studied directly.
By studying spin-lattice coupling effects in isolation, this work will clarify
the discussion and understanding of its role in more complex material systems.