* 1455629
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Brain reorganization in human evolution: Connecting structural and functional changes in the inferior parietal lobe
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Laura Reyes, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2017
* USD 22,021.00

During human evolution there have been large- and small-scale changes in
underlying anatomical structures of the brain. Studying this reorganization is
important for understanding the link between structure and function in the
brain, and how this relationship may affect cognition and behavior. This project
will look at changes in the interconnectedness and anatomy of a region of the
brain related to planning and carrying out complex tool making, in humans and a
number of non-human primate species. The findings will advance our scientific
knowledge about how distinctive human behaviors originated and developed,
ultimately contributing to our overall understanding of the origins of modern
human behavior and culture. In addition, the project will support a female
graduate student in the STEM sciences, provide science outreach to the public,
and potentially inform future research on degenerative neurological
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The parietal region of the brain, particularly
the inferior parietal lobe (IPL), experienced reorganization in the human
lineage based on studies of fossil endocasts and neuroimaging scans. The IPL is
particularly active in observing, planning and executing tool-use and skilled
tool-making. The proposed project will integrate histological analyses of IPL
microanatomy and a neuroimaging-based study of function and connectivity between
the IPL and other brain regions to investigate reorganization. These methods
will be applied consistently across a sample of primate species and humans to
address reorganization of the IPL in human evolution. Such an integrative
approach will reveal the anatomy of the human and non-human primate IPL and will
show how the IPL operates within large-scale functional networks. This study
will provide a detailed investigation of human-specific changes in brain
evolution within a comparative and evolutionary framework, and can aid in
answering questions about the origins of distinctive human behaviors, such as
complex tool-making and symbolic behaviors. Thus, studying patterns of brain
reorganization in the hominin lineage ultimately contributes to our overall
understanding of the origins of human behavior and culture.