* 1455261
* CAREER: Realizing the ultrastrong coupling regime of quantum electrodynamics using high-impedance Josephson superconducting circuits
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Vladimir Manucharyan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 539,600.00

Non-technical. Quantum electrodynamics (QED) is the theory that describes how
light and matter interact. In natural systems the strength of this interaction
is fixed by the fine structure constant which is a fundamental natural constant.
The fine structure constant is much less than one so that light and matter
interact only weakly. Recently, using artificial atoms, such as quantum dots,
systems have been fabricated where the effective fine structure constant is
controlled by the material properties. This opens the exciting possibility of
making the fine structure constant different than occurs in nature - opening up
new regimes of physics to explore. This project seeks to create artificial atoms
out of superconducting junctions where the fine structure constant can be
greater than one. This will shed light on fundamental questions of light-matter
interaction. At the same time these circuits can be used to form fault tolerant
qubits for quantum computing. This project will provide training to graduate and
undergraduate students in state-of-the-art experimental techniques such as
nanofabrication, low-temperature measurements, and quantum control of
superconducting qubits. The PI will also develop a novel new course on quantum
mechanics based on an analogy with electrical circuits as well as participating
in outreach activities to the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical.
This project aims at an experimental implementation of quantum electrodynamics
(QED) in the ultrastrong coupling regime. Ultra-strong QED is a situation where
a single atom is coupled to a vacuum quantum field with an effective fine
structure constant exceeding a unity. Our approach is to couple superconducting
qubits (artificial atoms) to very high-impedance microwaves (fields), with the
impedance approaching the value of resistance quantum. Such large impedances can
be achieved by exciting microwaves inside either an array of Josephson tunnel
junctions or a highly disordered superconducting film. The effective fine
structure constant of resonators is a material property, because the "magnetic"
energy of the radio-frequency (RF) field is created predominantly due to the
inertia of the moving Cooper pairs rather than due to stressing the vacuum with
a magnetic field. Novel effects, associated with the ultrastrong light-matter
interaction regime, such as spontaneous polarization of vacuum, superradiance
quantum phase transitions, and critical behavior in the spin-boson physics, will
be explored using the powerful arsenal of superconducting qubit techniques.