* 1455983
* BCSP: The Emergence of Inactivity: Adaptive Task Allocation in Complex Distributed Systems, or Why Are There so Many Lazy Ants?
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Anna Dornhaus, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2020
* USD 695,000.00

One of the most important, perhaps the biggest unanswered question in biology is
how a collection of relatively simple parts can form structures that are
organized, effective and often beautiful. This occurs in the origin of life,
where clusters of molecules form cells; in development, where initially
unspecialized cells form an embryo; and in many other systems, including insect
colonies, where an aggregation of small insects generates adaptive group
behavior. The same phenomenon also affects humans more directly, where computer
clusters, power grids, and people in organizations display unforeseen group-
level behavior. This project specifically investigates the behavioral rules that
individual units in such groups may use to divide up tasks. Division of labor
plays an important role in many collective systems and a systematic
understanding of how best to achieve it is lacking. This project will make
substantive contributions to the fields of Animal Behavior, Computer Science and
Engineering. Ants will be used as an empirical study system and mathematical
models will be developed to generalize findings to a variety of questions,
particularly in engineering. Results from this project will be used as a
stepping-stone to applied software development. An interdisciplinary teaching
program will be developed to train a new generation of biologists and engineers
who can make use of insights from both of these fields. Short film documentaries
and other teaching tools will engage the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide both detailed
empirical data on how social insect colonies generate an efficient and robust
division of labor and a broader theoretical framework that will deliver insights
on optimized, self-organized task allocation that applies widely across complex
systems. Individually marked ants and a semi-automated tracking system will
facilitate comprehensive data collection. For example, do fluctuations in the
need for work drive changing activity levels? This will show whether the many
apparently inactive ants found in colonies are necessary reserves and how
flexible task allocation strategies are. The effect of task allocation on insect
colony fitness will be directly measured. The development models will be used to
predict how inactivity may result from particular strategies and how alternative
strategies perform in terms of accuracy, flexibility, robustness and
specialization. In distributed computing theory, this work will push the
envelope by providing more powerful models that take into account a combination
of discrete, continuous, dynamic and probabilistic behavior. The investigators
will also hold an annual workshop on Biological Distributed Algorithms, bringing
together top researchers in biology, computing and robotics.