* 1455850
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Smart Home Networking via NDN
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Lixia Zhang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2016
* USD 124,893.00

With the fast growth of smart appliances and smart devices at home, the concept
of smart home has come a long way in recent years. As a result, home networking
is transforming from the connection of one or at most a few user computers using
the simplest local area network to one of the most heterogeneous networks
supporting intelligent applications. For example, in recent years, many home
appliances and devices are equipped with networking capabilities that enable
remote management, such as power plugs that can be remotely turned on and off,
thermostats that can be remotely adjusted, door locks that allow keyless entry,
and surveillance systems for remote monitoring. These and other changes, such as
wearable devices that may frequently move in and out of the home, are likely to
revolutionize how we live. This emerging smart home environment, however, poses
serious challenges to conventional TCP/IP based technologies because smart home
networking has fundamentally different characteristics that are not seen from
conventional IP networks including, for example, the absence of an operator,
high degrees of device heterogeneity, and a need for strong security, privacy,
minimal configuration, and self-management. Until recently advances in smart
home networking and home Internet of Things have been largely stove-pipe
solutions with little focus on interoperability across products or integration
in design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Named Data Networking architecture (NDN),
with its data-centric approach, includes benefits such as address independence,
built-in security, and in-network storage and shows great potential to address
the unique challenges of home networking. This project aims to formulate
important research questions about smart home networking, explore NDN's unique
advantages in addressing the challenges, and identify directions for potential
solutions. The plan to achieve these goals is by experimenting with two
prototype application systems -- home lighting control and home video
surveillance -- trying out different designs, and eventually generalizing what
is learned to other applications. Using the two prototype systems, the project
will explore approaches for device bootstrapping, device actuation, data
publishing and consuming, network management, and a gateway to the public
Internet. The results will be used to feedback into the NDN architectural design
as well. If successful, this effort could pave the way towards exciting, novel
solutions to smart home networking and application
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops viable, long-term
solutions to an emerging network environment that has been recognized by many
industry experts. Since there is no mature IP-based solution on the market yet,
an NDN-based solution could have significant impact. If successful this research
might also provide a path for NDN deployment. The deployment of home networks
does not require coordination among external networks, and because individuals
can deploy NDN (and enjoy its benefits) in their homes even if their neighbors
do not, individuals can potentially provide a realistic, grassroots deployment
scenario for NDN rollout.