* 1455348
* CAREER: Olefin Polymerization Catalysts with Ligands Featuring Weakly Coordinating Carborane Anions
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Vincent Lavallo, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2020
* USD 675,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Vincent Lavallo of the University of California at Riverside
is developing new catalysts capable of converting olefin feedstocks into
polymers with distinct and desirable properties. Polymers are long chain organic
molecules and are found in many facets of everyday life that utilize plastics,
including food packaging, structural materials for automotive and aerospace
transportation, and lightweight electronic devices. The preparation of useful
polymers, such as plastics, requires the utilization of a catalyst to facilitate
the chain building process and control the physical properties of the ensuing
material. Professor Lavallo is developing catalysts that contain a novel
collection of boron and carbon atoms called a carborane anion, which is
predicted to bestow unique properties upon the catalysts. Undergraduate and
graduate students in the Chemistry Department at the University of California
Riverside are being mentored in this program and are participating in the
research. Professor Lavallo is also developing a mentorship program for high
school students from economically disadvantaged backgrounds. In the summer
months, these high school students will participate in the proposed research at
UCR, and during the academic year, a novel curriculum will be implemented at the
high school, allowing a large number of students to directly engage in the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Lavallo is
synthesizing and studying phosphine and N-heterocyclic carbene ligands
containing icosahedral carborane anion substituents. Icosahedral carborane
anions are far more weakly coordinating, less basic, and larger than sulfonates
(palladium complexes of phosphine-sulfonates are an unusual family of olefin
polymerization catalysts that produce mostly linear polyethylene copolymers),
and these properties should favor the formation of the trans-pi-complexes
necessary for catalysis and also inhibit beta-elimination. The objective is to
produce olefin polymerization catalysts that display enhanced activity,
functional group tolerance, and produce polymers with greater uniformity and
molecular weight compared to state-of-the-art systems. The broader impacts of
the project pertain to the potential uses of phosphine and N-heterocyclic
carbene ligands containing icosahedral carborane anion substituents and the
planned educational activities targeted towards high school students from
economically disadvantaged backgrounds.