* 1455349
* CAREER: Cyber-Knowledge Infrastructure for Geospatial Data
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Wenwen Li, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2022
* USD 449,859.00

Geospatial cyberinfrastructure is a research area that focuses on geospatial
data and the need to provide more effective organization, integration,
computation, and visualization for widely distributed geospatial resources
scattered across cyberspace. This CAREER award will support a promising early-
career investigator's efforts to build key theories and techniques of a cyber-
knowledge infrastructure that enhances access, search, and reasoning
capabilities for using geospatial data across the ever-expanding Web. Current
data search tools are built primarily using standard techniques derived from
computer science and ignore the inherent properties of geospatial data, such as
location. The investigator will employ an innovative suite of algorithms to
answer complex spatiotemporal questions using the best available geospatial
data. The research activities to be conducted will transform traditional
cyberinfrastructure from a data infrastructure to a knowledge infrastructure
with core intelligent data access, search, and reasoning elements. The project
will address a critical need for data-access sustainability and will increase
research capabilities across a broad range of scientific and computer
information domains. Project results and methods will help develop more
intelligent cyberinfrastructure to support data and knowledge discovery in a
variety of data-intensive applications. The investigator will integrate her
research with community-driven geospatial cyberinfrastructure education and
outreach activities, and she will make algorithms and other materials developed
during the course of this project available via open source
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program to be pursued by this
investigator will build a cyber-knowledge infrastructure that will effectively
resolve fundamental issues residing in geospatial data access, discovery, and
knowledge synthesis. The project will integrate three innovative approaches to
support intelligent knowledge discovery: (1) a large-scale web-mining technique;
(2) a hybrid semantic search technique that combines a top-down ontological
approaches and a bottom-up data-mining approach; and (3) an intelligent
spatiotemporal reasoning system that enables high resolution queries. The
successful completion of the project will yield a variety of geospatial data,
analytic tools, and workflows that can be readily accessible and reused in order
to answer spatiotemporal questions in a timely manner as well as to reproduce
and validate scientific results in real time. The project will help foster
coupled spatial- and computational-thinking skills for future researchers in
cyberinfrastructure and data science through scientific community-driven
curriculum development.