* 1455455
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impacts of maternal environment on milk immunofactors and infant immune system development
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Katherine Hinde, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2018
* USD 14,053.00

In addition to being an infant's first food, human breast milk is medicine.
Molecules in milk can protect infants from infectious illness. Recent
technological advances now allow scientists to fully explore the wide range of
molecules contained in mother's milk. To better understand the sources of
variation in the immune protection provided by breast milk, this project will
investigate how the mother's current and childhood environments impact the
composition of key immune molecules in her milk. This research will also explore
how the variation of these milk molecules might influence infant immune system
development and consider how the immune system has changed during human
evolution. This research has direct benefits to society, including informing
parent's infant-feeding decisions, donor milk bank policies, and infant formula
composition. This work will also create opportunities for training women and
under-represented groups in science through established programs in the US and
Poland.

Monthly milk samples will be collected from mothers at the Mogielica Human
Ecology Study Site in Poland. This study location encompasses villages with
varying levels of participation in traditional agriculture and a cash economy,
leading to a unique diversity of environments in a small geographic area. The
milk samples will be analyzed in the United States using mass spectrometry for
selected immune molecules. Milk composition will then be compared to detailed
health history interviews to determine what aspects of the maternal environment
most influence levels of immune factors in the milk. To explore consequences of
variation in milk composition for the infant, milk composition will be compared
to salivary measures of the infant's immune function. This study is unique in
its longitudinal design, which will allow the researchers to contextualize
variation in milk composition and infant immune function in relation to the
environment. This study will make a substantial contribution to the existing
biological anthropology literature by expanding our knowledge of how immune
factors secreted in milk relate to childhood and current exposures in the
maternal environment. These findings not only have public health implications
but are important for understanding physiological adaptations to human
evolutionary transitions.