* 1455353
* CAREER: Revealing fluorescence mechanisms of emerging fluorescent protein biosensors using femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Chong Fang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 01/31/2021
* USD 650,000.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program and the Chemical
Structure and Dynamics-A Program in the Chemistry Division are funding Dr. Chong
Fang from Oregon State University to study the fluorescence mechanisms of
emerging fluorescent protein biosensors. These colorful biomolecules originally
derived from jellyfish and later from reef corals have revolutionized cellular
imaging and molecular biology for almost two decades. However, these biosensors
still suffer from drawbacks such as limited photostability, brightness,
penetration depth, and color contrast, which hinder their further applications
in physical and life sciences. The bottleneck in improving their functionality
is the very limited information available about the underlying structural
dynamics of fluorescent proteins, which involve a highly dynamic chromophore in
the center of the protein pocket. This pursuit will provide graduate and
undergraduate students as well as postdoctoral scholars the opportunity to
acquire specialized training in ultrafast spectroscopy, particularly in the
molecular vibrational domain, and in biophysical chemistry. The new femtosecond
Raman spectroscopic method for fluorescent protein studies, followed by
curriculum development and outreach workshops to impact young minds, will yield
molecular "movies" showing how the embedded chromophore responds to light and
choreographs the departure of a single proton or the swing of an aromatic ring.
This project will also provide integrated educational programs to create an
interactive and sustainable culture of engagement for STEM learners.

The scientific focus of the research is to elucidate the chromophore motions
that control the fluorescence characteristics of proteins related to Green
Fluorescent Proteins (GFPs) and of biosensors using newly developed, high
resolution, and broadly tunable femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopic
techniques. The structural evolution of the photoexcited chromophore will be
monitored by transient vibrational peaks starting from time zero, quantified by
kinetic analysis yielding crucial time constants and accompanied by
computational chemistry to map atomic trajectories. The functional relevance of
low-frequency skeletal motions along the multidimensional reaction coordinate,
especially on the subpicosecond timescale, will be studied. Currently a phenolic
ring wagging motion in wild-type GFP has been found to gate excited state proton
transfer; the new experiments will make possible the systematic evaluation of
governing factors for the chromophore conformational dynamics and emission
outcomes in emerging GFP-related biosensors. Insights from this study will
enrich physical chemistry and biophysics, and have the potential to guide the
rational design of next-generation FP-biosensors with improved properties.