* 1455546
* IDBR: TYPE B: Refinement of a miniature oceanographic data recorder that can be carried by marine mammals and other pelagic species for commerical production
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Randall Davis, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2019
* USD 646,871.00

An award is made to Texas A&M University refine an oceanographic data recorder
(ODR) and work with a company to make them commercially available to the
biological and oceanographic communities. This project will train graduate and
undergraduate interns in the use of the ODR. The graduate students will also
participate in field tests. The instruments will be used to teach undergraduate
students, including underrepresented groups, about ocean science. The oceans are
a key element in understanding global climate and its potential effects on human
society. The development and commercial availability of these instruments will
contribute to this understanding.

The ODRs can be attached to marine mammals, sea turtles, penguins and large
fishes that range throughout the world's oceans and record detailed
oceanographic data, especially in areas that are not frequently visited by
research vessels. Data recorded by these instruments will provide valuable
information on the world's oceans and climate. Most sub-surface oceanographic
data have been obtained from ship-based surveys and the deployment of
instruments that drift on the sea surface. Animal-borne instruments such as the
ODR provide a low cost alternative for augmenting these data.