* 1455809
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gene Expression and Physiologic Extremes in Primate Hibernation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Anne Yoder, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2017
* USD 23,037.00

Hibernation is a seasonal response that some species use to evade energetic
demands posed by their environment. Hibernation is characterized by physiologic
extremes that would be fatal to non-hibernating species, yet hibernators
experience these extremes on an annual basis without harmful effects. Among
primates, hibernation is only observed in the dwarf lemurs of Madagascar.
Previous work suggests that hibernation is activated not by a set of genes
unique to hibernators, but by selective expression of genes that are present in
all mammals. This view raises multiple questions, including: Are the
physiological processes associated with hibernation shared among all mammalian
hibernators (e.g., ground squirrels, bats, bears), or does primate hibernation
represent a specialized form of this behavior? Do all mammals, including humans,
have the genetic capacity for hibernation? If so, how can we use this
information for critical biomedical applications, such as emergency medicine or
space travel? Broader impacts also include development of new research
collaborations and significant science education and public outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transcriptome sequencing will be used to identify
and quantify genes that are differentially expressed in white adipose tissue
from differing physiological states associated with hibernation in 3 dwarf lemur
species: one species of captive dwarf lemur (C. medius), and two species of
free-ranging dwarf lemurs in Madagascar (C. crossleyi and C. sibreei). This is
the first investigation of the genetic control of hibernation in a primate and
therefore, this study has implications for understanding hibernation physiology
at the most fundamental level. Revealing insights into how primate hibernators
successfully display physiologic extremes without morbidity or mortality will
have potential applications for biomedical research, and is relevant to the
fields of comparative physiology, primate behavior, and evolutionary biology.