* 1455588
* The Role of Peroxy Radicals: Linking Gas-Phase Oxidation Chemistry to Secondary Organic Aerosol Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Nga Lee Ng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2018
* USD 238,782.00

This work focuses on improving the fundamental understanding of processes that
contribute to the formation of secondary organic aerosol (SOA - very small
particles formed from gas-phase compounds) in the atmosphere. A series of
laboratory chamber experiments is being conducted to evaluate the atmospheric
conditions and concentrations of various chemical species that lead to SOA
formation. The results of this research will lead to improved models for
predicting SOA formation.

The objectives of this research are: (1) To experimentally map out the effects
of the different reaction channels of peroxy radicals on SOA yields, gas- and
aerosol-phase composition from photochemical oxidations of biogenic and
anthropogenic hydrocarbons, and (2) To determine the effects of different peroxy
radical reaction pathways on aerosol volatility. The proposed work focuses on
oxidation by OH radicals under dry conditions (relative humidity < 1%). Ammonium
sulfate is being used as seeds for aerosol growth and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2),
nitrous acid (HONO), or methyl nitrite (CH3ONO) is being used as the OH source.
This research will also help improve understanding of how nitrogen oxides
influence the SOA formation process.

The project includes outreach plans at the Columbia Middle School (a Title 1
school) to work with an Earth Science teacher and middle school students to
increase their knowledge and experience in science, technology, engineering, and
math (STEM) disciplines.