* 1455814
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Harvesting Practices, Ecosystem Degradation, and Artifical Selection of Economically Viable Forest Resources
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Nigel Smith, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2016
* USD 9,465.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will focus on the complex
interactions between harvesting practices of forest resources and changes in the
quality and availability of the resource, which may engender changes to the ways
in which the resource is harvested. The project will focus on the impact of
destructive harvesting of a fruit-bearing tree by felling the tree, a practice
through which the destruction of female fruit-bearing trees from wild stands has
led to overall population declines and unbalanced sex ratios. The project will
analyze the extent and distribution of the degradation of trees and the
ecosystem they occupy, and it will determine whether harvesting practices
constitute an artificial selection process that favors economically inferior
fruit traits. The project will assess the potential value of new remote sensing
techniques for the analysis of land-cover degradation, thereby improving more
general capabilities for environmental monitoring. It will provide new insights
into the role of harvest-based artificial selection on underutilized crops,
which will expand knowledge of this general topic beyond its current focus on
fishing and hunting and enhance general understanding of natural resource
management, ethnobotany, and historical ecology. Project findings will provide
new insights regarding conservation and development in the study area and in
many other locales, including those in the U.S., where resource extraction
practices are being reconsidered in order to identify economically and
environmentally sustainable practices. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.

The doctoral student undertaking this project will focus his attention on the
harvesting of Mauritia flexuosa (Mauritia palm), which is economically and
nutritionally important to residents of the Peruvian Amazon. The study will
focus on TWO research questions: (1) What is the extent and distribution of
Mauritia palm swamp degradation from unsustainable harvesting? (2) Do these
extractive pressures lead to an artificial selection in Mauritia flexuosa? The
student hypothesizes that the spatial distribution of resource and ecosystem
degradation can be determined by the persistence of declines in the interannual
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI). As populations decline from
overharvesting, a correlating drop in NDVI is expected. Spatial statistics will
be used to map hotspots of degradation, and the results will be verified through
field surveys. The student also hypothesizes that ecosystem degradation is
decreasing the frequency of desirable phenotypes in Mauritia flexuosa. The
relationship between the expression of these traits and the level of degradation
will be analyzed to ascertain whether destructive harvest practices are shaping
phenotypic expression through a process of artificial selection.