* 1455654
* IDBR: Type A. High-Performance Surface-induced Dissociation MS/MS
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Vicki Wysocki, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2019
* USD 697,087.00

An award is made to Ohio State University to develop and instrument that can
characterize protein complexes through improved dissociation of the complexes in
mass spectrometers. Proteins in living systems can play structural roles, such
as those in skin and hair; they can also play active roles such as enzymes that
help with digestion, or hemoglobin that carries oxygen and carbon dioxide
through the body. Cellular processes such as metabolism, cell signaling, gene
expression, trafficking, cell cycle regulation, and the formation of subcellular
structures are contingent upon the formation and dynamic interactions of
complexes/assemblies of proteins. These protein complexes may also be bound to
other biomolecules (DNA/RNA), interacting in specific ways. Because protein
structure is tied to function, effective tools are needed to characterize
protein-protein and protein-ligand complexes. The proposed research will result
in integration of surface-induced dissociation devices into multiple types of
mass spectrometers that will provide information on the structures of protein
complexes important in biology. Discoveries from the project will be presented
in university courses and at international, national, regional, and local
workshops/ conferences on mass spectrometry and biomolecule structure and in the
peer-reviewed literature. The undergraduate and graduate students and the
postdoctoral associate will be trained in instrument development and will also
gain collaboration skills through interactions with the private sector partners
and local electronics and machine shops. Early SID adopters will serve as a
direct sounding board for the success of modifications. The project is vendor-
and platform-neutral, with direct inclusion of multiple private sector partners,
Ardara Technologies, Waters (Q-IM-TOF, quadrupole ion mobility time of flight),
Thermo (Orbitrap), and Bruker (ICR, ion cyclotron resonance), providing the
project team an opportunity to present at company user meetings and an
opportunity for those partners to assess the commercial value of the instrument
modification.

This research will develop surface-induced dissociation (SID) in high/ultra-high
resolution mass spectrometers and refine its use in an ion mobility (IM) mass
spectrometer whose purpose is to characterize protein complexes. The proposed
research will benefit researchers from many different fields interested in the
characterization of the topology of protein complexes. Planned, collaborative
visits to Thermo and Bruker are a necessary part of the research, to gain
familiarity with needed instrument platforms, to plan modifications, and to
allow the vendors to assess progress. The final instrument configurations will
combine either IM or high/ultrahigh resolving power with efficient SID
fragmentation and enhanced collection of product ions. The proposed combinations
are currently unavailable on any commercial instrument and are expected to
enhance the quality of analysis and expand the range of biological samples that
can be effectively characterized by mass spectrometry (MS). Planned improvements
to SID utilize RF focusing of the ions departing the surface post collision, in
contrast with the DC-only focusing that has been used in the past. Inclusion of
SID in current commercial ultra-high resolution platforms has not yet been
accomplished and is expected to dramatically enhance both the scope and depth of
analysis on biological systems. In the Bruker instrument, the modification will
allow SID to be explored, not only as a possible additional activation method,
but as a replacement for collision-induced dissociation (CID). The overall
intellectual merit of the project is adaptation of high performance mass
spectrometers to include a higher performance activation method for
fragmentation of refractory analytes, for which existing methods fail to provide
direct substructure information.