* 1455829
* NSFCloud Workshop: Experimental Support for Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Katarzyna Keahey, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 02/28/2018
* USD 68,807.00

The NSFCloud solicitation was established in 2013 as a track within the NSF CISE
Research Infrastructure (CRI) program with the objective to provide an
experimental platform enabling the academic research community to drive research
on a new generation of innovative applications of cloud computing and cloud
computing architectures. While this effort seeks to build on prior NSF
investments, such as the GENI and FutureGrid testbeds, it is unique in that it
targets specifically the field of cloud computing and seeks to support and
integrate research in this area with innovate solutions in systems, networking,
and cyber-physical system (CPS) research and thereby define a broad research
agenda of the future. NSF is making NSFCloud awards, and as these projects
begin, it is critical that a dialogue be initiated between the research
community and the experimental platform providers, detailing the expectations on
one side and capabilities on the other. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To initiate such
dialogue, this project provides support for a workshop whose principal
objectives are to (1) provide early information to the CISE research community
about the approach to providing an experimental platform taken by the funded
NSFCloud projects; and (2) provide a forum for a discussion of the experimental
requirements of the CISE community and thus provide an opportunity for community
feedback and refinement of those plans. As an extension of these objectives, the
workshop provides a lasting opening of the communication channels between the
testbed providers and the research community they will serve, and explores
collaborations and synergies that will make this relationship efficient and
fulfilling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop solicits participation from the
CISE research community that will rely on the NSFCloud projects for the support
of their experimental needs as well as the NSFCloud teams themselves. The
organizers engage minority serving institution (MSI) participants from both
groups. The participation by the community helps ensure that the testbeds, when
delivered to the community, will have the relevant capabilities, that the
intended research projects are targeted, and that the facilities are accessible
to MSI communities. The results of the workshop guide the experimental platform
development and community outreach related to the NSFCloud proposal.