* 1455042
* CAREER: Bridging the gaps- connecting theory and observations of planet-forming disks and addressing underrepresented populations in STEM
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2023
* Catherine Espaillat, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,012,917.00

This project will use the latest observational and theoretical techniques to
determine the basic properties for disks of gas and dust around young stars and
extend existing circumstellar disk models to include a more physically realistic
disk structure. Planets form out of flattened disks of gas and dust that
surround young stars. It is thought that the dust in these disks grows and
eventually forms rocky planets, or cores which accrete gas to become gas giant
planets. The PI and her team will test existing models by measuring important
properties of the dust and gas in over 100 circumstellar disks around young
stars. She will use new and archival data from several ground- and space-based
telescopes and then use the data to improve the planet formation models. This
project also has an educational component focused on the lack of women in
permanent STEM positions, particularly minority women. The project will create a
mentoring program for women postdoctoral research scientists to help increase
the number of women that go on to attain permanent positions in STEM. The
program will be based on mentoring circles that meet on a regular basis to help
members set development goals and teach skills to meet the goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three main research goals,
which are to 1) determine the basic properties (ie, dust sizes and settling,
mass accretion rates) for disks around young stars, 2) extend the circumstellar
disk model to include more physically realistic disk structure, and 3) create
models of circumplanetary disks embedded within circumstellar disks. The work
will be carried out by modeling Spitzer infrared and Herschel submillimeter
spectra of 100 disks, obtaining new U-band photometry of 400 young stars,
modifying a circumstellar disk model to incorporate spatially variable disk
structure and using it to do detailed fits of seven disks with SMA/ALMA archival
data. The group?s circumstellar disk model will be adapted for use with
circumplanetary disks and then compared with observations obtained from the
Gemini Planet Imager (GPI) and ALMA.