* 1455444
* RSB/Collaborative Research: A Sequential Decision Framework to Support Trade Space Exploration of Multi-Hazard Resilient and Sustainable Building Designs
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Timothy Simpson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2022
* USD 822,491.00

The design of multi-hazard resilient and sustainable buildings (RSB) is
necessarily complex due to the various economic, environmental, social, and
technical considerations that must be factored into the decision-making process.
These broad considerations result in tradeoffs among the numerous design
objectives (e.g., minimizing life cycle cost, probable losses, and environmental
impact). Negotiating these tradeoffs necessitates new decision-making frameworks
and tools to enable efficient and effective exploration of multi-hazard RSB
designs. Literature in the fields of behavioral economics, psychology,
marketing, and cognitive engineering support the premise that decision-making is
a simultaneous process of both constructing and satisfying one's preferences.
The objective of this research is to formalize an innovative sequential decision
process, tailored to simultaneous preference construction and satisfaction, for
the design of multi-hazard RSB. Model simulations will be performed in a
sequence of increasing fidelity while simultaneously decision-makers (DMs)
become cognizant of the design space and inherent tradeoffs (trade space), form
preferences, and then satisfy these preferences, culling the set of considered
designs throughout to arrive at a final choice. Key to the framework's
development are the following: (1) creating a complexity index that will situate
the building in relation to its social, technical, economic, policy, and
environmental context, and assessing the impact of this context on the
sustainability of the building, and conversely, the impact of the building on
its larger, regional context, (2) iteratively exploring for innovative multi-
hazard RSB designs, (3) establishing sets of feasible design objectives and
threshold values of design metrics, and (4) developing digital visualizations of
the trade space to facilitate and justify design choices. The sequential
decision framework will have a positive impact on the integrative design process
by providing mechanisms for learning, visualizing, and sharing of information
among the DMs, design team, and stakeholders so that the outcome is an
environmentally, socially, financially responsible building design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research project will be a rigorous,
sequential, decision framework based on progressive model-based simulation and
visualization algorithms to support trade space exploration for multi-hazard RSB
designs. Evolutionary algorithms will be employed at each level of model
fidelity to generate soil-foundation-structural-envelope building system design
alternatives, which consider an array of materials, structural forms, and
building components. A broad array of design metrics will be generated for each
building design alternative and hazard scenario(s) by integrating existing
probabilistic performance-based assessment models, life cycle assessment models,
and new probabilistic building recovery models. The building recovery models
will be developed using a systems reliability approach and will generate the
post-event functionality and recovery time metrics. The building recovery models
will explicitly account for internal functions and externalities, such as
utilities and the capacity of both organizational and technical systems, thereby
allowing a particular building design to be understood in the broader context of
a community's resilience. Novel interactive visual analytic techniques and
visualization algorithms will be developed to facilitate multi-dimensional trade
space exploration, allowing DMs to negotiate and gain insight into the intricate
relationships among the conflicting design metrics to identify designs that are
both resilient and sustainable. The formalized framework will be applied to in-
depth case studies for the design of mid- and high-rise residential, commercial,
and mixed-use RSBs threatened by earthquakes and/or hurricanes in urban
environments.