* 1455346
* CAREER: Many-electron interactions and excited-state properties in two-dimensional van der waals interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Li Yang, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2020
* USD 475,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Interfaces in solids, such as p-n junctions and heterojunctions in diodes and
transistors, are excellent platforms for fundamental scientific research, and
they are the foundation of the microelectronics industry. In these structures, a
very large number of electrons interact with each other and shape the
conductance, thermal activity, magnetism, optical response, and other
fundamental properties of the materials. This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research and education, in which the PI will focus on many-
electron interactions in a new type of structure that can be viewed as
"sandwiches" of two-dimensional layers of different materials. The layers are
held together by weak forces called van der Waals (vdW) forces. Materials with
interfaces in which vdW forces dominate combine the properties of the different
layers in exotic ways to produce novel effects, such as unusual light-matter
interactions and charge transport. Thus, such materials are useful for studying
new physical phenomena and for designing small electronic devices of targeted
functionalities.

The PI will use parameter-free quantum mechanical simulations and simpler models
based on these computations to explore how electronic interactions at vdW
interfaces yield unique electrical transport and optical properties. This
research can pave the way towards manipulating electronic, thermal, and optical
properties of devices, such as diodes, transistors and low-cost photovoltaic
solar cells.

The educational component of this activity includes student mentoring, course
development, seminars and workshops, and diverse collaborations involving
students. In particular, the PI will focus on various K-12 activities.
Collaborations with neighboring and international institutes will provide
opportunities for training under-represented minority students in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics fields.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Graphene and related two-dimensional structures have attracted a great deal of
scientific and technological interest over the last decade. Towards this end,
few-layer heterostructures and superlattices held together by interlayer van der
Waals (vdW) interactions have recently been fabricated. Creating few-layer
composites of different materials allows one to achieve a wide range of new
material characteristics - the individual materials' properties do not simply
superpose. Accordingly, it is very likely that vdW interfaces will be central to
the future of scientific and industrial research based on two-dimensional
materials. This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research and
education focused on many-electron interactions and excited-state properties of
these interfaces.

The research plan includes three facets:

1. At the single-particle excitation level, the PI and his team will compute the
quasiparticle band offsets and charge transfer at vdW junctions, which dictate
their electrical and transport properties. The team will further develop
practical methods for engineering these characteristic properties. Ultimately,
the aim is to design a new type of low-power-dissipation diode that is based on
quantum tunneling across vdW junctions.

2. At the two-particle excitation level, the project focuses on optical
excitations: excitons (electron-hole pairs). The electron-hole binding energy
spectra of unique interlayer and intralayer excitons will be computed for vdW
heterostructures, which is ultimately expected to lead to a parameter-free
exciton model. The team will also focus on physical and chemical approaches for
manipulating the energy spectra, optical activities, and lifetimes of these
excitons in few-layer and superlattice structures. These ideas will be applied
toward achieving exciton Bose-Einstein condensation and designing photovoltaic
devices.

3. At the higher-order excitations level, the project will focus on three-body
interactions (trions) and four-body interactions (biexcitons). By modeling the
screened Coulomb interactions in vdW interfaces based on first principles
simulations, the PI will develop efficient means for obtaining the energy
spectra and optical activities of trions and biexcitons. These models are
particularly useful for interpreting experimental results and predicting new
optical devices without requiring costly first-principles simulations.

The educational component of this activity includes student mentoring, course
development, seminars and workshops, and diverse collaborations involving
students. In particular, the PI will focus on various K-12 activities.
Collaborations with neighboring and international institutes will provide
opportunities for training under-represented minority students in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics fields.