* 1455118
* CAREER:Designing Hund's Metals from Transition Metal Sulfides
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Efrain Rodriguez, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 625,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program, the Principal Investigator's NSF CAREER plan focuses on the
development of a new class of materials with functional magnetic and electronic
properties. These crystalline solids are termed Hund's metals and their unique
electrical behavior arises from the combination of abundant metals such as iron
and copper with sulfur. Furthermore, the manner in which these elements come
together to form crystals is highly important in tailoring their materials
properties. To prepare these new compounds, the PI develops new chemical methods
available to the broader, national community of materials scientists. The
project provides training for both graduate and undergraduate students in the
synthesis of new solids and in characterizing their atomic structure and
physical properties with advanced instrumentation. Part of the students'
training also includes participation in outreach activities where they engage
high school students in the immediate vicinity of the University of Maryland.
The PI and his group of university students mentor the high school chemistry
students, whom are predominately Hispanic, African American and underrepresented
in the sciences, through activities that include chemistry tutoring and guided
tours of nearby national laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;The research group is engaged in hypothesis-driven synthesis
of new sulfides defined as Hund's metals. These materials are composed of late
transition metal sulfides and possess the electronic properties characteristic
of a metal while expressing localized magnetic behavior through interactions
dictated by Hund's rule for maximizing spin. The uniqueness of these Hund's
metals arises from the d-orbital behavior of the d-block elements including
iron, cobalt, nickel, and copper. While one subset of the five d-orbitals form
electronic bands that split across the Fermi level, as in an insulator, the
others form itinerant bands. The research projects specifically target sulfides
that contain certain crystal structure motifs including either octanuclear
clusters or two-dimensional sheets of the d-block elements. In both cases, the
transition metal is always tetrahedrally coordinated to sulfide anions in order
to minimize the crystal field splitting and therefore favor a high spin
configuration, which leads to the desired magnetic behavior of the Hund's
metals. The research goals include experimentally confirming the predicted
phases through solid state synthesis and crystal growth followed by measurements
of the new phases' magnetization, electrical transport, and specific heat
properties. Neutron diffraction and inelastic neutron scattering are utilized to
measure both the structure and dynamics in these sulfides. For the two-
dimensional layered sulfides, soft chemical methods such as intercalation of
lithium in liquid ammonia are pursued in order to form metastable phases, which
are prone to display extraordinary electronic behavior such as
superconductivity.