* 1455201
* CAREER: Glycoprotein mimetics with tailored galectin-binding properties based on self-assembled glycopeptide nanofibers
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Gregory Hudalla, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 03/31/2022
* USD 510,218.00

Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program
in the Division of Materials Research proposes to synthesize and study
nanofibers that mimic the structure, composition, and function of natural
glycoproteins to modulate the biological activity of galectins, a family of
carbohydrate-binding proteins that act as signaling molecules in various normal
and pathological processes. The proposed nanofibers are fabricated via self-
assembly of peptides. Nanofiber carbohydrate content can be varied by mixing
peptides with and without a pendant carbohydrate at different ratios in the pre-
assembled state. Carbohydrate chemistry can be precisely altered post-assembly
via enzymes derived from natural carbohydrate synthesis pathways. Nanofibers
with tailored carbohydrate content will be used as tools to study galectin-
glycoprotein interactions, which in turn will inform design of new therapeutic
biomaterials that can modulate galectin bioactivity for various applications,
including immunotherapy, cancer, and viral prophylaxis. These research efforts
will be coupled with outreach efforts that provide middle school, high school,
and undergraduate students with hands-on engineering experiences to stimulate
interest in research and prepare them for STEM careers, with a particular
emphasis placed on attracting students from under- represented communities
throughout northern Florida. Through these experiences, students will develop
important scientific and leadership skills to prepare them for independent STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal describes research to create biomaterials that can modulate the
activity of galectins, and could be useful in treating various conditions,
including autoimmunity, cancer, and viral infection. Galectin activity is
modulated in natural tissues via interactions with carbohydrates attached to
proteins, or "glycoproteins". Efforts to create therapeutics that can interfere
with galectin-glycoprotein interactions are often challenged by difficulties
associated with carbohydrate synthesis and the lack of clearly defined
correlations between carbohydrate chemistry and galectin binding specificity.
This research will address these limitations by developing a new method to
fabricate nanofibers with precise carbohydrate composition, and then using these
nanofibers to study and define galectin-glycoprotein binding parameters. In
turn, these parameters will inform the design of biomaterials that can enhance
or inhibit activity of a particular galectin according to the intended
therapeutic application. Outreach efforts are proposed to foster early interest
in STEM careers that is sustained through collegiate education. In particular,
these outreach efforts will develop hands-on engineering curricula to introduce
middle school students to fundamental engineering concepts, enable one high
school student per year to participate in a 7-week full-immersion research
experience in the laboratory of the Principal Investigator, and provide
undergraduate and graduate students with research and mentoring opportunities.