* 1455800
* EAGER: Systems Analysis of Signaling Pathway towards Robust Differentiation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Ipsita Banerjee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 02/29/2016
* USD 100,000.00

1455800 &lt;br/&gt;Banerjee, Ipsita &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pluripotent stem cells
have the unique capability of giving rise to any tissue-specific cell type at an
unlimited quantity. These outstanding properties make them a promising candidate
as a renewable source of human tissue for research, pharmaceutical testing and
cell-based therapies. The feasibility of obtaining organ-specific cell types by
modulation of associated signaling pathways has already been demonstrated.
However, the differentiated cell types at present remain limited in their yield
and mature functionality. The next challenge in realizing the potential of stem
cells is to ensure functional and homogenous maturation of these cells to the
desired lineage. This goal can be achieved through a quantitative understanding
of signal transduction and noise propagation through the signaling pathway. The
topic of this EAGER proposal is to develop a quantitative and predictive
representation of a critical signal transduction pathway driving stem cell
differentiation. Once it is known how signals are transduced and how uncertainty
is propagated during differentiation, it will be possible to design targeted
interventions to achieve homogenous and efficient differentiation. The
predictive platform to be developed in this project will inform the design of
targeted interventions for efficient and homogenous differentiation of stem
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the Transforming Growth Factor
beta (TGF beta) signaling pathway will be analyzed for differentiating
pluripotent stem cells by integrating quantitative experiments with predictive
modeling and systems analysis. The TGF beta pathway plays a central role in
inducing definitive endoderm differentiation in human pluripotent stem cell. Key
components of the experimental platform will be the development of techniques
for quantitative single cell level analysis of stem cell dynamics, in order to
ensure accurate representation of a cell¡¦s dynamic response, unbiased by
heterogeneity in the population. Specifically, the dynamics of TGF beta
effectors molecules will be quantified in individual cell compartment using
Green Fluorescent Protein fused effector proteins. The nucleo-cytoplasmic
shuttling of these proteins will be quantified using Fluorescence Recovery after
Photobleaching (FRAP) assay. Experimentally obtained single cell dynamics will
be used to train the mathematical model of the pathway. Ensemble modeling will
be used to integrate the single cell information to represent heterogeneity in
cell population. Computational efficiency of this integration will be enhanced
by a meta-modeling technique. Global sensitivity analysis of the ensemble model
will allow identification of key mechanisms governing signal transduction. The
model predictions will be experimentally validated at every step of the model
development. The validated model will be further analyzed for propagation of
uncertainty through the system by (i) experimental measurement of input
variability and (ii) in-silico simulation of propagation of input variability to
output molecules. The final outcome of the proposed project will be an
experimentally validated predictive platform which will allow design of targeted
perturbations to enhance differentiation efficiency while reducing heterogeneity
in the differentiated population.