* 1455039
* CAREER:  Understanding and Ccontrolling Fatigue in Photo-Responsive MOFs: Characterizing Photochromic Transformations in Single Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Jason Benedict, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 636,763.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Solid-State
Materials Chemistry program of the Division of Materials Research, the research
team is developing crystalline porous materials that are activated by UV light.
The photo-active chemical groups change shape when exposed to light. These
light-driven transformations cause the pores (holes) and channels of the
crystalline frameworks to change shape leading to materials capable of
selectively absorbing or releasing guest molecules, for example pharmaceutical
drugs, but only when exposed to the proper wavelength of light. In addition to
advancing our understanding of the fundamental photochemistry that occurs in
these novel materials, the research establishes design principles to understand
and ultimately control and prevent fatigue (failure) in a variety of photo-
responsive materials. The education and outreach activities bring
crystallography and X-ray science into U.S. classrooms through the continued
development of an X-ray science course for advanced undergraduate and graduate
students. The educational projects, including a nation-wide crystal growing
competition, bring concepts of crystals and light to K-12 classrooms through the
development of hands-on experiments and curricular development for teachers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This research
focuses on identifying and understanding the root causes of fatigue in
photochromic materials with the ultimate goal of developing design principles to
control fatigue in any photo-responsive system. The primary objective is
developing a detailed molecular level understanding of the photochemistry
occurring within diarylethene-based materials, an exciting niche in the nascent
field of photo-responsive metal-organic frameworks. Specific aims of the
research include: (1) the synthesis and characterization of new diarylethene-
based photoswitchable linkers and metal-organic frameworks prepared from these
linkers, (2) quantifying the photophysics of photochromic molecules in
crystalline environments using spectroscopic and diffraction methods to
determine reaction energetics and limitations, (3) determining the factors and
triggers that govern fatigue in these materials, (4) developing new techniques
to assess the distribution of guest species within the metal-organic framework
nanopores and determining their impact on the photophysical properties of the
crystalline frameworks, (5) using the knowledge gained to rationally design and
engineer advanced photochromic materials with enhanced properties, namely
improved resistance to fatigue. The primary research tools include traditional
and in situ single crystal X-ray diffraction (photo-crystallography), steady-
state and time-resolved absorption spectroscopy/microscopy, nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR), mass spectrometry, thermogravimetric analysis, and
computational modeling.