* 1455785
* LTREB Renewal: Linking Long-term Alterations in Atmospheric Chemistry to Changes in Nutrient Dynamics and Sustainable Productivity in central Appalachian Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2021
* William Peterjohn, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2021
* USD 449,869.00

For decades the burning of fossil fuels created large amounts of acid rain that
threatened the productivity, fertility, water quality, and biodiversity of
Appalachian forests. More recently, government regulations have reduced the
levels of acid rain and created an opportunity to assess the ability of these
forests to recover from past damage. Assessing the impact of changes in acid
deposition requires long-term measurements and experiments in order to detect
trends and better understand how forests function under changing conditions.
Such long-term records and experiments are extremely rare. This project focuses
on a unique, long-term dataset and manipulative experiments at the Fernow
Experimental Forest (FEF) in West Virginia. The research will continue long-term
measurements, some of which have been made continuously at FEF since 1951. It
will also continue two complementary experimental manipulations: a whole-
watershed acidification experiment that began in 1989, and a Long Term Soil
Productivity experiment that began in 1996. The unique data resulting from these
experiments will significantly improve our understanding of the link between
changes in air pollution and forest health in ways that inform public policy,
enhance ecological theory, and improve forest management
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from this project will be used along with
the Multiple Element Limitation (MEL) model and supplemental measurements to
examine four questions about the impacts of acid and nitrogen deposition on
forested watersheds: (1) Has a diminished biological demand for nitrate (a
source of water pollution) contributed to enhanced nitrate losses?; (2) Are
greater nitrate losses following nitrogen additions to a young forest due to
something other than increased rates of nitrate production?; (3) Will chronic
nitrogen addition and acidification diminish carbon storage in young forests?;
and (4) Does enhanced nitrogen availability reduce the diversity of forest herbs
and trees? In addition, a significant amount of damage caused by Superstorm
Sandy at the FEF created a unique opportunity to examine whether greater
nitrogen availability causes forests to be more susceptible to damage by severe
storm events. This project will continue an internship program that trained 20
students during the last 5 years and a creative writing course designed to
inspire a new generation of non-fiction writers by challenging them to learn
about (and reflect on) the long-term studies at the FEF. The writing course
trained 18 students in the last 3 years and is part of the National Ecological
Reflections Network.