* 1455342
* CAREER: The Ties that (Un)Bind: Understanding the Connection Between Galaxies, Stars, and Black Holes
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Philip Hopkins, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 06/30/2022
* USD 796,298.00

Galaxies are the building blocks of the universe, and as such are important
tracers of the origin and evolution of the cosmos. Since galaxies are themselves
made of dark matter, gas, dust, stars, and black holes, they also provide a
unique probe of these fundamental quantities. Computers are now sufficiently
powerful to resolve the internal structure of individual galaxies in simulations
that model their formation from the initial conditions of the Big Bang. This
CAREER award will push forward those simulations into the next generation in
terms of resolution, as well as the modeling of the interstellar medium, star
formation, and the physics of supermassive black holes. The simulations will
allow astronomers to make some of the first direct observational predictions for
the properties of galaxies being measured by major new observatories, such as
the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA). The work will also
enable the PI and his team to revisit classic questions in galaxy formation, the
regulation of star formation and black hole growth, and cold dark matter
cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this research project are
to produce and analyze a suite of cosmological simulations that explicitly
resolve the multiphase interstellar medium (ISM) of for the first time. The
unique combination of realistic feedback from stars and supermassive black
holes, dramatically improved numerical algorithms, and state-of-the art
resolution will enable the PI to dramatically improve the predictive power of
galaxy formation models. In addition, the team will make public and support the
new numerical methods developed as part of this work, which will help to resolve
many numerical problems and barriers that have compromised the accuracy and
interpretation of previous-generation simulations. This will allow the community
to assess the relative importance of numerics and physics in galaxy formation in
a way that has not been possible in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans
to leverage the visual excitement of simulations of the formation and evolution
of galaxies by partnering with the Shafran Planetarium and Mueller Observatory
at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, as well as data visualization
experts. Together they will build and distribute a new platform to allow
scientists to integrate their galaxy simulations into planetarium astronomy
shows and television programs. The work is expected to dramatically increase the
number and quality of astronomy visualizations entering the public domain, which
will improve astronomical education tools across the country.