* 1455808
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of the Social Environment on DNA Methylation and Immune Function in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Jenny Tung, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2017
* USD 31,676.00

Many primates, including humans, live in complex social environments, and the
capacity to deal with such environments can vary substantially across
individuals. While some individuals form stable, positive social bonds, others
do not; similarly, individuals vary in their achieved social status. Research in
both humans and non-human primates suggests that variation in these social
experiences can have profound effects on physiology, health, and survival. This
project uses behavioral and biological data from wild baboons to test the
hypothesis that social adversity influences health-related traits by altering
the way that genes are expressed. Identifying these connections is crucial for
understanding the evolution of primate sociality, and for addressing the well-
documented health consequences of social adversity in humans. Other broader
impacts of the project include fostering of research collaborations,
undergraduate training, and dissemination of novel methods for genomic studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year project will study 88 adult male baboons
from the Amboseli, Kenya baboon population, to investigate whether low social
status and/or social isolation lead to changes in DNA methylation, and whether
these changes predict how individuals respond to an immune challenge. To do so,
investigators will combine behavioral data with measurements of genome-wide DNA
methylation levels and immune-related gene expression patterns. The resulting
data will shed new light on whether, and to what degree, social experiences
influence immunological traits that likely contribute to health and survival in
wild primates.