* 1455842
* Impact of Regulatory Policy on Out-of-Hospital Care, Legal Mobilization, and Social Movements
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Renee Cramer, Drake University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 08/31/2018
* USD 76,244.00

This project examines the impact that regulatory policy has on out-of-hospital
care provided by certified health professionals. It examines the different ways
that certified health professionals interpret regulation, follow rules, and
understand their scope of practice, given the differing regulatory environments
in which they operate. The research asks whether and how the professionalization
and regulation of certified health professionals impact the provision of health
care; whether regulation operates as intended; and whether voids created by the
absence of regulation are filled by other means. In addition, the research
examines whether and how certified health professionals seek legal status and
regulation, the varying ways in which law is mobilized toward this end, and the
impact of such mobilization on the professional identities and legal
consciousness of certified health professionals. Answering these questions
contributes to theoretical understanding of the important relationship between
law and health, and has broad implications for policy-making and the regulation
of health care outside of the dominant medical model. The broader impact of the
research also includes training and education of undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project utilizes ethnographic participant-observation,
interview research, and documentary evidence coupled with interpretive social
science methods in order to analyze the regulations surrounding out-of-hospital
care in the United States. In the face of a complex web of regulations and
disparate enforcement state-by-state, the project focuses on three states where
regulatory environments and implementation varies, and relies on a case study of
Certified Professional Midwives (CPMs). The findings of this research will
advance sociolegal scholarship and theory on the implementation of laws, legal
mobilization, and legal consciousness of social movement and professional
actors.