* 1455917
* 2014 Waterman Award
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2015
* Feng Zhang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 01/31/2015
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) named Feng Zhang the 2014 recipient of its
Alan T. Waterman Award. This award is NSF's highest honor that annually
recognizes an outstanding researcher under the age of 35 and funds his or her
research in any field of science or engineering. Zhang's research focuses on
understanding how the brain works.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zhang seeks to
understand the molecular machinery of brain cells through the development and
application of innovative technologies. He created and is continuing to perfect
tools that afford researchers precise control over biological activities
occurring inside the cell. With these tools, researchers can deepen their
understanding of how the genome works, and how it influences the development and
function of the brain. Zhang also examines failures within the systems that
cause disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two different lines of fundamental research
and technology development are helping him do that: optogenetics and genome
engineering. Along with Edward Boyden and Karl Deisseroth at Stanford
University, he invented a set of technologies for dissecting the functional
organization of brain circuits, The successful development of optogenetics has
enabled the systematic investigation of neural circuit function in vivo with
unprecedented precision of control. Zhang used that approach to lead landmark
studies that illuminated the neural codes for arousal, reward and circuit
oscillation. He also developed light-inducible transcription effectors that
enabled optogenetic control of transcription and epigenetic process in the brain
and other tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zhang also developed the CRISPR genome
editing system--that is, to identify and cut a short DNA sequence underlying a
disorder so that it may be deleted or substituted out for other genetic material
Although Zhang's main area of focus is the brain, the potential applications of
CRISPR technology extend well beyond neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;He is
one of 11 core faculty members at the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard; an
investigator at MIT's McGovern Institute for Brain Research; and the W. M. Keck
Career Development Professor with a joint appointment in MIT's Departments of
Brain and Cognitive Sciences and Biological
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zhang is widely recognized for his pioneering
work in optogenetics and genome editing. He shared the Perl/UNC Neuroscience
Prize with Karl Deisseroth and Edward Boyden in 2012. In 2013, MIT Technology
Review recognized him as a "pioneer" and one of its 35 Innovators Under 35;
Popular Science magazine placed Zhang on its Brilliant 10, an annual list of the
most promising scientific innovators. Nature also named him as one of the "ten
people who mattered" in 2013 for his work on developing the CRISPR system for
genome editing in mammalian cells.