* 1455167
* SusChEM: CAREER: Near-IR Absorbing Dyes for Stable Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell Devices
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Jared Delcamp, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2020
* USD 566,013.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism
B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jared H. Delcamp of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Mississippi will design and
synthesize novel organic materials for the conversion of solar energy to
electricity. This program will focus on the rapid synthesis of organic dyes
absorbing into the near-infrared solar region and converting this energy to
electricity in dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) devices. This research could lead
to the more efficient harvesting of abundant solar energy and helps to reduce
our reliance on non-renewable fossil fuels. As part of the funded project, an
undergraduate survey course will be developed to promote awareness of active
STEM research areas including solar energy research. Both undergraduate students
and high school students will be encouraged to participate in original research
projects focusing on the development of DSC materials, exposing them to the
excitement of STEM-related research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A crucial challenge
facing the DSC field is the discovery of efficient sensitizers for the
conversion of light in the near-infrared (NIR) range beyond 750 nm. Ideally,
these sensitizers should be readily accessible (in fewer than 10 synthetic
steps), rely on sustainable organic materials and utilize strongly anchoring
functionality to promote long solar cell stabilities. This project will focus on
the introduction of pro-aromatic sensitizers to DSC devices. Pro-aromatic
materials are known to promote low-energy absorptions from low-molecular weight
building blocks by stabilizing excited-state energy levels. Additionally,
multiple conjugation pathway scaffolds will be developed for precise tuning of
dye energy levels through the use of multiple donors and acceptors. Multiple
semiconductor anchoring structures in conjugation with the sensitizer will be
employed for both strong binding to the semiconductor and to promote efficient
electron injection. Rapid synthetic routes to these materials will be a focus,
with C-H activation routes being strategically employed to reduce the number of
synthetic steps.