* 1455240
* CAREER: Ancient river and floodplain dynamics: a research and education plan for improving paleoenvironmental reconstructions and stratigraphic prediction
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2023
* Elizabeth Hajek, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2023
* USD 452,540.00

CAREER: Ancient river and floodplain dynamics: a research and education plan for
improving paleoenvironmental reconstructions and stratigraphic
prediction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rivers and floodplains are important
resources - they nourish agricultural land, provide water for irrigation, and
facilitate transportation between coastlines and continental interiors. Fluvial
landscapes are sensitive to climate and land-use changes; however, it is
currently difficult to predict which river systems are most sensitive and how
they will respond to environmental perturbations. Sedimentary deposits provide
an underexploited record of how Earth's landscapes have evolved in response to
climate, tectonic, and land-cover change throughout Earth's history. Methods for
reconstructing ancient landscape dynamics from fossilized river deposits hold
promise for understanding how rivers and floodplains responded to past
environmental changes - information that can help predict how today's rivers and
floodplains may adjust to present and future climate and land-use changes.
Despite recent advances in reconstructing ancient river and floodplain behavior,
the toolkit for extracting quantitative information from sedimentary deposits is
limited. Using detailed field observations from well-exposed Cretaceous-Eocene
rock outcrops in the western United States, this project focuses on developing
new methods of extracting practicable information about ancient river systems
from sedimentary deposits. A complementary education and outreach program aims
to 1) strengthen sedimentary geologists' reconstructions of ancient river
landscapes through a series of hands-on, training courses, 2) raise awareness
about dynamic fluvial environments among middle- and high-school students
through stream-table activities, and 3) support outcrop- and stream-table-based
research opportunities for students from underrepresented
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This work will expand our ability to measure
and compare how rivers and floodplains changed in response to environmental
forcing throughout Earth's history. This historical perspective will expand our
toolkit for predicting how modern rivers and floodplains will respond to ongoing
anthropogenic climate and land-use changes. Additionally, this work will provide
new ways of predicting the distribution and quality of subsurface hydrocarbon,
groundwater, and CO2 reservoirs. This CAREER project presents an integrated
research and education plan that will help build a foundation for the PI's long-
term professional efforts to 1) advance reconstructions of ancient sedimentary
environments in order to enhance decision-making and management practices for
modern sedimentary landscapes and improve process-based predictions of
subsurface stratigraphy, 2) build a diverse and adaptable workforce capable of
tackling the 21st century's energy and environmental challenges, and 3) broaden
citizen awareness of how understanding variability in sedimentary systems can
improve our ability to sustainably live in dynamic landscapes.