* 1455260
* CAREER: The Dynamics of the Milky Way's Local Group Substructure as the Key to Understanding Dark Matter and Galaxy Formation
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Nitya Kallivayalil, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 09/30/2021
* USD 754,824.00

There is overwhelming astrophysical evidence that less than 5 percent of the
universe is made from ordinary - or baryonic - matter. The rest of the cosmos
appears to be constituted from "dark matter," which has the gravitational
properties of matter but which hardly interacts with light (25 percent),
together with "dark energy," which acts to repel the force of gravity.
Astrophysicists have further developed this model into one in which dark matter
takes the form of slow-moving particles, and dark energy is associated with a
"cosmological constant" first introduced by Einstein. The model has had
remarkable successes in explaining many of the observed characteristics of the
universe. Nonetheless, there remain mismatches between the model and the
observed properties of our own Milky Way galaxy and its neighbors. The work
supported by this CAREER award will use the Gemini Observatory, of which the NSF
is a founding partner, to tackle these fundamental problems and provide new
constraints on the nature of dark matter. The PI, Dr. Nitya Kallivayalil, will
also launch and lead a major collaboration with Spelman College, America's
oldest historically Black college for women to create a pipeline for training
future STEM leaders from under-represented groups.

The specific goals of the PI's program are to use the world-leading adaptive
optics technologies employed by the Gemini Observatory, together with its
innovative large and long observing programs, to measure the 6-dimensional phase
space of tracers of the Milky Way's gravitational potential. This requires
accurate proper motions, in addition to radial velocities for field stars and
satellites widely distributed throughout the halo. The PI will definitively
constrain the dark-halo shape, orientation, radial profile and total mass of the
Milky Way; determine the infall times of its satellite galaxies; and constrain
the central density distributions of dwarf galaxies to assess whether they have
cusp- or core-like profiles. Furthermore, the PI's partnership with Spelman
College will involve a Research Experiences for Undergraduates REU program for
Spelman students, as well as curriculum development at the college.