* 1455247
* CAREER: Exploring Biofilm Material Properties with Micromechanical Tools
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* James Wilking, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 04/30/2021
* USD 503,396.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to Montana State University, Bozeman is to fund
the study of bacterial biofilm deformation in response to applied physical
forces. Most bacteria do not exist as free swimming individuals, but instead on
surfaces in soft, gel-like communities called biofilms. These films are
implicated in a tremendous number of health and industrial problems such as hip
implant infections and oil pipeline deterioration, but they also play beneficial
roles in sewage treatment and agricultural plant protection. For both beneficial
and problematic biofilms, knowledge of their mechanical response to physical
forces is critically important, yet greatly lacking. This proposal aims to
address this knowledge gap by using micromechanical measurements to develop a
fundamental, materials-based understanding of biofilm mechanics. These studies
could lead to new materials-based strategies for biofilm removal, which are
sorely needed. This proposal also aims to integrate soft materials science and
biofilm science with food science, and to develop educational food science
modules to attract students from rural communities in Montana and other sparsely
populated states into STEM fields. Integrating microbial materials research from
nearby Yellowstone National Park will provide the proposed work with
international exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The principal
research objective of this proposal is to apply micromechanical measurement
tools to explore the structure, mechanics and dynamics of bacterial biofilms
containing the widespread amyloid fiber and polysaccharide structural motif.
Following a reductionist approach, teh project team will first measure
interaction forces between individual components of the extracellular matrix,
then explore the mechanics of reconstituted networks of matrix components using
rheometry and shear cell microscopy, and finally map biofilm mechanics with
active and thermally-driven microrheology. Knowledge gained from these
measurements will provide insight into the role of mechanics in biofilm
physiology and inform new strategies for biofilm removal. The principal
educational objective of this proposal is to integrate soft materials science
and biofilm science with food science, to attract students from rural
communities into STEM fields. The project will begin by developing a science and
cooking day camp for Montana youth, integrating soft materials science with
local foods, fermented foods containing microbial biofilms and traditional
Native American foods. The curriculum developed in the day camp will then be
incorporated into educational modules to be distributed to rural communities in
Montana.