* 1455432
* Fluid-mobile and volatile element (Cl, B, and Li) cycling through the forearc: Case study of cold and thermal spring geochemistries from the Hikurangi accretionary prism, New Zeala
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Jaime Barnes, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2019
* USD 247,499.00

A subduction zone is an area where two tectonic plates collide and the denser
plate (also called a subducting slab, consisting of seafloor sediments, oceanic
crust, and underlying mantle) is forced to sink into the mantle beneath the more
buoyant plate. Hydrous minerals in the slab break down when exposed to the high
temperatures encountered at depth, releasing fluids ultimately involved in the
creation of arc magmas and explosive arc volcanoes. In addition, these fluids
are also thought to influence seismic slip behavior and the manifestation of
earthquakes. Therefore, determining the sources and amount of fluids released at
depth within a subduction is critical for understanding volcanic and earthquake
behavior along plate margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particular elements (for
example, lithium, chlorine, and boron) are highly fluid-mobile, thereby making
them excellent tracers of fluid source. These fluids impart diagnostic
geochemical signatures to overlying material that can be used to trace mass
transfer through subduction zones. This work will geochemically characterize
cold and thermal spring waters from the Hikurangi (New Zealand subduction zone)
accretionary prism to trace fluid sources along the fore-arc and quantify
volatile flux through the fore-arc. Fluid sources to the fore-arc will be
determined by examining variations in elemental concentrations (and ratios) and
isotopic compositions. The data will be used to evaluate causal links between
fluid sources and earthquake mechanics, such as shallow slow slip events. The
Hikurangi margin is the ideal locality for this study due to the numerous
exposed fore-arc springs, which allow a rare glimpse into the shallow part of
the subduction zone, and the previously documented along arc variability in
subduction parameters (e.g., amount of subducting sediment) and seismic slip
behavior. Geochemical evidence for increased (or more shallow) dehydration
reactions in the northern portion of the margin compared to the southern portion
would support a link between dehydration reactions and shallow slow slip events.