* 1455350
* CAREER: Modeling 19th century estuaries to address 21st century problems
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Stefan Talke, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Addressing 21st century problems such as coastal flooding, sea-level rise, and
salinity intrusion requires understanding both long-term trends and spatial
patterns in tides and water level. Historical observations and retrospective
modeling of historical conditions are needed to fully evaluate and interpret the
cause of long term trends. This study will investigate the long-term dynamics of
tides and transport in the Columbia River Estuary using verifiable data to
elucidate system sensitivities. Well-known, idealized insights into tidal
dynamics and scalar transport will be tested in a complex environment, to test
how altered local topography, wetland area, and depth have produced physical
changes. The dynamical questions raised may have implications for the past
development and future trajectory of estuaries globally. The project will train
a graduate student and engage High School teachers and underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study leverages ongoing efforts to digitize
19th century data and a recently developed numerical model of the historic
Columbia River Estuary. By pioneering new ways of calibrating historical models
and evaluating spatio-temporal trends via historical/modern model comparison,
this project will lay the groundwork for similar, future research in other
strongly-altered estuaries. Using time series of water temperature back to 1854,
new ground will be broken by simulating historical water temperatures. Because
water temperature, like salinity, is mixed along the river/ocean continuum, it
will be used to calibrate and verify salinity intrusion in both historical and
modern models. This approach circumvents the lack of historical salinity data,
increases model fidelity, and allows for process-based studies to determine the
historical factors which have altered water levels, habitat inundation,
baroclinic circulation, and transport. The primary hypotheses are: (a) Direct
anthropogenic alterations, rather than climate induced changes to river flow or
sea level, have dominated changes to estuary functioning since the 19th century;
(b) water temperature and salinity variability was much larger in the past than
today but changes in flow and channel depth have increased salinity intrusion;
and (c) changes in tide propagation in the tidal river will be reflected in
altered flood wave propagation: flood waves will move faster, and disperse less,
than in the past.