* 1455366
* CAREER: Topology, Symmetry and Disorder in Strongly Correlated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Alexander Chernyshev, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2019
* USD 217,457.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports basic theoretical
research on the self-organization of electrons in materials that are quantum
mechanical phases of matter characterized by topological order. Experiments
cannot distinguish among such phases by probing small pieces of the material,
but instead must perform measurements that in effect probe the entire extent of
a sample. This suggests that topological phases may be potent tools for storing
and manipulating quantum-mechanical information. In contrast to familiar
information storage technologies, information would be encoded globally in a
topological phase and would be protected against the detrimental effects of
material imperfections and other extrinsic sources of interference, that are
generally confined to small regions. Implementing this intriguing idea to build
a topological quantum computer is a major technical challenge, while
understanding the behavior of these unusual phases of matter is a fundamental
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project approaches these goals from two
directions. The first is to develop a systematic understanding of topological
phases from the perspective of the symmetry of their crystalline host materials.
This will enable the identification and classification of new topological
phases, including 'semi-metals' intermediate between metals and semiconductors
that may provide platforms for new quantum devices. The second direction is to
understand the behavior of a simple quantum computer: a system of many
interacting computer bits governed by the laws of quantum mechanics isolated
from their surroundings. The PI will examine whether such systems can avoid
evolving into a state of thermal equilibrium which could wash out their quantum
information content. The PI aims to develop techniques to probe the unusual
phases that result when such an equilibrium is evaded. In a fundamental sense,
these quantum states resemble 'glasses' and appear to represent a fundamentally
new type of system governed by quantum mechanics, with the potential for new and
surprising behaviors and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alongside these
research goals, the PI will implement a comprehensive education and outreach
plan. One effort will use thought-provoking experiments to expose middle school
students - drawn predominantly from schools with a large proportion of students
of low socio-economic status - to basic scientific questions. This will build in
to existing outreach programs at the PI's institution, and go beyond them by
providing materials and guidance for their teachers to duplicate such discovery
activities in the classroom. The PI will develop new courses at the graduate and
undergraduate levels and establish a journal club to acquaint graduate students
with research literature. The project includes funding for graduate and
undergraduate students, who will be actively mentored and given the opportunity
to participate in both national and international scientific collaborations or
conferences. The PI will also found a biennial summer school to prepare
beginning graduate students in Southern California for research careers in
condensed matter physics. The school will promote diversity by encouraging
participation by nontraditional and minority students in the California State
University system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports theoretical research into condensed matter systems where
interactions among constituent particles lead to topological phases of matter.
Such phases are potentially relevant to building decoherence-resistant
topological qubits for quantum computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first thrust
of the research activity will examine how crystalline symmetries delineate
possible phases of matter, building on prior work by the PI and collaborators
demonstrating the role of 'non-symmorphic' symmetries. Generalizing these ideas,
the PI will study systems where spin-orbit and interelectron interactions lead
to new phases. The PI will also examine how such symmetries lead to Landau-
forbidden phase transitions, using simple exactly solvable models. Armed with
these results, the P.I. will analyze the classification of interacting
topological crystalline insulators. Finally, the novel transport properties of
the semi-metals that emerge as a consequence of crystalline symmetries or
accidental degeneracies between energy bands will be studied, with an emphasis
on their connection to quantum anomalies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second broad
direction examines the response of topological phases to impurities. Three main
problems will be addressed: (i) the development of new dynamical probes capable
of discerning subtle effects of interactions on disordered, isolated topological
systems; (ii) an analysis of the behavior of disordered chains of non-Abelian
anyons to examine their potential for realizing novel many-body localized phases
with low entanglement; and (iii) the possibility of granular phases in
disordered quantum Hall systems, similar to analogous phases in dirty
superconductors, which would represent an unusual form of topological
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The P.I. will also implement a comprehensive
education plan that integrates these research goals into outreach aimed at K-12
students, undergraduate and graduate research and mentoring, curricular and
professional development of junior researchers. The project will also establish
a biennial summer school to prepare beginning graduate students in Southern
California for re-search careers in condensed matter physics.