* 1455011
* CAREER: Elucidation of the mechanistic origins of plasmon-induced chemical reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,02/28/2023
* Prashant Jain, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 02/28/2023
* USD 761,819.00

With this CAREER Award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor Prashant Jain of
the University of Illinois to study the detailed manner in which light energy is
converted into chemical energy within metallic materials. This process, if
properly understood and controlled, may become a candidate technology for
capturing solar energy and for driving energy-intensive processes in the
chemical industry with light. Professor Jain aims at preparing strongly light-
absorbing materials that can efficiently convert sunlight into chemical energy
in fuels. Another effort involves the achievement of light-to-chemical energy
conversion using cheaper, more abundant materials. Alongside the laboratory
efforts, an interactive software tool is being developed and employed for the
purpose of education on the interaction of light with matter. The educational
program is aimed at generating early scientific interest in the classroom by
means of vivid, hands-on examples from optics, preparing high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students for future science and technology careers.
Outreach activities seek to foster community awareness of solar energy as a
clean, renewable alternative to energy from fossil fuels.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Professor Jain investigates the physicochemical mechanism(s) by which
the plasmonic excitation of a noble metal-containing heterostructure induces or
catalyzes chemical reactions on the surface of the nanostructure. In this
project, a plasmonic heterostructure consisting of Au nanoparticles in contact
with a semiconducting oxide (titanium dioxide and zinc oxide) is studied for
determining the relative contributions of plasmonic near-field enhancement, hot
electron transfer, and photothermal heating in photocatalytic reactions. This
research aims to elucidate the mechanistic role of the oxide and assess whether
near-field-assisted bandgap or sub-bandgap photoexcitation of carriers in the
oxide is responsible for the observed photoactivity, or, whether charge
separation across the metal/oxide is a more important contributor. Professor
Jain uses single-molecule fluoresence to identify whether the photoreaction
takes place on the metal, on the semiconducting oxide, or at the metal/oxide
interface. Finally, he explores plasmon excitation-induced photocatalysis in a
noble metal-free plasmonic oxide, which represents an interface-free system
where plasmonic excitation and semiconductor electronic transitions are
localized within the same crystallite.