* 1455352
* CAREER: Taking the hydrochemical pulse of the critical zone in small catchments of the Andes-Amazon
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2021
* A  Joshua West, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 498,906.00

Water's journey -- from precipitation through soils and groundwater to streams
and rivers -- determines the quantity and quality of this economically and
environmentally essential resource. Along its path, water mediates chemical
reactions that transform rock into soil and that release nutrients, providing
the sustenance for ecosystems. Basic scientific questions remain about how
quickly water travels and what route it takes through watersheds. Answering
these questions is vital for understanding the generation and maintenance of
natural resources in Earth's critical zone. Recently developed analytical
techniques and theoretical advances promise new insight from the chemical
signatures carried by water. This project will develop an integrated research
and education program to contribute such insight through detailed hydrochemical
study in five small catchments in the Andes-Amazon of Peru. This study site
provides a rare opportunity to gain widely applicable mechanistic understanding
because of existing infrastructure, complementary ongoing research, and unique
natural topographic gradients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on prior work in
the Madre de Dios river basin, this project will focus on the transition from
the steep, mountainous Andes to the lowland Amazon. Mountain-to-floodplain
transitions are common hydrologic features but are poorly represented in
existing observatories. The research will identify how hydrochemical processes
vary over this transition and will explore mechanisms for observed variations.
The project will center around three themes: (i) water residence times; (ii)
concentration-discharge relationships of rock-derived solutes; and (iii)
relationships between water sources for plants, catchment hydrology, and the
availability of rock-derived nutrients. These themes will be explored using new
hydrometric and high-frequency hydrochemical measurements. Samples will be
collected from precipitation, streamwater, soilwater, and groundwater and
analyzed for solute concentrations and water isotope ratios. The hydrochemical
studies will be complemented by investigations of mineral distributions in soil,
saprolite, and bedrock. New data will be interpreted in the context of
topographic, denudation rate, plant root, and ecosystem nutrient datasets from
other studies in the region. Water and soil sample collection, chemical
analyses, and data interpretation will form part of a "Critical Zone Summer
School" that comprises the core of the integrated research and education plan
and will train upper-level undergraduate and beginning graduate students who
will lead the next generation in this cross-disciplinary research area. This
project will further broaden the reach of the "critical zone" conceptual
framework through collaboration with landscape architects and through additional
outreach and educational activities both in the US and in Peru.