* 1455163
* CAREER: Innovative Strategies for Fluorination of Common Functional Groups
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Ryan Altman, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 650,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor Ryan A. Altman of the Department of Medicinal Chemistry at The
University of Kansas is developing new reagents and metal-catlyzed strategies
for generating fluorinated substructures that are found in a variety of
therapeutics, biological probes, agrichemicals and polymeric materials. The
research advances fundamental knowledge at the intersection of organometallic
and organofluorine chemistries, providing synthetic chemists with new and
environmentally benign reagents and catalyst systems for preparing compounds
that would otherwise be challenging to access. The proposed research provides
hands-on training in synthetic organofluorine and organometallic chemistries for
undergraduate and graduate students. Dr. Altman is developing integrative
teaching of basic chemical science for professional-track pharmacy students
particularly through a unique experimental course that stresses the significance
of basic scientific developments within the context of clinical pharmacy.

The research project addresses the development of catalytic decarboxylation
(conversion of carboxylates to alkyl metal species through extrusion of carbon
dioxide) as a method for converting alpha,alpha-difluorocarboxylates into
fluororalkyl-substituted organometal intermediates. Decarboxylative metallation
is an efficient strategy for the formation of synthetically useful fluoroalkyl
organometallic intermediates partly because the process uses inexpensive and
readily available carboxylic acids, and derivatives thereof. Using these
fluoroalkyl organometallic intermediates, this project explores several
synthetically useful coupling reactions to generate trifluoromethanes and
difluoroalkyl ketones. Mechanistic studies provide factors (e.g. steric and
electronic effects, coordinating ability) that control the rates and efficiency
of decarboxylative metallation, and provide insight to improve the
transformations.