* 1455132
* CAREER: Combinatorial Methods in Low-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Joshua Greene, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

Topology refers broadly to the study of shapes, and low-dimensional topology
refers specifically to their study in dimensions one through four. These
dimensions are special from an anthropic perspective, since they model our
everyday perception of the physical world, and from a mathematical perspective,
since the phenomena they exhibit and the collection of techniques used to study
them are rather different from those in higher dimensions. Many of these
techniques used to study these phenomena involve combinatorics, the study of
discrete structures. A central goal of this research project is to advance the
combinatorial aspects of these techniques with a view towards concrete problems
in the field. Alongside the research component, the PI proposes activities that
integrate his research interests with education and training initiatives that
reach audiences from the high school level to postdoctoral researchers. For
instance, the PI is actively involved with mathematics enrichment at the high
school level through the Hampshire College Summer Studies in Mathematics and
Mathematical Staircase, Inc. In the context of these programs and in other
mentoring activities, he seeks to inspire the discovery process and aid in the
exposition of beautiful mathematics. A chief outreach activity in the project is
a graduate summer school that will showcase several different perspectives on
one central theme in low-dimensional topology, Dehn
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amongst the various techniques that come to bear
on low-dimensional topology are graphs of surface intersections, exemplified by
the work of Gordon and Luecke, and Heegaard Floer homology, defined and
developed by Ozsváth and Szabó. Both techniques have led to sensational progress
on the main problems in low-dimensional topology. The two approaches lend very
different perspectives on the subject, and they have complementary strengths and
weaknesses. The surface intersection techniques are more direct and rely on the
development of graph theoretic tools in order to draw topological conclusions.
Floer homology methods are less direct but apply heavy machinery to a vast
collection of problems. The PI specifically seeks to blend the combinatorial
ideas stemming from these techniques and others with a view towards some of the
driving problems in low-dimensional topology, spanning topics including the
study of knot diagrams, Dehn surgery, and the curve complex.