* 1455259
* CAREER: Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Sediment Supply and Sorting in Meandering Rivers
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2021
* Peter Nelson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 03/31/2021
* USD 510,848.00

A non-technical description of the project's broader significance and importance

Meandering river channels are one of the most iconic features of the landscape
and the migration of these large bends in rivers are a direct concern to
communities and landowners along the flood plain. The mechanisms of meander
formation and migration have long attracted the attention of scientists and
engineers. There remain, however, considerable gaps in knowledge of these
channels, especially regarding the dynamic interactions among sediment supply,
grain-size of river bed sediment, and the river-bed topography. The scientific
focus of this CAREER project is to explore these relationships using laboratory
flume experiments, analytical theory, and numerical modeling. The results of
this research will have applications to pressing societal issues such as flood
protection, stream channel maintenance, river restoration, and dam removal. The
research will be integrated with an educational and outreach program designed to
introduce K-12 students and the public to important issues in river science and
management, and to improve the educational experience of undergraduate and
graduate engineering students.

A technical description of the project

The scientific objectives of this project are 1) to investigate how channel
curvature affects equilibrium patterns of bed topography and surface sorting, 2)
to examine how changes in sediment supply affect sorting and bed topography in
meandering channels, and 3) to explore the interactions of free and forced bars
in meandering channels of mixed grain size sediment and variable sediment
supply. A comprehensive suite of flume experiments will be conducted to test
several hypotheses. The first experiments will use detailed flow and sediment
transport measurements to examine the mechanisms controlling equilibrium
conditions at different meander curvatures. The second experiments will focus on
questions related to sediment supply effects on bar-pool morphology and the
interactions between free and forced bars in curved channels. In conjunction
with Italian colleagues, the project will develop a theoretical model for river
meandering that incorporates sediment supply and grain sorting. This new model,
along with two-dimensional numerical models, will extend knowledge of processes
of meandering channels beyond the scales achievable in the laboratory.