* 1455445
* IDBR: TYPE A, Online Liquid Chromatography - Surface Enhanced Raman Detection for Metabolic Profiling
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Zachary Schultz, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 01/31/2019
* USD 352,267.00

An award is made to the University of Notre Dame to develop an online surface
enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) detector compatible with liquid chromatography
(LC) whose purpose is to identify metabolites. Developing the SERS detector for
LC provides a unique training opportunity for graduate and undergraduate
students. Training a diverse scientific workforce is essential to maintaining
the high concentration of knowledge- and technology- intensive industries
building and utilizing chemical instrumentation. This project will develop
technology and intellectual property that can be licensed and marketed
commercially while exposing students to this process. Integration of the
research with the PI's teaching will provide a unified platform for promoting
biochemical analysis, providing training opportunities for both graduate and
undergraduate students to gain research skills relevant to academic research and
commercial interests. An outreach program will provide these undergraduate
research opportunities to students from the neighboring, all-woman, St. Mary's
College. The PI is actively exploring leveraging research infrastructure for
both formal coursework and student training. The pedagogical tools developed may
reduce the fiscal cost of education while increasing student engagement in the
scientific research process.

Metabolic profiling has become a valuable tool for systems biology studies. SERS
has demonstrated the ability to detect and identify molecules that are
challenging to characterize by current technology, such as mass spectrometry
(MS), and thus will provide new insights into biochemical pathways associated
with metabolism. The approach builds from our recent results demonstrating high-
throughput, high-sensitivity, SERS detection in flow. The vibrational modes that
give rise to the SERS spectra are sensitive to molecular structure and can
differentiate between isomeric species that are problematic in MS detection. LC-
SERS should provide complementary characterization to the more common LC-MS,
thus providing more complete coverage of the metabolome. To demonstrate the
utility of the approach for metabolomics, metabolic profiling will be performed
on beta-cells following glucose stimulation. By developing a method that works
inline, different sample preparations can be avoided, facilitating adoption by
others.