* 1455162
* CAREER: Control of surface reactivity for catalyzing hydrocarbon formation from CO2
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Anne Co, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 651,729.00

CAREER: Control of Surface Reactivity for Catalyzing Hydrocarbon Formation from
CO2 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific studies have predicted that converting
carbon dioxide to fuels and chemical feedstocks, or using them directly as
solvents, has the potential to reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) emission by
4,000,000,000 tons per year. Electrochemical synthesis is amongst the most
promising chemical process for CO2 conversion, since the technology can be
readily added to our existing industrial infrastructure without major
disruptions. An economically-relevant electrocatalyst has certain requirements
to be effective. It must possess high current densities, low specific
electricity consumption, high selectivity, and a sustained electrode lifetime.
Currently no electrocatalyst for carbon dioxide conversion meets all of these
requirements. The carefully designed surface structures under investigation in
this the project can help understand these catalyst limitations through a
systematic investigation of the relationship between the surface structure and
the electrocatalytic reactivity. Integrated with the research activities are a
series of educational and outreach efforts that build upon existing
infrastructure at The Ohio State University (OSU). A research-intensive
undergraduate laboratory module in electrocatalysis is being developed as part
of the OSU Research Experience to Enhance Learning (REEL) program. Professor Co
and members of her group also participate in outreach activities to increase
interest of underrepresented groups in science and to engage the public through
OSU's STEAM Factory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemical
Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Anne Co of The Ohio
State University in the systematic investigation of the electrochemical
conversion of carbon dioxide to hydrocarbons. A series of highly-controlled
surfaces, designed to promote adsorption of specific intermediates, are being
produced by underpotential deposition of strained copper monolayers and by
porous copper-based bimetallic films, in designs chosen to facilitate the
selective formation of C-H and C-C bonds. A combination of electrochemical and
in situ spectroscopic measurements, complemented by theoretical modelling, are
used to elucidate the mechanistic pathways and the chemical environments around
the active center under electrochemical reaction conditions. The knowledge
gained from the investigation of surface structure and reactivity relationships
in this project has direct impact on the general understanding of surface
electrocatalytic processes, and in the specific reaction of CO2
electroreduction.