* 1455763
* CSBR: Natural History: Upgrading Infrastructure to Protect an Irreplaceable and Heavily Used Primate Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Neil Duncan, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 498,439.00

An award has been made to the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) for
improving storage, curation, and access to a nationally significant collection
of nonhuman primate (monkey and ape) specimens. The AMNH has one of the largest
primate collections in the world, including over 10,000 specimens collected on
dozens of museum expeditions to South America, Africa, and Asia. The AMNH
collection preserves host specimens from large field surveys of scientifically
important microbes and parasites and is an archive of biological diversity in
many formerly pristine landscapes subsequently altered by human activities. This
collection is a national resource for training undergraduate, graduate-student,
and postdoctoral researchers from the United States and abroad. Primates are
also studied by anthropologists for clues about human evolution, and primate
research is also important for understanding the origins of human diseases (like
AIDS and malaria), which are caused by microbes that evolved in monkeys and
apes. Additionally, the collection is often used as a basis for illustrations in
field guides used by the public. Specimens for public exhibits are viewed by
millions of museum-goers every year.

This award will contribute to the long-term research and societal value of the
AMNH primate collection by protecting vulnerable specimens on archival
substrates in new dust- and insect-proof cabinetry, cleaning and repairing
specimens, decompressing and reorganizing the collection, georeferencing, and
improving data quality. Currently, much of this collection is stored in old
cabinets, where skins are discolored by dust and urban soot and at risk from
insect pests. AMNH houses one of the largest and most heavily used mammal
collections in the world. On average, more than 200 unaffiliated researchers
visit the AMNH mammal collection every year, the AMNH Department of Mammalogy
loans about 1800 specimens annually to researchers at other institutions, and an
online collection database provides access to specimen data. Primates comprise a
uniquely important part of the mammal collection. Primate researchers account
for more than 40 percent of total visitor activity in the Department of
Mammalogy and account for a substantial fraction of publications based on AMNH
mammals. Traditional museum research with this material has produced hundreds of
scientific publications over the last 100 years, and new technologies (such as
CT scanning and 3D laser-imaging) allow modern researchers to use AMNH primate
specimens for a wide range of non-traditional research purposes. A
professionally produced video posted on the AMNH main website and its YouTube
channel (the latter with more than 41,000 subscribers and millions of annual
visitors) will serve to educate viewers about these important functions and
about the challenges of museum specimen conservation.