* 1455142
* CAREER: Assessing Long-Term Sociocultural Impacts in Disaster Recovery Efforts
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2023
* Mark Schuller, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 430,481.00

Recovery efforts following natural disasters are notoriously fraught with
challenges. While recovery efforts are initially aided by large amounts of
government and private contributions, appropriate assessment requires
consideration of a range of variables that might influence the pace of recovery.
This project explores what happens once the media attention has ebbed and aid
organizations begin to leave the area. Do these disasters and the recovery
efforts result in long-term sociocultural changes, and what are the implications
for those changes on development and economic revitalization of these areas? As
a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award, the project integrates
research and training to more effectively reinforce the infrastructure necessary
to conduct effective scientific research. Funds would support graduate students
with scientific and methodological training, field experience, and support in
completing their theses. Widely-disseminated results will help inform future
humanitarian policy and practice, and would forge international scientific
cooperation in area of disaster recovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mark Schiller of
Northern Illinois University explores the question of what long term changes to
local socio-cultural institutions remain following the end of an aid or
development project. Haiti's 2010 earthquake was one of the world's deadliest
disasters in recent memory. It also inspired one of the most generous
international humanitarian responses ever attempted. Despite the continuing
global recession, governments pledged over $10 billion and private citizens
contributed over $3 billion. The proposed research will offer methodological
insights into ethnographic evaluation of INGOs (international non-governmental
organizations) in disaster recovery efforts. The proposed five-year research
project uses a purposive sample of eight rural communities with differing
presence of humanitarian and development INGOs before and after the earthquake.
While the researcher conducts interviews with donor, state, and organizational
representatives, a team of graduate students shares responsibilities for
participant observation and interview methods on social indicators, including
level of dependence, independent mobilization, spatial organization, and what
the researcher has termed "civic infrastructure," noting evolution over time.
The educational component includes a research methods seminar in Haiti and a
two-week Field School training, held concurrently with an NGO Summer Institute
at Northern Illinois University.