* 1455596
* IDBR: TYPE A  Precise Manipulation and Patterning of Protein Nanocrystals Using Surface Acoustic Wave Technology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Tony Jun Huang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2018
* USD 288,526.00

An award is made to SUNY at Stony Brook to develop a device for the precise
manipulation and patterning of protein nanocrystals using surface acoustic wave
technology. Structural biology impacts virtually all fields of biology and
biomedicine. By increasing the efficiency of data collection, this device will
decrease the time required to solve crystal structures, conserving precious
resources and making it possible to collect data on samples that would be
otherwise impractical or impossible. The result will be a major positive impact
on every field of biology that makes use of structural data, and the potential
for significant advances benefiting human health. This cross-disciplinary work
is also an ideal opportunity to provide education and experience to a variety of
trainees. Graduate students, undergraduates and high school students involved
with this project will learn aspects of engineering and its application to
biology. Additional educational components of this work include video
demonstrations and tutorials on the use and applications of this technology, the
creation of teaching modules to introduce undergraduates to acoustofluidics and
the promotion of the participation of under-represented groups by active
participation in STEM explorations and diversity-enhancing
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this device is to manipulate and
pattern protein crystals for X-ray crystallography. X-ray crystallography is an
extremely powerful and well established technique used to determine the atomic
resolution structure of biomolecules from the diffraction of X-rays by
crystalline samples. The majority of structures solved by this technique make
use of X-rays generated at synchrotron sources or, more recently, by free
electron lasers (FELs). Advances in technology at these sources have made
possible increasing flux with ever decreasing beam sizes. This is largely driven
by the increasing complexity and size of the biomolecular specimens that are
being analyzed. Many of the most exciting targets, including protein complexes,
membrane proteins and viruses, are extremely difficult to isolate, purify and
crystallize. These types of samples, as well as many others, may only yield
crystals of a few micrometers or less in size during crystallization trials.
While modern X-ray sources make data collection on microcrystals feasible,
conventional means of crystal manipulation are inadequate to handle crystals of
such small proportions. The device to manipulate and pattern protein
nanocrystals will make use of biocompatible surface acoustic wave technology to
move fragile crystals of virtually any size. This device, which will be robust,
inexpensive to fabricate and easy to implement by non-experts, will
significantly improve throughput and vastly decrease sample consumption. The
implementation of this device will enable the use of previously intractable
samples and broaden the accessibility of micro-focus and serial crystallography.