* 1455572
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Documenting differences in gene expression during human tooth development to understand the evolution of the primate dentition
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Martin Cohn, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2018
* USD 29,966.00

Primate species, including humans, have diverse dental patterns that reflect
different dietary and ecological specializations, but the genetic mechanisms
that underlie these differences are poorly understood. The goal of this study is
to identify specific genes that are responsible for tooth formation and tooth
shape in humans and other primates. The investigators will use human and mouse
dental tissues in conjunction with state-of-the-art molecular techniques to
identify genes and measure differences in gene expression across tooth types
(i.e. incisors, canines, premolars). The findings from this novel and
potentially transformative study will not only advance science by informing
research on dental evolution, but may have societal impact by contributing to
the understanding and future treatment of dental malformations in humans.

In this 24 month study, cutting-edge RNA sequencing technology will be used to
quantify levels of expression of all genes at a key stage in human tooth
development (cap stage), and to compare dental gene expression in humans and
mice. Identifying individual genes that are the primary determinants of a
tooth's cusp pattern will help explain how the human dentition is patterned
during development and what dental genes have been conserved during mammalian
evolution. This research will result in novel, testable hypotheses of how
differences in gene expression may produce dental variation and adaptations seen
in extinct and extant primate species. This represents a first step towards
understanding evolutionary transitions that gave rise to the present dental
diversity among primates because the genetic and developmental drivers of
changes in tooth shape cannot be uncovered until the formation of differently
shaped teeth is fully characterized. In addition, knowledge of the genetic
components required for tooth formation will provide potentially transformative
new information on the genetic underpinnings of anatomical anomalies in teeth.
The project will also provide student training and scientific outreach,
including a guided-inquiry lab in which undergraduate students will test
hypotheses of the correspondence between tooth morphology, function, and diet in
mammals and learn how differently-shaped teeth develop.