* 1455151
* CAREER: Characterizing the First Billion Years of Galaxy Evolution with 21 cm Tomography
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2015,12/31/2021
* James Aguirre, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 12/31/2021
* USD 583,900.00

The researcher will address a major question in Astronomy, understanding the
first formation of galaxies. Our most distant vision of the universe comes from
radio wavelength observations. Their plan is to implement critical components of
the next generation radio telescope. This telescope will observe the heating of
the gas between galaxies, which happened when the first stars in galaxies
formed. These first stars in the first galaxies are too distant to be seen in
optical light, but can be detected in radio waves. Because these first galaxies
are seen from a great distance, the radio waves are found to be shifted to much
lower frequencies, making these observations very difficult.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will contribute to the study in two key
ways: 1) investigating the effects of polarization calibration and foreground
sources on power spectrum estimation and 2) developing the observational and
analysis techniques to cross-correlate Epoch of Re-ionization data with other
data sets. The critical goal is extracting cosmological information, and their
approach is based on semi-analytic models of re-ionization
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary broader impact activity is a novel
one that goes beyond traditional efforts in this regime and was particularly
well integrated with the research. They will convert an unused 10-m satellite
dish into a community-use radio telescope in a high-poverty neighborhood, which
will be used for high-school science projects. This includes involving students
in the reconstruction of the dish. The students will use technology being
developed for the experiment to detect the formation of galaxies.