* 1455415
* EAGER: US Ignite: Real-Time Monitoring of Air Pollution via Mobile Sensors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Michael Savoie, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 04/30/2017
* USD 113,603.00

This project creates an integrated pollution identification grid that provides
detailed, real-time data on air pollution creation points. Utah Valley, like
other areas of the country, experiences severe unhealthy "inversion" days, and
localized air pollution "hot spots" throughout the year. These conditions cause
major health problems for people living and working throughout the valley.
Current air pollution monitoring utilizes a limited number of fixed sampling and
data collection points with little opportunity to create control methods to
reduce pollution levels in real-time as they change throughout the day. The air
quality at street level is generally unknown. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
provides a system to collect real-time, interactive data on the location, time,
direction, and amount of pollution created to support pollution control efforts
underway by various public and private entities in the state. Mobile monitoring
units and large-bandwidth wireless networks allow the data to be collected,
processed, and reported in real time. With this information, air pollution hot
spots can be identified and responses taken immediately to correct pollution
causing conditions and improve overall air quality. The key technical elements
of the project are the collection of continuous data from mobile monitoring
units mounted on vehicles owned by government agencies, commercial fleets and
private cars, then using high-speed wireless systems to backhaul the data to a
central data center. With this information, air pollution hot spots are
identified and responses taken immediately to correct pollution causing
conditions and improve overall air quality.