* 1455233
* CAREER: Two-dimensional Van Der Waals systems with tunable spin-orbit coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Enrico Rossi, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2021
* USD 475,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research
and education to investigate the properties of novel materials made of stacked
two-dimensional layers in which the way electrons interact with each other and
with the crystal lattice, and the role of materials defects can be controlled
and tuned experimentally. This research is motivated by recent experimental
breakthroughs that have demonstrated that single, one-atom thick, layers of
different materials can be isolated and then stacked to form novel systems, "van
der Waals systems", in which the different layers are held together by a weak
electrostatic interaction named after the Dutch Nobel prize winner Johannes
Diderik van der Waals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties of van der Waals
systems can be engineered and tuned to an unprecedented degree by selecting the
materials forming the structure, and the stacking order. Of particular interest
is the spin-orbit interaction. Electrons have an intrinsic property called spin
where it appears as if the electron spins like a tiny top. The spin of the
electron is also connected to its intrinsic magnetic properties; it behaves as
though it was a tiny bar magnet. As an electron moves through a material it will
experience a magnetic field from the atomic cores in the lattice as a
consequence of the theory of relativity. The PI will investigate the effect of
tunable spin-orbit interactions and crystalline imperfections on the equilibrium
state of the electrons and on the way charge and spin move through van der Waals
systems. Impurities are often regarded as a nuisance that spoils the properties
of a clean system. However, impurities can be essential to obtain desirable
physical effects and can be used as unique atomic-scale probes of the ground
state of the host system. The PI plans to study impurity-induced states in van
der Waals systems and to explore the possibility to use disorder to achieve
novel functionalities in these materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
activities supported by this award include the design and development of a
portable kit to carry out demonstrations for K-12 students. This Physics in a
Briefcase will be used to reach economically disadvantaged schools. The PI will
also develop a new course on condensed matter physics tailored to advanced
undergraduate and 1st-2nd year graduate students, and a multimedia "wikibook"
created from students' contributions to present and disseminate course material
to students and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education
to investigate the interplay between spin-orbit coupling, electron-electron
interactions, and disorder, in newly realized van der Waals materials. The spin-
orbit coupling, interactions, and disorder strength can be tuned in these
materials by varying experimentally controllable quantities. The PI plans to
study: (i) the effect of tunable spin-orbit coupling on correlated states; (ii)
how the type and strength of disorder affects the ground state and investigate
the possibility to realize disorder-tuned phase transitions between different
broken-symmetry states; (iii) the effect of tunable spin-orbit coupling on the
properties of impurity bound states; (iv) anomalous coupled charge-spin
transport and current-driven spin torques and how they can be modified by tuning
the spin-orbit coupling. To carry out this investigation the PI will use a
combination of field-theoretic, diagrammatic, and computational approaches. In
particular, computational methods based on a functional approach developed by
the PI will be used to study the presence of disorder with a correlation length
larger than the Fermi wavelength of the electrons. The theoretical description
will be verified and refined via close collaboration with experimental
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By studying van der Waals systems with tunable
spin-orbit coupling, interactions, and disorder, the proposed research will
provide theoretical results that will transcend the field of van der Waals
systems and be directly relevant to the broad topic of the effect of spin-orbit
coupling in electronic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational activities
supported by this award include the design and development of a portable kit to
carry out demonstrations for K-12 students. This Physics in a Briefcase will be
used to reach economically disadvantaged schools. The PI will also develop a new
course on condensed matter physics tailored to advanced undergraduate and
1st-2nd year graduate students, and a multimedia "wikibook" created from
students' contributions to present and disseminate course material to students
and the public.