* 1455381
* CAREER:   Disentangling CO2 Fluxes in a Tropical Rainforest Using Carbonyl Sulfide
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2023
* Ulrike Seibt, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2023
* USD 594,034.00

The primary objective of this CAREER project is to quantify gross carbon dioxide
(CO2) fluxes in a tropical forest and obtain new understanding of processes
linking these fluxes to environmental conditions. This project uses carbonyl
sulfide (COS), an atmospheric trace gas, as a proxy for carbon dioxide uptake by
plants, since both gases are consumed inside leaf cells by the same enzyme. This
method will be used to estimate Gross Primary Production (GPP) through
photosynthesis in a tropical rain forest. The results will provide a better
understanding of the carbon cycle and its role in the Earth system science. Both
the Atmospheric Chemistry Program and the Ecosystem Science Program at NSF are
supporting this interdisciplinary project. The Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) Program is a Foundation-wide activity that offers the National Science
Foundation's most prestigious awards in support of junior faculty who exemplify
the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent education
and the integration of education and research within the context of the mission
of their organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three methods being employed for
estimating ecosystem GPP in the rainforest are: (1) a field campaign to measure
ecosystem fluxes of COS as novel tracer of GPP, (2) a network of distributed
flux chambers to obtain new information on spatial and temporal patterns of
plant and soil CO2 fluxes, and (3) an education-outreach program that will
collect long-term data on CO2 fluxes across the forest canopy. The field study
will take place at La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica, a site that has
hosted over 12 years of ongoing rainforest research. The results of this
research will help to answer questions such as how CO2 uptake responds to
variations in soil moisture, light and temperature. The study will provide new
information on the relationship of ecosystem respiration to changes in
temperature during the day and night and help to explain how changes in GPP and
ecosystem respiration contribute to large interannual fluctuations in both net
ecosystem exchange and forest growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is well
integrated with several educational activities, such as the development of a
sensor lab course to provide advanced undergraduate students with hands-on field
experiences. There are also plans for an outreach program for K-12 students at
the Stunt Ranch Reserve (a biological field station) in the Santa Monica
Mountains and the creation of a Legacy dataset at the field site involving high
school students and college level students from both the U.S. and Costa Rica.