* 1455335
* CAREER: SusChEM: Exploiting the Versatile N-O Bond
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2015
* Laszlo Kurti, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 405,000.00

Abstract

With this CAREER award the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry Division
is supporting the research of Professor László Kürti of the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center. Professor Kürti is developing powerful new chemical
tools that can be used for the rapid and environmentally friendly synthesis of
complex molecules such as pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals that contain densely
functionalized aromatic rings. The common theme in these newly developed
chemical transformations is that weak N-O bonds are broken and strong carbon-
carbon as well as carbon-nitrogen bonds are formed with great efficiency.
Importantly, this approach avoids the use of transition metal catalysts that are
expensive and often toxic. The operationally simple and transition metal-free
direct arylation and amination reactions that emerge from these studies will be
easily accessible to researchers in a wide-range of academic and industrial
laboratories. Overall, the outcome of this research is expected to have a broad
impact on society by providing, both directly and indirectly, greener and
cheaper access to valuable organic molecules that find utility in catalysis,
materials science and drug discovery. Each year Professor Kürti is offering a
series of campus-wide special-topic seminars on key green chemistry principles,
current applications in pharmaceutical process chemistry and discussing the
challenges and advances in sustainable organic synthesis. A teacher-training
program for high school science teachers is provided by Professor Kurti to relay
the importance of chemistry with examples focused on new cures for various
diseases.

Professor Kürti's laboratory is exploring several fundamentally new strategies
for the transition-metal (TM)-free direct arylation of arenes and intramolecular
amination of arenes. There are three objectives. First, the TM-free direct
arylation of arenes, via [3,3]-sigmatropic rearrangement of N,O-biaryl
hydroxylamines as well as S,O-biaryl sulfoxides. Second, the scope and
limitation of the TM-free direct amination of arene C-H bonds. Third, primarily
through collaborations, the mechanisms of these TM-free arylation and amination
reactions are being computationally elucidated. The proposed research
significantly advances the field of sustainable organic synthesis by expanding
the toolbox of mechanistically well-understood green chemical transformations
for the introduction and functionalization of aryl rings.