* 1455406
* Disordered Systems and Stochastic Growth Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Ilya Gruzberg, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2015
* USD 28,806.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The Division of Materials Research and the Division of Mathematical Sciences
contribute funds to this award. This award supports research and education in
theoretical condensed matter physics in two related subjects: disordered systems
and stochastic growth phenomena.

The projects the PI will engage on disordered systems include: the study of
conformal invariance, multifractal critical functions, and symmetry of
multifractal spectra at Anderson transitions; critical states and the integer
quantum Hall effect in low magnetic fields; general network models for Anderson
localization in all symmetry classes and the supersymmetry method for them; the
theory of quantum Hall transitions and other disordered critical points in two
dimensions based on conformal restriction theory and Schramm-Loewner evolution;
localization and Anderson transitions in class D, including the random bond
Ising model; network models with structural disorder, and other disordered
systems on random surfaces. In the area of stochastic growth the specific
projects will be the Schramm-Loewner evolution for critical systems with
extended chiral symmetries: Wess-Zumino-Witten models and parafermionc theories;
theoretical and mathematical aspects of conformal restriction in the bulk;
models of stochastic growth interpolating between deterministic Laplacian growth
and stochastic diffusion-limited aggregation and similar processes; stochastic
perturbations of general classical integrable systems.

The proposed theoretical developments connect with experimental studies of
quantum Hall transitions and of various driven systems exhibiting unstable
interfacial motion. The research will also make contact with direct computer
simulations through collaborators who are experts in large-scale numerical
simulations.

The research has a strong education component involving the training of graduate
students, and involves substantial international collaboration with research
teams in France, Germany, and Japan, which will enrich the research enterprise
in the physical sciences in the US.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The Division of Materials Research and the Division of Mathematical Sciences
contribute funds to this award. This award supports research and education in
theoretical condensed matter physics in two related subjects: disordered systems
and stochastic growth phenomena.

Impurities, lattice imperfections, and other forms of disorder crucially affect
properties of electronic and other materials. Disorder alone can prevent
electric current from flowing, turning a metal into an insulator. This is a
consequence of the wave nature of the electron and the interference of electron
waves scattered by impurities. The PI will use sophisticated theoretical
concepts and mathematical methods to advance understanding of this
transformation between a metal and an insulator as the amount of disorder is
varied. The PI will also study how this transformation takes place in a quantum
Hall system where electron conduction is richly complex. A quantum Hall system
is a gas of electrons confined to a plane in an artificial semiconductor
structure with an applied magnetic field perpendicular to the plane. The
conduction of electrons through a quantum Hall system varies in interesting ways
depending on the strength of the magnetic field. Of particular interest is the
effect of the interplay of the magnetic field with disorder on the conduction of
electrons through a quantum Hall system. The PI will also use sophisticated
mathematical methods to advance understanding of random patterns that arise in
growth. Examples of such patterns are evident in soot particles, bacterial
colonies grown in a Petri dish, fingered patterns of minerals deposited by water
seeping through porous rock, and vortices in turbulent fluid flows. The shapes
that arise are generally rough and fractal - when examined more closely, a
magnified image looks the same as the unaided image. These fractals are often
driven by random forces, requiring their characterization in terms of
probabilities. The research has a strong education component involving the
training of graduate students, and involves substantial international
collaboration with research teams in France, Germany, and Japan, which will
enrich the research enterprise in the physical sciences in the US.