* 1455744
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding Cultural Influences On Population Structure and History through Genetic Analyses of Assyrians
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,12/31/2016
* David Merriwether, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2016
* USD 11,831.00

Understanding the cultural and behavioral factors that shape human populations
is important for studying the complex history and modern day distribution of our
species. Language, religion, geopolitical boundaries, and sociocultural
pressures are four such factors, but it is often difficult to explore their
effects on population structure within a single population. This study explores
the population genetics of present-day Assyrians, a Near Eastern ethnoreligious
minority. Due to their relative isolation since the Sassanid Era, Assyrians are
an excellent population for understanding the effects of linguistic, religious,
and sociopolitical boundaries on populations, and for reconstructing the
population history of Mesopotamia, an area of exceptional importance for the
study of prehistoric and historic human migrations, the spread of agriculture,
and the advent of modern civilization. The project will also bring attention to
Assyrians as one of the fastest-growing underrepresented communities in the
United States, introduce members of the Assyrian community to anthropological
genetics and anthropology, and support the professional development of a
graduate student who is also a member of this community.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;During this 12-month project, the investigators will determine
mitochondrial and Y-chromosome haplotypes for at least 140 unrelated Assyrian
individuals in the United States, mainly from Chicago area, home of the largest
Assyrian population (n=80,000) outside of the Near East. Various genetic
analytic methods will be used to measure differences in haplotype distributions
among Assyrians originating from different countries (geopolitical boundaries),
and between Assyrians and other Near Eastern populations (language, religious,
and social boundaries). The project has the potential to significantly advance
generalizable knowledge in human population genetics, in addition to filling in
gaps in the population history of an individual culture and a historically
important region of the world. Results will be disseminated through professional
presentations and journals, but also through public outreach within and beyond
the Assyrian community.