* 1455625
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genetics of hominin brain evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Jennifer Baker, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2016
* USD 16,806.00

Paleoanthropology uses the fossil record to work out how and when the defining
characteristics of humans, such as large-brains, upright walking, extended
juvenile period, and increased longevity, evolved. Advances in molecular biology
now make it possible to investigate how the genes of our forbearers might have
been modified to generate these defining characteristics. This project focuses
on the evolution of a gene (NR2C1) potentially involved in early brain
development, and will compare the activity of human versus non-human ape
versions of the gene in mouse cells. The data that are generated will advance
our understanding of the unique molecular interactions at play in the evolution
and development of the modern human brain. In addition, the project has broader
impacts to society that include potential pharmacological applications,
generation of new, shared genetic data, training of a non-traditional, female
graduate student, and public science education and outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear receptor genes are implicated in the control of
growth and development, hormone regulation and behavior. Preliminary evidence
suggests that one of these genes, NR2C1, has undergone positive selection in the
human lineage. In this six-month study, copies of NR2C1 will be generated for
modern humans and chimpanzees, and predicted/reconstructed for a last common
ancestor (LCA) of chimpanzees/bonobos and modern humans. These three different
gene variants will be inserted into mouse embryonic stem cells that have had
NR2C1 knocked down, allowing quantification of the transcriptional and
regulatory functions of NR2C1. These methods will allow the investigators to
analyze how alterations to the modern human version of NR2C1 may have resulted
in the morphological or functional changes we see in the modern human brain.
Data on the locations and timing of primate amino acid substitutions for all 48
primate nuclear receptor genes will be generated and will be of interest to the
general public and to researchers in biological anthropology, evolutionary
biology, medical genetics, neuroscience, and pharmacology. The graduate student
researcher, who has years of experience as a biology teacher, is dedicated to
providing well-designed student and public education about evolutionary
processes.