* 1455709
* Damage and Instability Detection of Civil Large-scale Space Structures Under Operational and Multi-hazard Environments based on Change in Macro-geometrical Patterns/Shapes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Guirong (Grace) Yan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 02/28/2019
* USD 324,262.00

Civil structures such as sports stadiums, arenas and auditoriums are usually
built for venues where hundreds or even thousands of people assemble. A possible
collapse of roof dome of this type of structure may risk many lives. This
research focuses on an automatic structural health monitoring system for large
domes that can provide early warning of structural problems from instability or
damage to structural members resulting in collapse. Early warning can facilitate
decision-making on repair or demolition, leading to worry-free structures for
both the general public and the owners. The system has potential use to protect
historical structures (e.g., cathedrals), to verify the appropriateness of
repairs of dome structures, and to evaluate the health condition of these
structures after an earthquake or a strong wind event.

The objective of this research is to develop innovative yet practical approaches
to detect damage and instability in space structures under operational or multi-
hazard environments. This research objective will be achieved through three
research tasks: 1) develop an approach to detect damage based on the status of
fractal patterns of structural member configuration using fractal geometry; 2)
develop different approaches to detect instabilities, including individual
members buckling, nodal snap-through instability or dynamic instability; and 3)
integrate these approaches through a wireless sensor network with multi-metric
measurements (tilt angles, strains and/or accelerations) to form a structural
health monitoring system. The goal is to achieve automatic early-warning of
damage, instability and potential collapse. Although projected approaches work
on the shape/pattern changes of the structure, no direct displacement
measurements will be required. The shape/pattern changes are strategically
reflected in tilt angles, strains and accelerations, which can be measured
easily. These approaches also do not require baseline response data. The
developed structural health monitoring system can detect instability and can
work under multi-hazard environments.