* 1455601
* Collaborative Research: Transitions and Transcriptomics: a Novel Approach to Understanding Shifts in Floral Developmental Pathways Preceding the Origin of the Pentapetalae
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Andre Chanderbali, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 327,599.00

Flowering plants are the most abundant and diverse form of plant life on Earth.
This dominance is largely due to the evolutionary success of one group, the
Pentapetalae, characterized by whorled flower parts in multiples of five, which
account for over 70% of described species. In contrast, flower parts are
arranged in multiples of three (monocots, for example), two, or a variable
number in less abundant groups of flowering plants. The shift to whorled
pentamery of the Pentapetalae occurred about 100 million years ago, and appears
to have been one of the most successful evolutionary innovations of not only
flowering plants, but of green plants in general. This research will investigate
the evolution of the underlying genetic changes that contributed to this ancient
evolutionary event. It promises to discover the new and/or modified genetic
pathways that produced the typical Pentapetalae flower, one of the major
mysteries of plant evolution. Several undergraduates will be trained in
phylogenetic and molecular biology methods and analyses, and high school
teachers will participate in the research through a summer workshop. Data
generated will be shared freely online and will provide tools for other
researchers and the public to investigate other questions about flowering plant
evolution.

The researchers will sequence genes expressed during flower development in a
phylogenetically representative sample of flowering plants and employ state-of-
the-art transcriptome analysis techniques to achieve three major goals. Firstly,
phylogenetic relationships among lineages subtending the Pentapetalae clade will
be reconstructed. Robustly resolved phylogenetic relationships of the lineages
preceding the shift to the pentamerous whorled flower are currently lacking but
pivotal to interpreting the evolutionary sequence of genetic changes that
underlie this key morphological innovation. Secondly, several comparative
methods will be used to identify, date, and determine the evolutionary impact of
whole-genome and/or gene duplication event(s) that predate the origin of the
Pentapetalae. The occurrence of whole-genome duplication events prior to
Pentapetalae is widely acknowledged but their precise positions are uncertain.
Lastly, RNA-seq and in situ hybridization approaches will be used to infer
spatial patterns of gene expression in non-Pentapetalae versus Pentapetalae
flowers to identify gene expression changes that correlate with a shift to
whorled pentamery in the latter. Together, this integration of approaches will
provide exciting new insights into our understanding of flowering plant
evolution