* 1455413
* Collaborative Research: Innovating and Experiencing Punishment
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Lori Sexton, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 04/30/2019
* USD 60,323.00

This research examines the causes and effects of changing punishment and
incarceration practices, with a particular focus on the deepening divide between
harsh, high-security prisons and more humane, low-security prisons. The research
explores 1) when and how more punitive decisions in penal incarceration get made
over less punitive ones, 2) how prisoners and staff experience the
implementation of these decisions within different facilities, 3) whether and
how penal consciousness differs across prison security levels, and 4) how
punishment innovation develops through bottom-up, local-level decision-making.
By developing a greater understanding of the factors that contribute to
punishment innovation in models of incarceration and the effects of these
innovations on prisoners and prison staff, this work will advance sociolegal and
criminological understanding of penal exceptionalism, local-level prison
innovation, and the experience of punishment. Findings will facilitate continued
interchange of ideas that inform current U.S. policies and practices and
contribute to a growing interest among policymakers in alternative incarceration
models. Broader impacts include the training and education of undergraduate
students and building an increasingly international community of punishment
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design extends U.S.-focused work to
Denmark, a nation often touted as a model of humane and limited incarceration.
Known in the U.S. primarily for its "open" prisons--facilities free of perimeter
fences and at least partially integrated with non-prison communities--Denmark
has a long but largely unacknowledged history of solitary confinement. This
study takes the design and opening of Denmark's newest, high-tech, maximum-
security prison with a dedicated isolation wing as a starting point for
examining the causes and effects of the deepening divide between harsh and
humane punishment. Providing a detailed, localized analysis of punishment
innovation and experience, and employing methods that include examination of
government documents, analysis of news coverage, and interviews with key prison
managers, architects, policymakers, prisoners, and prison staff, the project
traces the inception, implementation, and impact of a particular punishment
innovation.