* 1455220
* CAREER: Harnessing Nitrogen-Heteroatom Bonds for Unsaturated Carbon-Carbon Bond Difunctionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Qiu Wang, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 05/31/2022
* USD 673,199.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program supports fundamental
research to be carried out by Professor Qiu Wang at Duke University. Professor
Wang will develop new synthetic routes to organic compounds that contain
nitrogen. Organonitrogen compounds are widely distributed in nature and they
display a broad range of biological activities. Efficient multistep processes
are being developed to construct carbon-nitrogen bonds through the use of
versatile intermediates. In addition to applications in biological and chemical
science, this research has the potential to impact the pharmaceutical, chemical
and agricultural industries through the creation of efficient routes leading
from readily available starting materials to important nitrogen-containing
synthetic intermediates. This research aims to provide broadly applicable
strategies for the synthesis of more complex organic structures. To motivate
young minds, Professor Wang will develop a training foundation directed at
involving women and underrepresented minority students in cutting-edge chemical
research. This educational program will encourage students to think creatively
and collaboratively, building the skills necessary to undertake complex
scientific and social challenges and encouraging students to pursue careers in
scientific discovery. Toward this goal, Professor Wang will work with North
Carolina local high schools and the Duke Service-Learning Program to provide
opportunities for high school students to conduct hands-on experiments at the
frontiers of chemistry research. This outreach program will recruit faculty,
graduate students and undergraduate students as science ambassadors to visit
local schools and to speak on their research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Wang's research focuses on the direct introduction of 1,2-diamino-functionality
onto diverse unsaturated carbon-carbon bonds. The project involves the study of
reactivity in reagents bearing nitrogen-heteroatom bonds (N-X; X=Cl, Br, I, OR)
with the goal of developing operationally simple and efficient amino-
functionalization reactions, including (1) the amino-halogenation of arynes to
prepare ortho-functionalized aminoarenes, (2) intramolecular amino-fluorination
to prepare fluorinated aza-heterocycles, and (3) intra- and intermolecular
alkene diamination reactions designed to prepare valuable vicinal diamines.
Experimental studies are planned to provide insight into the mechanism and
stereochemical outcome of these reactions, potentially guiding the design of
second generation N-X to N-C transformations.