* 1455289
* CAREER: Introducing Hierarchical Architectures into Advanced Functional Organic Materials Controlling the Secondary and Tertiary Structure of Carbon Nanocoils
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Felix Fischer, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2020
* USD 624,592.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Felix Fischer of the University
of California at Berkley is developing new synthetic polymers that can mimic the
diverse structural features of naturally occurring biological polymers. Polymers
are long chain organic molecules and are found in many facets of everyday life,
and while synthetic polymers have been adapted to almost every aspect of our
industrialized culture, their performance and structural diversity still falls
short when compared to their biological analogues. The diversity both in
architecture and function emerging from biological polymers ranges from
molecular machinery, data and energy storage, to structural support that spans
over several orders of magnitude, e.g. from the size of a sugar molecule (tiny
fractions of a millimeter) to the height of a Sequoia tree (greater than 100
meters). The educational activities being pursued include the education and
training of undergraduate and graduate students, establishing a "Girls Day" at
the College of Chemistry at UC Berkeley, and participating in the "Touch a
Molecule" program as a content contributor and a mentor.

In this project, Professor Fischer is developing new synthetic tools to encode
higher order structure and complex function into artificial polymers with the
goal of tuning both their physical properties (e.g. size, shape, electronic
structure) and function (chemical reactivity or response to external stimuli) at
the molecular scale and controlling both their programmed assembly and their
cooperative interaction in precisely defined higher order architectures.
Specifically, Professor Fischer is synthesizing poly(arylene ethynylenes) (PAEs)
and "carbon nanocoils" using a relatively new polymerization methodology: ring-
opening alkyne metathesis (ROAMP). The experimental plans includes exploring
methodology to synthesize ring-strained monomers to access ortho-, meta-, and
para-substituted PAEs, to develop molybdenum alkylidyne catalysts that well
effect a living polymerization of the monomers, to study the conformational
folding and secondary structures of the resultant PAEs, and to direct their
further self-assembly.