* 1455296
* CAREER: Quantum anomalies and collective dynamics in symmetry-protected topological phases
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Shinsei Ryu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 11/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research that explores exotic quantum
mechanical phases of condensed matter, called topological phases, which interact
strongly or arise only in the presence of strong electron interactions. The
recent discovery of a new state of matter, called the topological insulator, has
created great excitement and led to a number of revolutionary developments in
condensed matter physics. One of the key features of topological insulators is
related to their peculiar transport properties. Usual transport phenomena of
electrons (the flow of an electric current) in solids are accompanied with
dissipation (Joule heating). Topological states of matter, on the other hand,
can support dissipation-free quantum transport through their boundaries while
remaining insulating in the bulk. Such quantum transport phenomena of
topological origin are promising candidates for electronics and spintronics with
low energy cost. Excitations in topological media have also been expected to
provide a promising platform for quantum computation that could outperform its
classical counterpart by orders of magnitude in terms of computational speed.

While non-interacting and disorder-free topological insulators are reasonably
well understood, an important next challenge is to understand topological phases
of matter that are strongly interacting or that arise only in the presence of
strong electron interactions. This is the research theme that is pursued in this
project. Electrons in solids can interact with each other strongly through the
Coulomb repulsion, and this strong interaction can sometimes lead to exotic,
unexpected forms of matter. By developing new theoretical approaches, the PI
will search for novel, fully interacting phases of matter that may be
characterized by new topological phenomena.

The research activities in this project are interdisciplinary in nature and
designed to stimulate interactions between condensed matter theory and other
fields of academia, such as high-energy physics, computational physics,
mathematics, and materials science. Success in these projects will impact many
areas of theoretical physics, and may further connect to concrete numerical
simulations and to experiments in condensed matter systems. Students and young
researchers from various backgrounds, including condensed matter, materials
science, high-energy physics, and mathematics will be integrated into the
research activities. They will be trained as a new generation of researchers who
will be able to work across and between disciplines in the future. In
particular, the PI will organize workshops and summer schools for young
scientists from the U.S. and Japan on the topic of topological phenomena.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research that explores topological phases
of matter, which are strongly interacting or which arise only in the presence of
strong electron interactions. By developing new theoretical approaches, the PI
will search for novel, fully interacting topological phases of matter that may
be characterized by new topological phenomena. A line of attack taken in this
project is to use quantum anomalies, i.e. breakdowns of symmetries by quantum
effects, to describe and diagnose interacting topological phases, possibly
protected by some symmetry. More specifically, this project aims to:

1) Generalize Laughlin's thought experiment, one of the most powerful
theoretical tools, which establishes the extreme robustness of the quantum Hall
effect against disorder and interactions, in the way it is applicable to a wider
range of topological phases, such as topological phases protected by symmetries
and topological phases that lack particle number conservation.

2) Use quantum anomalies to construct effective actions and to develop
hydrodynamic effective field theory descriptions of collective dynamics of
interacting topological insulators and topological superconductors.

3) Establish a connection between anomalous commutation relations obeyed by
electron position operators (the coordinate non-commutativity) that arise in
topological insulators and collective dynamics of interacting topological
insulators. The research activities in this project are interdisciplinary in
nature and designed to stimulate interactions between condensed matter theory
and other fields of academia, such as high-energy physics, computational
physics, mathematics, and materials science. Success in these projects will
impact many areas of theoretical physics, and may further connect to concrete
numerical simulations and to experiments in condensed matter systems. Students
and young researchers from various backgrounds, including condensed matter,
materials science, high-energy physics, and mathematics will be integrated into
the research activities. They will be trained as a new generation of researchers
who will be able to work across and between disciplines in the future. In
particular, the PI will organize workshops and summer schools for young
scientists from the U.S. and Japan on the topic of topological phenomena.