* 1456973
* Evolution of Mating Communication in Moths: Role of Male Courtship Pheromones
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Coby Schal, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2019
* USD 579,000.00

The overall goal of this project is to understand male-female communication in
animals by integrating mechanistic research at the biochemical-genetic-
behavioral levels with experimental and observational research in the field, and
with research that addresses evolutionary questions. This project will elucidate
the chemical structures of signal molecules and blends (pheromones) used in moth
mating communication, quantify behaviors elicited by these chemicals, uncover
mechanisms of pheromone production and reception, and identify genes that
underlie all these processes. This project will lead to a better understanding
of the evolution of pheromone blends in females and response profiles in males
and females among populations and across closely related species. Because many
moth species are important pests in agricultural crops, forests and stored
grains, this research has practical significance for society through the
discovery of new tools for ecologically based pest control. This project will
train a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student in a multidisciplinary
environment that includes quantitative analysis of behavior, chemical ecology,
neuroscience and genetics. A unique feature of this project is the collaboration
with the University of Amsterdam in the Netherlands and the Max Planck Institute
of Chemical Ecology in Germany, which will offer the postdoctoral researcher and
graduate student unique training in evolutionary, chemical, and molecular
biology in a collaborative international setting. The project will recruit and
train undergraduates from underrepresented demographics from North Carolina
State University and nearby Historically Black Universities. It will develop
outreach programs, including hands-on interactive exercises and discussions in
biodiversity, animal behavior and evolutionary biology. Finally, trainees in
this project will participate in public education and engagement events,
including BugFest (the largest STEM education program in the US with ~35,000
participants annually), Science Cafés, the Science of Attraction (300
participants in 2014), and other public education programs.

Three major questions in animal sexual communication motivate this project: 1)
What features of close-range male sexual signals affect female choice; 2) What
information do components of the male's complex signal convey to the female; and
3) Is the production of male sexual signals biochemically and genetically linked
to production of female signals. Answers to these questions are critical not
only for understanding the roles of reciprocal signaling and mate choice in the
evolution of sexual communication systems in animals, but will also lead to a
better understanding of how the evolution of mating preferences can lead to
reproductive isolation among populations, and ultimately to the origin of new
species. Researchers have largely ignored close-range courtship behavior by male
moths, including the release of close-range sex pheromones, female assessment of
the male pheromone, preference, and ultimately acceptance or rejection of the
male. This project is based on the recent discovery of novel compounds in the
male pheromone gland, some of which share biosynthetic origins with female-
produced pheromones, while others are chemically unrelated and may be
sequestered from larval and adult food. This dual chemistry can provide females
with a dual assessment of the male's ability to (a) de novo biosynthesize
pheromone compounds similar to hers, and (b) acquire essential nutrients, and
grow on a well-defended plant. This project integrates insect mate choice with
insect-plant interaction strategies and investigates the new male compounds as a
novel class of sexual signaling molecules in insects.