* 1456594
* Untangling the Complex Network of BIK1 Mediated Immune Response Signaling Pathways
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Tesfaye Mengiste, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2019
* USD 736,893.00

Plant pathogens pose continued threat to global crop production. Studies that
expand fundamental knowledge on mechanisms of plant-pathogen interaction will
ultimately help design better disease control strategies. Despite extensive
studies, mechanisms regulating pathogen recognition, signal transduction and
activation of plant defenses are poorly understood, particularly for
interactions involving fungi that kill host tissue in order to gain access to a
plant's nutrients. These so-called necrotrophic pathogens promote the
destruction of their plant hosts by secreting a variety of disease promoting
factors. The goal of this project is to determine how plants recognize that an
infection was initiated and the molecular and cellular processes plants employ
to activate appropriate defenses. This project will also provide training for
students and postdoctoral scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arabidopsis BOTRYTIS-
INDUCED KINASE1 (BIK1) plays a central role in plant immunity to necrotrophic
fungi and bacterial pathogens. BIK1 promotes resistance to necrotrophic fungi
but suppresses resistance to virulent strains of the biotrophic bacterial
pathogen Pseudomonas syringae. Intriguingly, BIK1 promotes PAMP triggered
immunity (PTI) to bacterial and fungal pathogens. The PTI function of BIK1
hinges upon ethylene signaling and interactions with other immune response
regulators. Thus, BIK1 is pervasive in its impact on plant immune and hormone
responses, epitomizing the complexity of its functions. The molecular and
biochemical bases of BIK1's functional versatility and regulatory role are not
understood. The downstream targets that connect BIK1 to downstream immune
responses that contribute to its contrasting resistance functions are not well
studied. By taking BIK1 as a focal point, the project aims to dissect the
molecular mechanisms of plant immune response signaling. First, targets of BIK1
that propagate signals downstream will be studied for their mechanisms of
function in relation to BIK1 and other regulators of plant immunity. The
regulatory relationship between BIK1 and its interacting partners will be
studied through genetic, molecular and biochemical approaches. The goal is to
determine biochemical and functional linkage between BIK1, its interacting
partners and other targets further downstream in the immune response signaling
hierarchy. Second, the biochemical and molecular interactions between BIK1 and
other regulators of PTI and effector triggered immunity (ETI) will be studied to
determine the role of BIK1 at the ETI-PTI interface. The relationship of BIK1
and receptor like kinases mediating responses to necrotrophic fungi will be
investigated. This project will provide training to students and post-doctoral
scientists of different backgrounds to contribute to a diverse scientific
workforce. In addition, necrotrophic fungi are widespread pathogens with
tremendous impacts on crop production. Virulence strategies of necrotrophs and
the corresponding plant immune responses show significant differences from
biotrophic pathogens. The project will pave the way for smarter genetic
resistance strategies by generating fundamental knowledge on regulatory proteins
and mechanisms that control plant immunity.