* 1456492
* Collaborative Research: Coping with Stress: Integrating Hormones, Behavior, Gene Expression, and Fitness
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Daniel Ardia, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2021
* USD 59,957.00

The question of why some individuals are better at coping with stress than
others is fundamental and pressing. Identifying the causes of differences in the
stress response requires understanding how the stress response varies within and
across populations, and how these differences affect survival and reproduction.
Organisms respond to a diversity of stressors through behavior and physiology,
and this response is important for coping with immediate threats, yet it can
also impose substantial damage. Stress resilience is the rapid and effective
termination of the stress response and may be an important predictor of the
capacity to persist in changing environments. This research will address how
stress responsiveness and stress resilience affects fitness across a range of
environments. The results of these experiments could significantly advance
understanding of the traits that drive vulnerability to stressors and adverse
health outcomes, and help to predict the potential for individuals, populations,
and species to persist in a changing environment. This research will be
integrated with education and outreach in several ways. A partnership with the
Cornell Lab of Ornithology's education program will produce accessible and
engaging multimedia pieces on how organisms, including modern humans, cope with
stress. These materials will be designed to enhance public interest in science,
and to provide a standards-based resource for use in secondary schools and
undergraduate biology courses nationwide. The research team is also
collaborating with local environmental groups and researchers at each study site
to develop field-based public outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers engaged in this collaborative project will experimentally manipulate
phenotype and exposure to stressors in a widely distributed songbird, the tree
swallow (Tachycineta bicolor), to determine whether variation in specific
components of the stress response are causally linked to behavior, phenotypic
damage, gene expression, and fitness. Novel techniques that enable the
manipulation of the hormonal stress response in free-living and freely-behaving
birds will be coupled with advances in remote monitoring and tracking to reveal
the detailed behavioral changes and fitness effects of variation in the hormonal
stress response. The potential for selection to shape the efficacy of negative
feedback will be assessed by estimating the heritability and consistency of
trait expression within and across seasons. Coordinated experiments across four
populations that breed in differing environments from Alaska to Tennessee will
address how variation in specific components of the stress response influence
the ability to survive and reproduce in the presence of stressors. The data
obtained through this project will be stored in databases maintained by the
Principal Investigator and collaborators, and archived through the Cornell
eCommons facility. Data will be provided as supplementary material to
publications, and made publicly available within five years of the conclusion of
the project.