* 1456829
* The Role of Mg2+ Transport in Bacterial Heat Tolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2021
* Laszlo Csonka, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 709,700.00

Heat tolerance of Salmonella enterica, a pathogen important to food safety, is
dramatically enhanced by mutations that result in high-level synthesis of two
proteins that transport magnesium ions across bacterial cell membranes. By
determining which cellular components are protected at high temperature as a
consequence of these single DNA nucleotide mutations, this project will provide
a unique opportunity to identify the heat sensitive target(s) that are
responsible for loss of viability at high temperature. Results obtained in this
study will provide insights into the causes of thermosensitivity not only in
Salmonella but also in other bacteria. Success in the construction of
thermotolerant varieties of bacteria would provide a simple approach to the
engineering of improved strains that can be used for the synthesis of biofuels
and other chemicals whose production or isolation would be enhanced at higher
temperatures. Also, because high-temperature treatment is the most widely used
and cost-effective means for inactivating food pathogens, analysis of the
regulation of thermotolerance could provide insights into the development of
more efficient ways to ensure microbiological food safety. Funding by the NSF
will also enable the PI to continue the training of scientists at all levels
from high school through postdoctoral in the integration of genetics, molecular
biology, and genomics to address important problems in bacterial
physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the proposed research are to test
whether the overproduction of two Mg2+ transporters (MgtA and MgtB) will confer
increased thermotolerance on other bacteria besides Salmonella and to elucidate
the mechanism by which increased synthesis of MgtA and MgtB confers enhanced
thermotolerance. The project has the following Specific Aims: 1) Test the
hypothesis that overproduction of Mg2+ transporters provides a general method
for the engineering of thermotolerant derivatives of bacteria by carrying out
such constructions in 3 Gram negative species, a halophile, and in a Gram
positive bacterium. 2) Test the hypothesis that the chr (constitutively heat
resistant) mutations impart increased thermotolerance by protecting the
stability of cellular proteins at high temperature. These experiments will also
probe whether denaturation of proteins could be an important cause of cell death
at high temperature. 3) Test the hypothesis that the chr mutations result in
enhanced heat resistance by protecting membranes at high temperature. These
experiments will determine whether the chr mutations decrease membrane leakage
at high temperature or stabilize membranes by altering lipid composition. 4)
Test whether the chr mutations confer enhanced heat tolerance by inducing
thermoprotective genes. RNAseq will be used to probe the effect of the chr
mutations on global transcriptomes. Results of these studies will be published
in peer-reviewed journals and presented at regional and national scientific
conferences.