* 1456921
* Collaborative Research: WiFiUS: Heterogeneous Resource Allocation for Hierarchical Software-Defined Radio Access Networks at the Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Zhu Han, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 02/28/2017
* USD 140,000.00

Wireless cellular infrastructure is becoming dense and heterogeneous. Software-
defined networking has brought new opportunities for enhancing network planning
and administration. When applied in geographically large-scale radio access
networks, software-defined networking suffers from scalability and survivability
problems due to high centralization. In this project, a hierarchical software-
defined radio access network architecture is designed. In contrast to a flat
version of software defined radio access networks, which have large control
overhead and system latency for large scaled networks, the proposed scheme
offers reduced control overhead and system latency by exploration locality,
thereby enhancing system scalability. In addition, the tree structure of the
hierarchical design can easily deal with single points of failure. The plan is
to first investigate the architecture design of the hierarchical software-
defined radio access network, the protocol design for the control network,
survivability, and locality and optimization, followed by large-scale elastic
approaches, machine learning based approaches, and matching theory based
approaches for network-wide resource allocation. The intellectual merit
originates from the interdisciplinary fusion of different technologies including
software-defined networking, wireless communications, software-defined radio,
machine learning, and game theory. The research plan addresses challenging
issues of coexistence of interfering clusters and elastic resource allocation
for a large-scale radio access networks, while developing theoretically novel
frameworks to tackle these challenges. This research will lead to simpler and
more efficient resource allocation schemes for wireless networks by exploring
the power of software-defined networks. The transformative and interdisciplinary
project involves a complementary mix of network architecture design, theoretical
modeling and analysis, and experimental simulations quantifying performance
benefits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes will be made available to the
research community through high quality journal articles and conference
presentations which may be used by industrial entities for network development
and future industrial standardization. This project will strengthen
collaboration in the research field of wireless communication between the United
States and Finland. The proposed research activities will complement and enrich
the growing curriculum on game theory and optimization at the University of
Houston and Arizona State University through course development and special
topic seminars. Highly skilled personnel in related areas will be trained in
carrying out the proposed research tasks. Special efforts will be made to engage
minority and underrepresented groups, including African-American, Hispanic and
female graduate students. K-12 outreach is also planned so as to motivate high
school students in science and engineering.