* 1456133
* Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Extreme Trait Size
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2020
* Douglas Emlen, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick Abbot
* 04/30/2020
* USD 712,000.00

From the horns of Hercules beetles to antlers of elk, intense selection arising
from competition for access to reproduction has driven the evolution of extreme
animal weapons. Extreme weapons often evolve faster than other body parts, and
they tend to be more diverse among species than other body parts. Yet few
studies have directly measured selection on weapons in natural populations, and
almost nothing is known about the genes and developmental pathways responsible
for rapid weapon evolution. This project capitalizes on populations of
rhinoceros beetle that differ dramatically in the relative size of a weapon, a
"pitchfork" horn projecting from the heads of males. By rigorously studying
beetle behavior in divergent populations, the investigators will test whether
local differences in the intensity of selection have driven rapid, recent
evolutionary changes in weapon size. Studies of the distribution of relevant
genes in these populations of beetles, along with identification of additional
genes associated with these extreme traits and their location within the genome
will further our understanding of the genetic basis of weapon evolution,
building on a decade of prior research by these investigators and their
collaborators on the developmental mechanisms regulating horn growth in this
species. This project will train post-doctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
students, expand an international collaboration with research labs in Japan, and
contribute both regionally and nationally to high school science education and
public knowledge of evolutionary biology and animal behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the PIs will combine QTL and divergence
mapping approaches to screen for genes associated with increased weapon size
(AIM 1); contrast gene expression in proliferating horn tissues of beetles from
recently diverged short- and long-horned populations, identifying candidate
genes and transcripts that are differentially expressed, and then investigating
their function in the evolution of this weapon (AIM 2); and they will use field
studies of behavior to compare the intensity of selection on horns in divergent
populations (AIM 3). This study will impact society through education and
outreach by (1) establishing a pipeline for undergraduate researchers from
Gonzaga University to work at Washington State University and the University of
Montana, (2) engaging a high school biology teacher in an authentic research
project, (3) contributing to displays and student docent volunteer training at
the new Missoula Butterfly House and (4) developing Process Oriented Guided
Inquiry Learning (POGIL) activities targeted to high school biology students.
Data will be deposited and available in the Dryad repository
(http://datadryad.org), and at Traces
(http://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/), NCBI GEO
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/info/seq.html), and GenBank
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/tsa/).