* 1456213
* Nonclassical MHC-dependent Innate T Cell Ontogeny and Function in the Amphibian Xenopus
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Jacques Robert, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 04/30/2019
* USD 674,999.00

T cells are well known for their role in generating the capacity of the adaptive
immune system to identify and respond to diverse non-self antigens. The
selectivity of a T cell arises from the T cell receptor variant it displays at
its surface, with an individual?s T cell population containing a massive
repertoire of distinct T cell receptor variants. However, a subgroup of T cells
displays a limited or invariant set of T cell receptors. These so called innate
T cells (iT cells) are thought to be rapid responders to infections, recognizing
via their T cell receptors conserved molecular determinants in pathogens and
providing defense in advance (or absence) of an adaptive immune response.
However little is known about how iT cells differentiate or the role they play
in immune responses. With preliminary data demonstrating that iT cells are well
represented in tadpoles of the frog Xenopus, this project addresses the general
hypothesis that the external development of tadpoles requires a capacity to
mount rapid immune responses to viruses and bacteria, that the responses be
mediated by a small population of immune competent cells, and that these
requirements are met by iT cells. This research will extend our understanding of
the evolution, biology and importance of iT cells in host/pathogen interactions.
It also has the potential to suggest immunologically informed strategies for
controlling pathogens and their role in amphibian decline. Undergraduate,
graduate and post-graduate students will be extensively involved in all aspects
of the research, which includes opportunities to study fundamental immunology,
development, microbiology and evolution, as well as to learn a range of modern
molecular, cellular and reverse genetic techniques. The PI will recruit one or
two undergraduate students during the academic year, and in collaboration with
the NSF BIO REU program and the Summer Undergraduate Research Program, at least
one additional minority undergraduate each summer. The PI also directs the
Xenopus laevis Research Resource for Immunobiology, which provides reagents,
animals, information, assistance, training and outreach to scientists and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two specific hypotheses guide this project: (i)
ectothermic vertebrates with rapid external development critically rely on iT
cells for an innate-like T cell repertoire; and (ii) that class Ib restricted iT
cells are pivotal in orchestrating immune responses against viral and bacterial
pathogens. This hypothesis will be addressed in vivo in X. laevis tadpoles and
adults with innovative reverse genetic loss-of-function approaches that combine
transgenesis with RNAi or CRISPr/Cas genome editing technologies to determine
the roles of class Ib molecules in the development and function of iT cells in
X. laevis. The research will also use and further develop class Ib tetramers and
antibodies to identify distinct iT cell subsets. The specific aims are: (1) To
identify and characterize class Ib genes regulating the development and function
of distinct iT cell lineages using qPCR, immunohistology and in situ
hybridization as well as class Ib-deficient transgenic lines; (2) To
characterize distinct class Ib-restricted iT cell lineages in tadpoles and
adults using a combination of class Ib tetramers and monoclonal antibodies with
flow cytometry, cell sorting and fluorescence microscopy; (3) To elucidate the
roles of distinct class Ib-restricted iT cell lineages of tadpoles and adults in
vivo during immune response against ecologically relevant pathogens including
the ranavirus Frog virus 3, Mycobacterium marinum, and Aeromonas hydrophila. The
successful application of tools (class Ib tetramers and antibodies) and
innovative loss-of-function by transgenesis technologies will further empower
the Xenopus research model.