* 1456761
* IOS: The Link between Chloroplast Metabolism and Plasmodesmata-mediated Carbon Partitioning
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Tessa Burch-Smith, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

The end product of photosynthesis, sucrose, is exported from leaves to the rest
of the plant where it is used as an energy source for metabolism. This
distribution of sucrose is essential for plant growth and development. A major
route for passage of sucrose between cells is via cytoplasmic channels called
plasmodesmata (PD). Although PD have long been known to exist and to be
important for sucrose transport, we still do not know how PD development and
function are regulated. There is accumulating evidence that chloroplasts, the
plant organelles that perform photosynthesis to generate sucrose, produce
signals that can regulate PD. This project will determine how chloroplast
function impacts PD to regulate sucrose transport. The results of this research
will be of broad interest to plant biologists, and in the long term should also
provide novel targets for genetic engineering in efforts to develop plants with
fine-tuned control of carbon partitioning. This may produce plants with better
carbon allocation patterns to meet increased human demands for crop production.
Several high school and undergraduate students will be involved in this project,
and will gain hands-on experience in conducting research. This will help the NSF
meet its goal of integrating research and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon partitioning in plants depends on the coordination
of carbon fixation with transport. Plasmodesmata (PD) allow the passage of
sugars to and from the plant vasculature for redistribution to tissues that
require photoassimilates. It has long been known that plant physiology
significantly impacts PD and intercellular trafficking, but how this is
accomplished remains unclear. On the basis of previous work with the ise2
mutant, it is proposed that chloroplasts regulate the balance between
photosynthesis and PD. ISE2 is an evolutionarily conserved nuclear gene that
encodes a chloroplast RNA helicase. The objective of this study is to
characterize the function of this chloroplast RNA helicase in chloroplasts and
to elucidate its impacts on PD. Specific goals of this project are to: 1)
elucidate the molecular function of ISE2 in the chloroplast, 2) understand how
chloroplast photosynthetic output alters PD formation and intercellular
trafficking, and 3) characterize other chloroplast mutants with altered PD
structure and trafficking properties. The questions addressed in this proposal
impact two important areas of plant cell biology. The first is the longstanding
question of how intercellular flux of carbon via PD is regulated. Second is RNA
processing in the chloroplast, an intriguing process that represents a crucial
step in the coordination of gene expression between nuclear and organellar
genomes, providing insight into the evolution of the organelle from its
prokaryotic origins as an endosymbiont. A combination of biochemical and
molecular biological approaches will be used to investigate ISE2's molecular
function; intercellular trafficking will be monitored through the use of
fluorescent molecules; and PD will be visualized by transmission electron
microscopy and confocal fluorescence microscopy. Insight into the relationship
between chloroplasts and PD will increase our understanding of how plants
integrate local physiological and environmental cues into decisions that have
systemic implications. The research in this proposal takes a holistic view of
intercellular trafficking, and the results generated could potentially shift the
paradigm from PD as passive mediators of carbon flux to PD as part of a larger
strategy for integrating local, cellular physiology with whole organism
responses.