* 1456358
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Surface Free Energy Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Giles Dillingham, BRIGHTON TECHNOLOGIES GROUP, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2018
* USD 892,538.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to allow for
more energy efficient surface treatment, more consistency in surface treatment
processes, reduced scrap rates in manufacturing and more reliable bonded and
coated structures. This in turn will reduce barriers to adoption of these
inherently efficient manufacturing methods. Markets that have expressed keen
interest in the proposed sensor technology include automotive OEM?s and their
suppliers, major airframers and their suppliers, and manufacturers of general
purpose surface treatment equipment. Other major markets include manufacturers
of medical devices, consumer and industrial electronics, and food packaging. The
theoretical and practical knowledge gained through this work will advance the
ability to apply these principles to create robust surface free energy sensors.
This understanding is critical for controlling many processes that depend on
wetting phenomena, including printing, adhesive bonding, painting, rapid
prototyping and additive manufacturing, application of agricultural chemicals,
and aircraft deicing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project will address the needs engendered by the current
environmentally mandated shift from solvent-based adhesives and coatings to
water-borne systems, which has made the control of surface treatment extremely
critical. Currently, surface treatment processes are performed without feedback
control. The quality of surface treatment is determined by expensive destructive
testing. The proposed sensor is based on ultra rapid determination of the
equilibrium shape of a miniscule drop of a probe liquid on the surface in
question, a parameter directly related to the Gibbs free energy of the surface.
The research objectives are to develop a fundamental understanding of the
relationship between ballistic deposition parameters of small liquid drops, the
morphology and energetics of a substrate surface, and the equilibrium drop
geometry, and utilize this knowledge to design and construct prototype closed
loop control surface processing equipment. This understanding will be developed
primarily through high-speed imaging of the interaction of growing droplets with
surfaces of various chemical composition and morphology. This knowledge will be
incorporated into the design and construction of prototype surface processing
equipment that includes closed loop feedback for precise control and
verification of surface free energy.