* 1456185
* I-Corps:  Software Suite for Quality-Control of Patterned Nanostructures
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Sanjukta Bhanja, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Nanotechnology is one of the premier technologies with vast potential and is
progressively changing the frontiers of innovation to create novel applications
that impact a broad range of application domains. Nano-research facilities have
nanofabrication engineers who fabricate nanostructures for their novel research
ideas, and most nanostructures are characterized using Scanning Electron
Microscopy (SEM), Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and Magnetic Force Microscopy
(MFM) imaging techniques that are prone to variability between different users,
especially as the dimensions of the nanostructures are reduced. There are a few
commercially available software solutions to automatically analyze and
characterize images of nanostructures to identify magnetization states and
fabrication defects, but they lack in providing a quantifiable feedback as to
how well the designed fabrication layout meets the intended
requirement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed innovation: Software based
analysis of Patterned Nanostructures (SPaN), is an automated, image based
software suite that provides nanotechnology fabrication engineers the ability to
automatically analyze and characterize microscopic images of nanostructures,
thereby quickly identifying magnetization states and geometric shape defects for
various applications that require patterned nanostructures with very specific
geometry and spacing requirements. The proposed software suite will have
enhanced value in mass-production of nanoscale electronics and sensors
applications. In addition, the proposed innovation will enable customers to
analyze images for quality checks and defects in few minutes compared to a few
days that an expert user may require to complete the same task. The software
also enables users to perform rapid fabrication development iterations with
progressively improved fabrication quality by providing relevant feedback on the
fabrication quality. This I-Corps team will investigate the viability of a
proof-of-concept developed to support accurate patterned nanostructure
fabrication following a desired base layout. While current state of the art only
uses post-processing and enhanced image quality of post-fabrication
characterization, this product SPaN will ensure a comparison with base pattern
at a systemic level.