* 1456527
* LTREB Renewal: Acorn pulses and the dynamics of rodents, ticks, and Lyme-disease risk in oak forests
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Charles Canham, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2020
* USD 449,996.00

Lyme disease afflicts hundreds of thousands of Americans each year. There is no
vaccine and both diagnostic methods and treatments remain problematic; avoidance
of exposure to disease-bearing ticks is the primary means of protecting the
public. This project will identify what regulates the abundance of ticks and the
proportion of ticks that carry the disease agent, providing detailed knowledge
about when and where people are most at risk of exposure to Lyme disease.
Researchers will continue long-term collection of data on acorns, ticks, mice,
other hosts, and climate in one of the most heavily affected portions of the
United States. Results will facilitate reduced burden of disease though
avoidance and management of high risk places and times. The project will
contribute to K-12 classroom teaching, undergraduate education, and extensive
public education through strong collaborations the researchers have developed
over the course of this sixteen-year study. Public health benefits ensure
widespread coverage of the research by public media. The project will train
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral researchers,
through their participation in the research.

Lyme-disease risk can be predicted from past acorn production, yet the discovery
of new patterns and mechanisms complicates these predictions. The investigators
will continue research on 6 oak-forest plots to collect long-term data on acorn
production; the population dynamics of mice, chipmunks, squirrels, and larval,
nymphal, and adult blacklegged ticks; infection prevalence of ticks with Lyme
disease bacteria; and tick responses to specific climatic variables. Five
additional years of data encompassing a more extensive range of host abundances,
tick burdens, resources, and climatic conditions will generate the empirical
base for constructing robust models of all tick life stages, questing and
attached, to address biotic and abiotic drivers of tick population dynamics.
Models will also be extended to distinguish the effects of climatic variables
from those of host abundances and host resources on Lyme disease risk. The
importance of contingencies in acorn-mouse-tick interactions will be explored.
Although most years of high mouse abundance are followed by high nymph
abundance, a recent mouse peak was not followed by a nymph peak. More robust and
predictive models of the mast-mouse-tick system require the exploration of
specific contingencies, which are likely to be episodic. Long-term trends in
acorn production will be analyzed to decompose temporal variation in the
magnitude and timing of masting events by individual species into patterns due
to individual variation in seed production versus changes in overall abundance
and population size structure. Analyses of the seasonal timing of host-seeking
by larvae and nymphs will be integrated with estimates of host population size
to explain variation in nymphal infection prevalence and to improve predictions
for this critical variable.