* 1456530
* SBIR Phase II:  Making and programming robots in early childhood education
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Mitchell Rosenberg, KinderLab Robotics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2018
* USD 750,000.00

This SBIR Phase II project focuses on robot systems designed for early childhood
education (preK-2). There is increasing research and applications for
educational robotics, but little attention are focused on the foundational
years. The early childhood segment is underserved because there are few
available platforms for STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Math)
education that are developmentally appropriate for children 4-7 years old.
However, research shows that from an economic and a developmental standpoint,
educational programs that begin in early childhood result in lower costs and
more durable effects than those that begin later on. This project focuses on
developmentally appropriate robot kits for young children, and the curriculum
support, teacher resources and automated assessment tools to make this
innovation useful for early childhood education in a broadly disseminated,
sustainable and scalable way. Recent re-envisioning of early childhood programs
by the Federal government has resulted in calls to develop innovative
technologies and approaches for teaching STEM. Given the size of the industry
devoted to early childhood education, the potential commercial impact is
significant, opening new markets and job opportunities. This innovation also has
the potential to have significant positive impact on the US economy by preparing
children with economically important skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
innovation underlying this project is the design of a robot system that engages
4 to 7 year old children in learning programming concepts through the use of a
developmentally appropriate programming language. In order to be developmentally
appropriate for this age range, the programming language is physical, not typed,
with no screens or keyboards of any kind required. The resulting educational
platform also enables children to develop engineering design process skills by
building physical objects that can respond to different inputs through the use
of sensors. This project is organized around five technical objectives: a
developmentally appropriate robot kit for young children to learn programming
and engineering; robot modules for curriculum integration with other areas such
as math, science, literacy and the arts; support systems for early childhood
teachers through a web portal with resources for both formal and informal
education and professional development strategies; and an automated learning
assessment system that collects data characterizing student learning directly
from the robot, analyzes it through innovative mechanisms and displays it using
visualization tools according to the different needs of parents, educators and
school leadership to understand learning outcomes; and cost reduction of the
robot system for broadening adoption.