* 1456573
* Scholars Awards: The evoText Project
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Grant Ramsey, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 188,043.00

General Audience Summary

The project aims to develop and make broadly accessible a new web-based tool,
evoText, which will open new domains of inquiry and collaboration in history and
philosophy of science. The scientific literature for many topics is too large
for scholars to engage with comprehensively, a type of Big Data challenge in the
humanities. Traditional methods in this area require scholars to engage the
literature selectively and that inevitably yields an incomplete (and perhaps
biased) view of scientific fields. The new web tool being developed will provide
a way around these limitations; moreover, it will be publicly accessible via the
Internet and its use will be free of charge. In addition, there is very
substantial promise that it will have an impact on secondary-level STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) education. The PI will work
through his academic institution to reach out to local secondary schools to
explore how evoText can be used in the classroom, including running a workshop
for local instructors on the use of evoText. It will also be publicized at
conferences relevant to science education, such as the various conferences
established by the NSTA.

Technical Summary

EvoText will supplement traditional approaches to the history and philosophy of
science by allowing historians, philosophers, scientists, and others to answer
questions that cannot feasibly be answered due to the time it would take to work
through millions of pages of text. It can be used to address specific hypotheses
about the nature and history of science, and can also serve as a tool for
discovery, pointing to salient periods in history or to important concepts whose
investigation may be fruitful using advanced textual analyses. During the period
of the grant, the investigator will implement many more sophisticated text
analysis algorithms. The evoText database currently contains around 450,000
journal articles; during this period, the investigator will greatly expand the
database, adding further content from open access journals as well as JSTOR,
Nature Publishing Group, and other closed-access journal providers. His eventual
goal is to include every article published in the evolutionary sciences, broadly
construed, and also be close to comprehensive in related fields of science (like
organismic biology and ecology) as well as in general science. This will provide
a unique window into the sciences that we are excited to use to study the
history and philosophy of biology, asking questions heretofore impossible to
answer.