* 1456682
* Collaborative Research: Physiology of Long Distance Assimilate Transport
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Michael Knoblauch, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2019
* USD 308,321.00

The basis for life on earth is the conversion of solar energy into chemical
energy by a process called photosynthesis that takes place in plants. The high
energy containing end product of photosynthesis is sugar that has to be
translocated, via a tissue called phloem, from the site of generation (in most
cases leaves) to the sites of consumption and storage (stems, roots, fruits).
Humans either consume energy rich plant tissues directly in the form of salads,
cereals, vegetables etc., or indirectly via the consumption of meat, which was
produced by animals consuming plants. The translocation of sugars within the
phloem is a key mechanism in the production of high quality, high yield, and
healthy food. For example, photosynthesis is actively reduced by the plant if
export of sugars through the phloem is insufficient. Pests like aphids attack
the phloem, insert their mouthparts into the tissue and feed on the sugar rich
solution, which results in loss of production. Plant viruses travel through the
phloem and cause severe damage to the plant. Despite the central role the phloem
plays in plant performance and food production, the knowledge of the underlying
processes of phloem loading and transport are poorly understood. This project
will investigate the flow path of sugars through leaves, the entry or "loading"
of sugars into the phloem and the distribution of sugars within the plant.
Enhanced understanding of phloem loading and transport could lead to new
strategies to protect plants from pests, to increase crop yield and to produce
healthier food by reducing or eliminating the necessity for application of
pesticides.

The goal of this award is to investigate physiological parameters of phloem
loading and the physics of transport in plants with long phloem networks (vines
and trees). Methods developed during previous awards will be used to generate
cell and tissue-type based maps of leaves outlining turgor pressure and phloem
flow patterns in different vein orders. In addition, the distribution of
plasmodesmata between cells and tissues, and cell-to-cell conductivity from
source cells to sieve tubes will be mapped. New systems to measure sieve tube
turgor and flow velocity, as well as straightforward SEM based methods will be
used to gather data on plasmodesmal frequencies and sieve plate structure. The
relationship between plant size and source turgor pressure and phloem
architecture in trees and vines with different loading types will also be
investigated. This will allow current models of phloem transport to be re-
parameterized so as to reflect better the hydraulic architecture of the pathway
for photoassimilate transport through the plant. This award will also bring
together researchers specializing in plant cell biology and vascular transport,
and support education and training for a postdoctoral researcher and graduate
students, as well as engage undergraduates in research and provide opportunities
for high-school students and teachers to learn about the transport of
photoassimilates in plants.