* 1456094
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Separation Technology for Cellulosic Sugar Biorefineries
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Rodrigo Teixeira, Hyrax Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 899,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project will be the development of an alternative, renewable
route to fuels and chemicals that is based on biomass that does not compete with
the food supply. The process will use underutilized feedstocks such as corn
stover and forestry residue to produce fermentable sugars, which can be
converted into various raw materials and finished products. The project will add
to the scientific understanding of ionic liquid bioprocessing and has the
potential to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions and stimulate rural
job creation.

The technical objective of this Phase II research project is to develop an
integrated process for converting lignocellulosic biomass into fermentable
sugars. The process uses ionic liquids that dissolve biomass and afford
monomeric sugars at high yields via a reaction that is both simple and fast.
What is lacking is an affordable method for separating sugars while recycling
the ionic liquid. In Phase I the project demonstrated an efficient strategy for
sugar recovery. By the first half of Phase II the goal is to integrate sugar
recovery into the process front end. Unit operations taking raw biomass to clean
sugars and lignin will be performed in batch open loop in order to close mass
balances and set a baseline for further process development. Then, the loop will
be closed with the addition of ionic liquid cleaning and drying. By the end of
this project, the objective is to demonstrate a stable and high-yielding
process, including experimentally validated techno-economic projections showing
unprecedentedly low capital and operating costs.