* 1456942
* RCN: A Network to Promote Comparative Genome to Phenome Analysis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2023
* Carl Schmidt, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 499,999.00

Understanding the relationship between an organism's DNA (the genome) and the
set of phenotypic characteristics that result from genomic expression (the
phenome) is a central challenge in biology. High throughput sequencing and
phenotypic data from multiple species provides an opportunity for comparative
analysis of genome to phenome data. The objective of this award is to develop a
Genome to Phenome Network (G2PN) Research Collaboration Network (RCN) aimed at
promoting comparative analysis of vertebrate and invertebrate animals to enrich
our understanding of the relationship between genomes and phenomes. The G2PN
will bring together groups using diverse experimental approaches to understand
how the genome ultimately manifests the phenome. The G2PN will provide tools
necessary for scientists to exploit comparative genomics approaches to
understand genome to phenome relationships. In addition, the activities of the
G2PN will provide training for undergraduates, graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows in the science of comparative biology and genome to phenome
relationships. Participation of researchers from universities and colleges
serving historically underrepresented groups will be particularly encouraged.
The G2PN will also generate educational modules to further enhance student
training in G2P concepts. All of the resources developed by the G2PN will be
freely available to the scientific community, communicated at scientific
meetings, and published in peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major
objective of the G2PN will be to encourage researchers to leave their silos and
develop collaborative teams that will exploit comparative approaches to enhance
our understanding of genome to phenome relationships. The G2PN RCN goals
include: Establishing an international G2PN with scientists studying a diverse
range of animals; G2PN activities that will directly foster the development of
comparative studies by promoting standardization of experimental approaches,
data and metadata collection and bioinformatic analyses; promoting new
collaborations and proposals among scientists from different specialties through
international meetings, web sites, publications and social media; and promoting
understanding of comparative genomic studies through the development of training
modules using diverse educational modalities. Ultimately, this RCN will improve
our understanding of the relationships between selective pressures, genomic
changes and phenotypic outcomes. The standards developed by this RCN will find
applicability far beyond the science directly affected by the G2P network. These
standards will facilitate laboratory work and data comparability across a broad
range of species and studies.