* 1456884
* Cell Adhesion and Fate Determination in Physcomitrella Patens
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Mark Running, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 03/31/2019
* USD 457,420.00

One of the key milestones in the history of life on earth was the colonization
of land by plants. To accomplish this feat, plants had to adapt to the much
harsher terrestrial environment in a variety of ways, including making
specialized structures for anchoring in soil, gathering sunlight, and
reproducing, as well as being able to sense and respond to rapidly changing
environmental conditions. How early plants were able to do this remains largely
unknown. The moss Physcomitrella patens is an excellent species in which to
study plant adaption to land, since mosses are among the earliest-arising land
plants. P. patens also has a variety of properties that make it amenable to
scientific study, including its small size, transparent cells, small amount of
genetic material, ease of growth in the laboratory, and ease of manipulation
using molecular tools. Moss lines have been developed that harbor mutations
causing the plants to revert to single-celled organisms resembling green algae,
the progenitor of land plants. These plants also are able to withstand
dehydrating conditions better than normal moss plants. Studies of these mutants
will give clues into how normal development of moss proceeds, but also what
mechanisms early plants used to adapt to land. These studies also have
implications for 1) developing crops that are better able to withstand drought,
and 2) developing algae lines to be used in biofuel production that might be
easier to harvest, by engineering individual algae cells that will stick
together when prompted.

The moss mutants that will be examined are defective in protein prenylation,
which is a post-translational modification that adds a lipid group to particular
target proteins. This lipid group plays a role in targeting the protein to
membranes and in protein-protein interactions. It was previously found that
prenylation deficiencies in moss resulted in a lack of cell adhesion after cell
division, along with a complete lack of cell differentiation. These moss mutants
were also more sensitive to abscisic acid, which resulted in higher
survivability under dehydrating conditions. The goals of the current project are
threefold: 1) to generate additional mutants defective in various types of
protein prenylation, 2) further determine the functional roles of prenylation in
cell adhesion, cell fate determination, cell differentiation, cell polarity, and
hormone responses, and 3) identify and examine the functional role of key
prenylation target proteins in mediating cell adhesion and developmental
processes. Studies of prenylation in moss will advance our understanding of the
genetic and molecular basis of many important plant processes of broad
scientific interest. This project will provide training in a wide variety of
experimental techniques, and will include extensive participation by students,
especially those from groups underrepresented in the sciences.