* 1456047
* CLE effector peptide signaling in plant-nematode interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Melissa Mitchum, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Brad Day
* 07/31/2019
* USD 671,433.00

Plant-parasitic nematodes are a major impediment to meeting the challenge of
feeding a population projected to reach 9 billion by 2050. These nematodes cause
billions of dollars in yield losses annually worldwide. The unavailability or
limited genetic base of commercially acceptable resistant cultivars, genotypic
variability in nematode field populations, as well as the emergence of new
species, pose a continued threat to crop production by this group of
agriculturally important pests. The most economically important plant-parasitic
nematodes include the cyst forming nematodes. Cyst nematodes form parasitic
relationships with their plant hosts by establishing a permanent feeding site
within the root, which serves as a nutrient sink to support growth and
development of the nematode. This project will provide new insights into how
plants recognize and respond to nematode-secreted molecules to form unique and
essential feeding cells within host roots, which may, in turn, translate into
novel strategies to bioengineer crops with robust resistance to pathogenic cyst
nematodes. The investigators seek to understand the detailed molecular
mechanisms and pathways by which plant-parasitic cyst nematodes co-opt host
developmental programs for feeding cell formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Feeding
cell development and maintenance is dependent on stylet-secreted effector
proteins produced in the esophageal gland cells of cyst nematodes. However, our
understanding of signaling processes directing the process of host cell
transformation by nematode-secreted effectors is largely lacking. Among the
stylet-secreted effectors are small signaling peptides sharing similarity with
plant CLAVATA3/ENDOSPERM SURROUNDING REGION-related (CLE) peptides. The
investigators have demonstrated that these nematode-secreted peptide signals are
required for successful infection, but their exact role in developmental
reprogramming of root cells for feeding cell formation remains unclear. The
project focuses on elucidating the function of nematode-secreted CLE peptides in
modulating the plant cellular program for feeding cell formation. Molecular,
genetic, genomic, and biochemical analyses will be used to characterize the role
of nematode CLE peptides in feeding cell formation. Once delivered into host
cells, CLE proteins are retargeted to the apoplast via a novel post-
translational trafficking mechanism. The trafficking pathway will be
investigated through subcellular localization and analyses of host-interacting
proteins. In the apoplast, CLE peptides are perceived by plant receptors.
Receptor localization will be characterized and deletion and mutagenesis studies
will be used to evaluate receptor binding specificity to nematode CLE peptides.
The hypothesis that CLE peptides act to modulate phytohormone and defense
signaling pathways will be tested through cell-specific studies of mutants,
reporter lines, and other related assays including nematode infection assays and
in vitro peptide application assays. The data generated will provide information
about a class of pathogen effectors unique to plant-parasitic cyst nematodes and
the first example of a pathogen secreting a protein mimic of a plant peptide
hormone. Beyond the cyst nematode-plant interaction, the data generated will
contribute to an understanding of CLE signaling and potentially novel protein
trafficking pathways in plants. The project will integrate research activities
with education and training of female and underrepresented minority
undergraduate students in plant molecular genetics and cell biology through
outreach programs targeting K-5 focused on applications of plant science and
technology for society.