* 1456225
* LTREB Renewal: Climatic drivers of temporal and spatial dynamics of a focal herbivore
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Richard Karban, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2021
* USD 441,540.00

The Earth's climate has changed continually over 4 billion years. The recent
increased pace and direction of this change challenge the nation's welfare, the
economics of agriculture, and the management of essential resources. This
project provides a unique opportunity to identify the mechanisms by which short-
term climatic effects cause long-term population changes, affect spatial
exchanges between local populations, and result in the extinction of some
populations. The project focuses on a common herbivore, the wooly-bear
caterpillar, and results have the potential to inform conservation and
management of beneficial as well as pest herbivores. More importantly, the
project will be integrated into high school curricula by involving students and
teachers in monitoring caterpillar abundances. Undergraduate students from
groups under-represented in science and graduate students will also receive
training in the practice of science through their participation in the project
The wooly-bear moth, Platyprepia virginalis, is a primary herbivore on lupines
in California. The investigators have accumulated up to 30 years of abundance
data for this species and for important drivers of its population dynamics,
including host plants, other herbivores, predators, parasitoids, movement, and
climatic conditions. The project will initiate short-term experiments to
identify mechanisms that causally link climatic factors to observed patterns of
abundance and distribution across habitats. These will evaluate top-down effects
of climate on predators, bottom-up climate effects through a facilitative
interaction involving a second herbivore species, and the effects of flooding
and litter accumulation on caterpillar vital rates. Statistical analyses and
mathematical models will test inferences from these experiments, evaluating
whether the hypothesized mechanisms cause inter-annual fluctuations in abundance
and changing spatial dynamics including local extinctions. The project's
combination of manipulative experiments with model development and analyses of
long-term demographic data is rare. It will provide a well-documented example of
source-sink dynamics, an ecological phenomenon for which data remain scarce, and
is likely to become a classic example of the consequences of climate change for
population dynamics.