* 1456235
* Capturing and comparing slow slip events in Cascadia and New Zealand using a novel, physics-based approach
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Laura Wallace, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2017
* USD 269,999.00

Over the last 15-20 years, GPS technology has revolutionized our ability to
track spatial and temporal variations in rates of deformation at tectonic plate
boundaries around the globe. Typically, these data are analysed in terms of (a)
time-averaged site velocities; (b) discrete displacements; (c) temporal
variations in displacement rates, or (d) converting GPS velocities into strain
rates. Notably, continuously operating GPS instruments at plate boundaries
around the world have led to the discovery of ?slow slip events?, which are a
previously unknown form of fault slip that involves transient aseismic slip
across a fault (lasting weeks to months) at a rate intermediate between steady
plate boundary displacement and the slip velocity required to generate
earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;To push the boundaries on the limits of spatial and
temporal resolution of deformation processes that can be obtained by GPS, this
project will adapt a novel, physics-based approach that our team has recently
developed to use continuous GPS (cGPS) data to objectively detect and
characterize slow slip events at a higher spatio-temporal resolution than can be
done using existing methods. Unlike conventional methods, our new approach (for
the first time) obtains Vertical Derivatives of Horizontal Stress (VDoHS) rates
from cGPS timeseries. VDoHS rates are the most tightly resolved surface
expression of subsurface forces associated with these (and other) deformation
events. We will implement our new method to characterize and detect slow slip
events (SSEs) at the Cascadia subduction zone (Pacific Northwest) and the
Hikurangi subduction margin (New Zealand), both of which are well-covered by
dense continuous GPS networks. Moreover, due to the strong differences in the
duration and magnitude characteristics of SSEs at Hikurangi and Cascadia, this
project will allow us to investigate a broad spectrum of slow slip event types
using the new method.&lt;br/&gt;The observation of SSEs and associated seismic
phenomena at subduction zone plate boundaries worldwide has ignited one of the
most dynamic fields of research in seismology today. To advance the overall
understanding of SSE processes, our new method will (a) lower the threshold of
geodetically detectable SSEs, increasing our knowledge of the full spectrum of
SSE slip behavior; (b) enable objective, high resolution identification of SSEs,
and reveal the relationship of this to temporal variations in megathrust
locking, and (c) foster a detailed comparison of Hikurangi and Cascadia SSEs and
their relationship to seismicity and tremor. We also expect that the adaptation
of our method to cGPS timeseries to analyse transient deformation will pave the
way for a much needed approach to incorporating cGPS data into time-dependent
seismic hazard models.