* 1456138
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Translation Strategies for Mutual Symbiosis in STS-Engineering Collaborations
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Ron Eglash, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 18,000.00

General Audience Summary

The goal of this dissertation project will investigate how researchers in the
field of Science and Technology Studies (STS) can work with other stakeholder
groups to design and build technological artifacts. The core research question
addresses how social scientists work collaboratively and productively with
engineers, designers, business owners, and potential end users to produce usable
technological artifacts. To address that question, the investigator will conduct
a case study of the development and production of an open-source condom vending
machine in Kumasi, Ghana. The investigator will use a mix of methods that
includes critical making (activities that bridge the gap between critical
thinking and physical making), interviews, design workshops, and collaborative
documentation. The project has significant potential for making recommendations
to designers, and to African health advocacy organizations.

Technical Summary

STS is moving from its prior status as a technology critic to a more engaged
collaborative role. The most successful of these collaborations have been in the
area of lay participation, and new extensions have offered emphasis on promoting
the legitimacy of lay-citizen perspectives. Important as this approach has been,
restricting the role of STS researcher to that of a facilitator who brings lay
citizens together with professionals often results in a very narrow deployment
of the wide array of possible STS analytic insights and concepts. More direct
forms of engagement with varying sets of stakeholders have been developed that
include up-streaming, mid-streaming, anticipatory governance, and critical
making. Inspired by this new body of work, the project will seek to extend and
enhance the collaborative framework in the context of a specific case study, the
development of a condom vending machine in the West African nation of Ghana. The
investigator will develop an experimental foundation that offers a two-way
symbiosis between STS researchers and engineers that will be conducive to long-
term, project-based engineering and design interventions.