* 1456772
* The responsibility of judges to assure due process: Tension among neutrality, rights protection, and role
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Steven Penrod, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 193,796.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES-1456772&lt;br/&gt;The Responsibility of Judges to Assure
Due Process: Tension Among Neutrality, Rights Protection, and Role&lt;br/&gt;PI
- Larry Heuer&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI - Steven Penrod&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The decision
of the US Supreme Court in Turner v. Rogers (2011) has prompted consideration of
the role of judges in cases in which a party, or parties, are not represented by
counsel. In Turner, the Court held that judges in child support cases have a
specific duty to ensure that judicial processes are fair to parents who are not
represented by counsel. Turner has given rise to debate about how judges can
fulfill the duty to ensure that judicial processes are fair to parties without
counsel while at the same fulfilling the duty to apply the law neutrally to all
parties. The question has considerable currency. In communities across the
country, state courts are inundated by millions of people unable to afford
private counsel and unable to secure the limited free services made available by
the civil legal aid bar. Communities are therefore weighing a range of options
to helping to assure the fair resolution of cases for people without lawyers.
Many states have modified their respective codes of judicial conduct, or have
developed other guidance for judges, to provide that a judge may take steps to
ensure that judicial processes are fair to unrepresented parties without
violating the judge's duty to apply the law neutrally to all parties. Yet, how
these changes will be realized on the ground is a complicated matter. Two
studies carried out by this project will examine different aspects of the
question of whether and how judges can fulfill their duty to ensure that
judicial processes are fair to unrepresented parties while at the same
fulfilling their duty to ensure that the law is applied neutrally to all
parties. The research findings are expected to advance theory on procedural
justice and inform practice and policy on judicial education. The project also
has a broader educational impact, including training and mentoring of
undergraduate students, law students, and a postdoctoral fellow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both studies will be carried out in the New York City
Housing Court, specifically focusing on the role of Housing Court Judges in
reviewing the fairness of proposed stipulations of settlement in cases in which
a landlord has brought an action seeking recovery of an apartment from an
unrepresented tenant based on the tenant's alleged nonpayment of rent. The first
study--a courtroom experiment--asks whether training judges to preserve
procedural fairness in cases involving unrepresented parties can a) increase
judicial engagement with the unrepresented party, b) help the unrepresented
party understand the information needed in the case, and/or c) increase the
unrepresented party's perception of procedural fairness and of the legitimacy of
the court. The experiment will train 40 judges in procedural fairness and survey
the judges (and litigants and attorneys in their cases) on five trials prior to
the judges' training and five trials after training (thus permitting controlled
testing of training effects). Four hundred target cases will be observed and the
behaviors of the participants and outcomes systematically coded (with the above
dependent variables in mind). A team of trained law students will code the case
files. The second study--a controlled experiment--asks whether educating all the
parties about the role of judges in preserving procedural fairness for
unrepresented parties can minimize the parties' possible perception of judges as
biased in favor of unrepresented parties. The experiment involves a 3 (Party
Representation Balance: Balanced, Neither party represented vs. Imbalanced,
tenant represented vs. Imbalanced, landlord represented) x 2 (Judge is engaged
as per training vs. passive) x 2 (Party: Tenant vs. Landlord) x 2 (Outcome:
Favors landlord vs. favors tenant) x 2 (Procedure Overview: Present vs. absent).
The two studies are expected to cast light on additional underlying questions,
including the following: a) do unrepresented parties' views on the treatment
they deserve have a bearing on their perceptions of whether the judicial
processes are fair, and b) is procedural fairness as important to the parties as
it is to the judges?