* 1456974
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Do-It-Yourself Biology, Deliberation and Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* William Kinsella, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 18,000.00

General Audience Summary

This dissertation project will develop a case study of citizen deliberations
about the governance of science by focusing on Do-It-Yourself Biology, a form of
amateur science that makes relatively simple biotechnology practices accessible
to individuals who are not affiliated with academic or corporate laboratories.
The researcher will explore how the DIY Biology network defines synthetic
biology and its governance using archival research and ethnographic methods.
Issues to be explored include how the network relates to academic and corporate
scientists and other stakeholders, how US and EU regulatory structures inform
and respond to the network, and the consequences these negotiations pose for
genetically modified organisms and the future of genetic sciences. The study
will generate data that will be useful to scholars, policymakers, and
practitioners. The results of the study will be disseminated to academic
audiences through journals such as Social Studies of Science, Public
Understanding of Science, and Science Communication. They will also be
disseminated in widely accessible newspaper and magazine articles. In addition,
the researcher will develop an online wiki that compiles links to local,
national and international regulations pertaining to laboratories that work with
transgenic organisms in order to enable practitioners to add more links over
time.

Technical Summary

Using archival and ethnographic methods, the researcher will explore how DIY
Biology in the San Francisco area, which serves as the primary site of the US
phase of the project; the region plays a pivotal role in the development of
biotechnology and microelectronics, two streams that are converging in synthetic
biology. Copenhagen, Denmark, serves as the primary site of the EU phase of the
project due to its leadership in developing contemporary biotechnology, in
formulating national and international biotechnology policies, and in
encouraging active citizen participation in the regulatory process.
Complementing an ethnographic approach with archival study will extend this
research back in time to highlight how DIY Biology echoes or diverges from
historical conceptions of microelectronics and biotechnology. The project will
contribute to multi-disciplinary conversations about how emerging technologies
are constituted, legitimized and governed, and how democracies operate. By
positioning citizens as practitioners of scientific techniques, DIY Biology
offers an opportunity to reconsider scientist-citizen interactions in the
context of governance. The project will shed light on the shifting interactions
between science and politics in different cultural contexts, on what motivates
people to deliberate and how people experience deliberation in their daily
lives, and on the effects their deliberations have on governance systems.