* 1456103
* SBIR Phase II:  Solar Thermal Collector Using Advection Enhanced Nano-Porous Insulating Media
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Mark Miles, Mark Miles Consulting Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2017
* USD 909,425.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will profoundly improve the economics of solar
water heating (SWH) systems. Little innovation has occurred in this area since
the advent of evacuated tube solar thermal collectors in the 1980s. Despite
these advances the cost of SWH systems is much higher than the cost of fossil
fuels in the U.S. Thus while there exists a flourishing global market in excess
of $20B, the market for such systems in the U.S. is virtually nonexistent. The
solar thermal collector technology under investigation has demonstrated
performance in terms of efficiency vs. output temperature that is already
superior to that of state-of-the-art collectors. Economic modeling further
indicates that in high volume production the collector would be substantially
less expensive than commercial products. This combination of improved
performance and reduced cost has the potential to make SWH economically viable
in more than 40 states in the U.S. An outcome which could provide a solid
economic foundation for the revival of a domestic industry, and accelerate the
proliferation of these systems worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will extend the performance
envelope of two solar thermal collector architectures identified during the
Phase I effort. Current solar thermal collectors exhibit non-economic
price/performance metrics and are constrained to water heating applications in
only a few markets worldwide. The first architecture utilizes advection to
improve the insulating properties of a granular nano-porous medium. The Phase II
effort will transition this architecture from prototype to the fabrication and
characterization of an engineering scale collector. It is expected that
increasing the size and solar simulator output (currently below reference
standard) will increase efficiency significantly. Material dopants, heat
transfer fluid dynamics, and optical absorber thermal properties will be
examined computationally and experimentally to further improve performance. The
second architecture significantly extends the operational range. This effort
will explore techniques to expand this range including the use of material
dopants to modify optical characteristics and the development of passive
technique for concentrating optics. Computer simulations suggest that outputs
comparable to that of a parabolic trough are possible.