* 1456592
* SG: Growth-defense tradeoffs, context dependency and genetic variation in aspen: implications for plant-insect interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Kenneth Keefover-Ring, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2019
* USD 168,323.00

Genetic diversity is important to the health of forest ecosystems, but the
factors that influence such diversity remain poorly understood. This research
will address how genetic diversity is affected by trees' ability to grow and
defend themselves against insect attack, and by competition from neighboring
trees for resources. Also, forest productivity will be explored in light of
genetic diversity. The research will take place in experimental stands of aspen,
where trees have been grown for several years at different densities and then
subjected to an outbreak of leaf-eating caterpillars. This work will advance
scientific knowledge of how best to manage forests to maximize production, while
also minimizing insect damage. Results from this research will be particularly
relevant to regions where aspen populations are in widespread decline. The
project will train undergraduate and graduate students in biological science and
promote mentoring of high school and college students from groups that are
currently under-represented in science.

This research will explore how environmentally mediated growth-defense tradeoffs
in a foundation plant species influence intraspecific (genotypic) variation and,
in turn, how genotypic variation shapes stand-level productivity and resistance
to insect attack. Aspen exhibits striking genotypic variation in physiology,
growth and chemical defense, and strong negative genotypic correlations between
growth and defense. How such tradeoffs influence selection to shape the genetic
architecture of plant populations is largely unknown. An array of experimental
aspen stands, each containing 16 genotypes and subjected to low or high
intraspecific competition intensity (CI), will be used to test hypotheses
concerning: 1) phenotypic expression of leaf physiological and chemical traits
under low vs. high CI, 2) shifts in the genotypic composition of aspen stands as
a consequence of competition-mediated selection for growth vs. defense traits,
and 3) effects of genotypic divergence on stand resistance to defoliation by
forest tent caterpillars. Hypothesis testing will incorporate measures of
aboveground growth, photosynthesis and foliar chemical defenses, as well as
assessments of stand-level defoliation by tent caterpillars. This research will
advance understanding of the ecological and evolutionary factors that influence
the distribution, genetic composition, and function of forest ecosystems.