* 1456709
* Testing evolutionary hypotheses through large-scale behavioral simulations
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Thomas Griffiths, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Hout
* 12/31/2020
* USD 474,697.00

Along with the human brain, human cognition is a product of evolution. The
complexities of human cognition, both individually and collectively, include
sharing information, innovating, and developing complex technologies,
institutions and norms. Why and how these aspects of human cognition and
behavior came to be is a question that crosses many disciplines, including
biology, psychology, linguistics, archaeology and anthropology. It is also an
important one, as understanding how various aspects of human cognition and
behavior came to be what they are could have implications for engineering
artificially intelligent systems, enhancing and augmenting human capabilities,
and improving upon societal conditions.

Traditionally, the evolution of human cognition has been investigated in either
of two ways: 1) through computer simulations of possible evolutionary processes
that took place over long periods of time and many generations, or 2) through
laboratory experiments that examine the behavior of modern humans to test
evolutionary hypotheses about aspects of human cognition. This research project
develops an innovative third approach that combines the two existing approaches.
In this approach, rather than needing to simulate hypothetical human cognitive
processes on a computer, a real human being can complete a relevant task online.
This allows for real human cognitive processes to be measured and then
incorporated into the computer simulation of evolutionary processes. Each
participant will perform a computerized task much like in many cognitive science
experiments. To incorporate these real human data into computer simulations of
evolutionary processes, each person's data will influence the next iteration of
the computer simulation. Specifically, the task given to the next set of
participants will be affected by the performance of the participants that
preceded them. For example, the nature of the available information for a later
set of participants might be altered based on the performance of the earlier set
of participants. Across many sets of participants and corresponding iterations
of the simulation, hypothetical evolutionary processes can be examined to better
understand how genes and culture interacted over time and generations to produce
present-day human cognitive capabilities and behaviors. The investigators will
use crowdsourcing technology to recruit large numbers of participants, and will
explore questions about the evolution of language, how complex learning
processes evolved, and how genes and culture interact. The software developed to
run these simulations will be distributed freely, making it possible for other
researchers and educators to run similar simulations to address a wide range of
questions about the evolution of human cognition. A version of the software will
also be created for educational purposes to teach students about evolutionary
processes.