* 1456630
* RUI:  Magmatic Evolution Leading Up to the Modern Aleutian Arc on the Alaska Peninsula
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Ronald Cole, Allegheny College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2018
* USD 107,250.00

Alaska contains the largest number of active volcanoes in the United States and
is one of the most volcanically active regions in the world. Most of the
volcanoes in Alaska form a belt that includes the Aleutian Islands and extends
landward onto the Alaska Peninsula, ending across the Cook Inlet from Anchorage.
The Alaska Peninsula hosts more than 20 volcanoes with historic activity, five
with major eruptions in the past 25 years, and includes the world's largest
eruption of the 20th century. This project will investigate the growth of the
volcanic system on the Alaska Peninsula and evaluate the factors that influence
the composition and behavior of volcanoes in this region. The results of this
project will contribute to ongoing work of the U.S. Geological Survey and Alaska
Volcano Observatory for understanding volcanic behavior in a region where there
are roughly 30,000 people per day transported in commercial aircraft over the
volcanoes and where eruptions can have severe impact on Anchorage (Alaska's
largest population center) and along the Kenai Peninsula. The Alaska Peninsula
is also one of the nation's most important mineral resource regions; this
project will provide an improved regional framework that will be useful for
future detailed studies to delineate economic mineral deposits. Scientific
advances made through this project will also contribute to the public-outreach
mission of Lake Clark and Katmai National Parks, where several of the volcanoes
of this study are located. This project will additionally provide high-level
STEM training for undergraduate students. The project is highly cost-effective
because it uses publically-available sample collections of the U.S. Geological
Survey, building on past investments in federal funding.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Southern Alaska is one of the best places in the world to investigate
long-term magmatism and crustal growth along a convergent margin, as recognized
by the GeoPRISMS community who selected the Alaska/Aleutian subduction zone as
the highest priority site for the Subduction Cycles and Deformation (SCD)
initiative. This two-year project will benefit the GeoPRISMS community with an
unprecedented synoptic study to evaluate temporal and along-strike geochemical
trends for Eocene through Quaternary igneous rocks on the Alaska Peninsula. Data
will include major and trace element, whole rock Nd-Sr-Hf and zircon Hf-
isotopes, and 40Ar/39Ar and zircon U/Pb dating on volcanic and plutonic rocks.
The results of this research will provide new constraints on the continental
portion of Aleutian arc including: i) along-arc trends in magma chemistry and
relationships with sediment flux and regional tectonics, ii) geochemical
products of subduction over time and how these influence the composition of new
continental crust, and iii) the timing of subduction initiation and relationship
to Pacific-wide versus local tectonic processes. This work is in concert with
the GeoPRISMS SCD initiatives to "focus on long-term margin evolution and
material transfer" and "the growth and evolution of volcanic arcs and
continents" and can be integrated with other projects (i.e., geophysical studies
of the southern Alaska margin) to yield advances in understanding the regional
controls on convergent margin magmatism.