* 1456301
* Role of Phages in Structuring Bacterial Communities: Ciona Intestinalis as a Model Organism
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Larry Dishaw, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2019
* USD 440,300.00

The animal gut hosts a complex community of specially-adapted bacteria that
interface directly with the host epithelial cells and fundamentally affect host
health and nutrition. Because gut bacteria play such vital roles in host health,
a detailed understanding of how bacteria colonize the gut and how biological and
biophysical factors affect the stability and longevity of their symbiotic
existence with the host is of enormous significance. One often overlooked factor
that may play a significant role in structuring gut-associated bacterial
communities is the presence of viruses, specifically phages (viruses that infect
bacteria). The investigators have developed a simple marine invertebrate model
system (the sea squirt Ciona intestinalis) that affords the opportunity to
dissect numerous aspects of host:bacteria symbiosis, such as initial
colonization, effects of feeding and digestion, and interactions with the host
immune system. In this project, they will test the hypothesis that phages serve
important roles in shaping overall bacterial community structure through their
ability to break apart specific hosts, thereby releasing dissolved organics and
facilitating gene transfer among hosts, and driving microbial evolution. By
carefully examining phage-bacteria interactions both in vitro and within the gut
of the sea squirt, they will gain unprecedented insight into the effects of
phages on bacterial communities living within animal guts. This research will
benefit society by exploring the promise of phages for remodeling complex
microbial communities, which has important implications for human health,
bioremediation, and ecosystem restoration projects. The investigators will
develop an outreach program that encourages high school students to undertake
mentored science fair projects encompassing microbial ecology concepts and
provide hands-on training in molecular microbiology techniques. To reach a
distinct target audience, they will also run microbial ecology modules for Girl
Scouts, Girls Incorporated, and the University of South Florida's Oceanography
Camp for Girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine the roles of phages in shaping
the overall structure and function of bacterial communities, the investigators
will accomplish three specific research objectives: 1) characterize phage
diversity in the Ciona gut using culture-based and culture independent methods,
2) dissect phage-bacteria interactions in vitro and determine if phages can
modify bacterial community (microbiome) structure in experimentally colonized
Ciona, and 3) culture Ciona in both the presence and absence of phages in the
water to determine the effects of phage presence on gut microbiomes and host
physiology. As a filter-feeding sessile organism, Ciona directly interfaces with
the marine environment and encounters a continuous stream of microbes that can
potentially colonize or influence its gut flora. Previous work with adult,
field-harvested, Ciona indicated that a consistent, "core" microbiome dominates
their gut. Additionally, they have successfully cultured various members of the
core gut microbiome, isolated phages for some of these bacteria, and are
studying the process of extracellular biofilm formation by these bacteria on
artificially constructed matrices that resemble the surface of the gut
epithelium in the presence and absence of phages. Ciona is a highly tractable
experimental system that can be grown under predominantly sterile conditions,
allowing experimental control of of nearly every aspect of the symbiotic
conversation between host, bacteria, and phages. The results of this work have
the transformative potential of redefining our understanding of the factors that
shape the establishment and maintenance of stable, host-associated, bacterial
communities and in turn affect the physiology of the host itself.