* 1456543
* Molecular Mechanisms Employed by TRIM28 to Maintain Epigenetic Information through Different Stages of Embryonic Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* MARIA GARCIA-GARCIA, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2019
* USD 832,000.00

How information in genomes is decoded during embryogenesis is one of the
greatest mysteries of humankind. Central to this problem is an understanding of
how gene expression is regulated. Certain genes are controlled by chemical
modifications that are introduced before fertilization. These marks to DNA (also
called chromatin marks or genomic imprints) in eggs and sperm are transmitted
from parents to children and constitute an important mechanism for the control
of gene expression across generations. While research in the last 50 years has
uncovered the complexity of chromatin marks, information is still lacking about
the factors that recognize and interpret these marks to activate or repress the
imprinted genes. Preliminary evidence has revealed a novel role for a specific
protein as a regulator of imprinted gene expression. By further defining the
requirements for involvement of this protein, this research program will expand
fundamental knowledge of the processes and factors that mediate control of gene
expression across generations. In addition to enhancing understanding of a
fundamental problem in embryonic development, this program of study fosters
research by students of all levels. Additionally, both the lead researcher and
students participate in several outreach activities to disseminate knowledge of
developmental biology.

Shortly after fertilization, mammalian embryos undergo a genome-wide
demethylation event that involves the enzymatic removal of methyl groups from
methyl-cytosine DNA residues. The removal of these epigenetic marks allows the
reprogramming of the zygotic genome, an essential process for embryogenesis to
begin. However, a number of genomic loci, including imprinted genes, need to
preserve epigenetic information for the new organism to develop properly. The
transcriptional repressor TRIM28 has recently emerged as a key regulator of
imprinted gene expression. However, the mechanisms employed by this
transcription factor are still unclear. This proposal aims to resolve the
requirements of TRIM28 for genomic imprinting at different developmental stages
and the molecular mechanisms used by this transcriptional regulator to maintain
epigenetic information in developing mouse embryos. Experiments in Specific Aim
1 will analyze the stage-specific requirements of TRIM28 for imprinting control
by analyzing the effects of conditional depletion of Trim28 at different times
during embryonic development. In Specific Aim 2, the mechanisms by which TRIM28
controls secondary DMR methylation at the Dlk1-Gtl2 locus will be investigated
through epistatic analysis. Results from these experiments will provide novel
insight not only into the roles of TRIM28, but also into the mechanisms that
regulate genomic imprinting.