* 1456338
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Evolution of Diet Breadth through Ecoimmunology
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* M. Deane Bowers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2020
* USD 331,905.00

Human commerce and other anthropogenic activities have caused widespread changes
in the geographic ranges of species, affecting how species interact within their
communities. Since plant-feeding insects represent a large part of Earth's
terrestrial biomass, understanding the factors that influence them to change
their diets is central to predicting if and how newly organized ecosystems will
function. Ecoimmunology is an emerging discipline that highlights the role of
the immune system in species interactions and the evolution of life history
traits. Although research in plant-insect interactions has long recognized that
the range of plant species eaten by insects is shaped not only by
characteristics of the plants, but also by enemies such as predators and
parasites, the role played by immunological defense in determining dietary
breadth is a new area of study. This research explores the hypothesis that
resistance to pathogens attained via enhanced immunity can affect the likelihood
of incorporating new plant species into insect herbivore diets.

To test this hypothesis, researchers will combine approaches from ecoimmunology,
chemical ecology and microbiology, using a model system of four butterfly
species, all of which have incorporated the introduced plant, Plantago
lanceolata (Plantaginaceae), into their diets. Researchers will assess whether
the use of the introduced plant is associated with altered disease risk by
quantifying parasitism rates and environmental levels of two common pathogens in
different populations of each butterfly species that vary in their use of P.
lanceolata. In the laboratory, genetic stock from these populations will be used
to compare the immunological response to microbial pathogens and simulated
parasitism among caterpillars feeding on P. lanceolata and ancestral host plant
species. Researchers will experimentally investigate the interplay between diet,
the sequestration of plant chemicals, and the bacteria residing in the insect
gut by measuring the immune response when these factors have been manipulated.
Finally, they will test whether larval infection history affects which plants
are chosen by ovipositing females, or whether shifts to P. lanceolata reflect
selection on innate host preference.