* 1456407
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra-softening polymers from engineered thiol-based resins for additive manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Cary Baur, Adaptive 3D Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2018
* USD 730,198.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is making tough, 3D printed parts that can be
directly manufactured through additive processes commercially available.
Additive manufacturing has potential to revolutionize the way parts are produced
by streamlining product design, production, and validation, which allows for low
production costs and accelerated lead times. The penetration of additive
technology into industrial processes has been greatly slowed by the current
inability to 3D print parts of any stiffness with materials properties on par
with traditionally manufactured parts. Particularly, 3D printed materials tend
to tear or fracture more readily between successive printed layers. At Adaptive
3D Technologies, we have developed resins that produce tough, robust parts that
are tougher than many current 3D printed products in the x, y and z planes by
achieving covalent crosslinking across printed layers. These materials and
processing techniques will help drive additive manufacturing into large volume,
yet customizable, market sectors to increase efficiency and productivity across
industries. The printed parts resulting from our printable materials will
further U.S. manufacturing by lowering production costs, increasing product
performance and reshoring advanced manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on understanding
interface chemistry and adhesion phenomena in a special class of low-viscosity,
thiol-ene resins to produce a range of mechanically tough materials that are 3D
printable via stereolithography (SLA). A significant problem with current SLA
approaches is that successive printed layers do not adhere sufficiently
together, leading to large reductions in toughness as measured by the stress-
strain response in soft, viscoelastic and stiff materials. Our Phase II research
explores the tradeoffs between molecular architecture, reactivity, resin
viscosity, and key printing parameters to develop improved materials to enable
tougher printed parts than industry standards along multiple axes of deformation
at similar printing speeds and feature sizes well below 100 microns. We have
developed a portfolio of 3D printable materials with room temperature Young's
moduli near 2 MPa, 20 MPa, 200 MPa or 2 GPa. Soft and viscoelastic materials
have strain capacities well above 100% in all print directions, including when
measured perpendicular to print layer interfaces. We expect to further our
polymers' thermomechanical properties through the proposed Phase II SBIR effort
by incorporating proper additives into our systems to control color, shelf life,
aesthetics, mechanical properties and compatibility with various jetting
techniques.