* 1456918
* RUI: Cells from the Immune System Generate Adult-born Neurons in Crayfish
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Barbara Beltz, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 06/30/2017
* USD 195,000.00

Neurons in crayfish brains can be replaced throughout adult life. The brain
neurons are formed by a process that begins when an immature cell, or stem cell,
divides and then goes through a process of development that converts the stem
cell to a mature neuron. Interestingly, the source of the neuron stem cells is
not known in the crayfish. The Principal Investigator proposes that cells in the
crayfish?s immune system may be the source of the stem cells. This is a novel
idea because it requires that adult cells with a very different function
(immunity) change into immature cells with the ability to develop into neurons.
The researcher has found evidence to support this idea and will carry out
studies to confirm her findings and learn how these potential source cells get
from the crayfish circulatory system into the brain. The project will provide
research training opportunities for female undergraduates and for students from
underrepresented groups. Student experiences will be assessed using
institutional and curricular surveys. Outreach activities will be carried out at
local K-12 schools, for alumni associations, and for senior citizens in the
Older, Wiser Lifelong Learning (OWLLS) program to teach neuroscience and explain
the value of using invertebrate animal model systems to study lifelong
plasticity in the nervous system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innate immune system
of crayfish is composed of two distinct tissues that contain different cell
types with characteristic cell cycle times and properties. In vitro and adoptive
transfer methods will be used to identify regions involved in producing putative
neuronal precursor cells. Crayfish will be injected with bromodeoxyuridine to
label cells that are in the cell cycle. Hemolymph containing BrdU-labeled cells
will then be extracted from these donor crayfish, and hemocyte types separated
using Percoll gradients. Each hemocyte class will then be tested for its
attraction to the niche in vitro, as well as injected into live crayfish for
long-term studies that will test whether particular immune-derived cell types do
transition into neuron progenitors that then develop into neurons. The neuronal
phenotype will be confirmed by labeling for appropriate neurotransmitters and
tract-tracing to reveal cellular morphology.