* 1456836
* Functional Significance of the Competition between Vapor and Liquid Transport in Transpiring Leaves
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Fulton Rockwell, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2019
* USD 229,616.00

Plants use solar energy to take carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and construct
sugars, a process which forms the basis for agricultural food production and
influences the global carbon cycle. Yet, when plants open pores in their leaves
(called stomata) to access gaseous carbon, their internal cell surfaces
inevitably lose water to the air around the plant, a process called
transpiration. The efficiency with which leaves can replace water lost to
transpiration imposes an important constraint on stomatal apertures and
therefore carbon uptake by plants. Yet, this constraint remains poorly
understood, both at the individual leaf level as well as the canopy level
relevant to meteorological and climate models. Previous investigations of the
physical and structural basis of water transport efficiency in leaves have
typically relied on an isothermal analogy that treats a leaf as an isothermal
"black box." Such models cannot be directly interpreted in terms of real
material properties, such as plant cell membrane and cell wall permeabilities to
water, properties that are subject to genetic modification. The current proposal
addresses this problem by adopting a new intellectual foundation, derived from
basic principles of thermodynamics and continuum mechanics. This makes it
possible to address questions of vapor transport inside leaves that could not be
formulated previously, opening up a new perspective on the effects of leaf
structural and material properties on the exchange of energy and water between
leaves and their environments. This project will provide the scientific
community with robust tools for scaling from the hydraulic properties of
individual plant cells to the behavior of transpiring leaves, in order to better
understand and manipulate hydraulic constraints on plant production in the
future.

This proposal addresses the competition between liquid water and vapor transport
that occurs within a leaf, from the veins to the stomata. This competition
between phases is physically coupled to the competition between thermal
conduction and latent heat. A critical aspect of the competition between phases
is that the mole fraction gradient that drives the diffusive flux of water vapor
is far more temperature sensitive than the water potential gradient driving
liquid permeation; vapor gets a significant push from even small (~0.1 C)
temperature differences between the veins and stomata. Previous work by the
principal investigator developed a mechanistic model to describe heat and
molecular transport in transpiring leaves, and validated the approach for leaves
of red oak (Quercus rubra L.). This project would extend the model to 3D
treatments of leaf structure, and investigate the physiological role of internal
vapor transport experimentally. An experimental approach is essential because
there is no mechanistic model for predicting stomatal movements to environmental
perturbations; experimental observations are required. In addition, energy
balances for leaves integrate over a large suite of traits and thus span a high-
dimensional parameter space. While the space can be explored theoretically, this
is useful only if the range occupied by real leaves is known. An experimental
hypothesis is that temperature driven vapor transport is important in allowing
herbaceous leaves to maintain stomatal aperture under large solar radiation
loads. Conversely, the ability to extract soil water through large whole plant
hydraulic resistances, and the maintenance of tight coordination between xylem
and stomatal water potentials, are expected to impose constraints on a vapor-
dependent transport strategy.