* 1456950
* Characterizing the Role of Transcriptional Repression in Maize Development and Domestication
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Andrea Gallavotti, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 07/31/2020
* USD 976,293.00

Most of the world's food supply is provided either directly or indirectly by a
few cultivated cereal species. Cereals generate their main edible product,
grains, through a reproductive process that takes place in specialized
structures called spikelets, which eventually give rise to flowers. Spikelet
formation is carefully regulated by a network of genes that function at specific
times during development. This is achieved through precise control of gene
activity, either by activating or repressing mechanisms. The maize REL2 protein
is essential for repressing gene activity in many developmental processes, among
which are those that regulate the formation of spikelets and flowers. In this
proposal the role of REL2 and REL2-like proteins are investigated in the
development of maize, an economically important crop species. Overall, this
research will reveal the molecular mechanisms controlling spikelet and flower
formation, and will have far-reaching ramifications for both basic and applied
plant research in maize and other agronomically valuable species. This project
will impact undergraduate students and a post-doctoral researcher, providing
them with a broad range of genetic, developmental, and genomic skills. High-
school students and teachers will also be trained and exposed to the importance
of protein interaction networks in biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research integrates genetic, molecular and genomic approaches to
dissect the role of REL2-mediated transcriptional repression during maize
development and will ultimately lead to: i) the functional characterization of
the REL2 corepressor gene family; ii) the development of an integrated model for
spikelet and flower formation; iii) a mechanistic understanding of a key step in
the domestication of maize spikelets; and iv) the discovery of new proteins
mediating transcriptional repression in different developmental pathways.