* 1456035
* Scholars Program for Engineering College Students (SPECS): Motivate, Accelerate, Retain and Transfer Engineering Students
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Kate Disney, Cabrillo College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 02/29/2020
* USD 715,613.00

There is an established need in the United States to increase the number of
American scientists in the workforce. This NSF Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project will award
scholarships to help increase the number of students who complete associates
degrees in engineering at Cabrillo College, transfer to 4-year institutions, and
seek careers in STEM. As many as 84 scholars will participate in a three-year
program, designed to immerse them in academic enrichment activities including
participation in a learning community and a course meant to help them to develop
strong professional identities through doing hands-on projects, interacting with
local engineers, and touring local industry. The institution's STEM Center, will
provide students with an abundance of resources including academic, career and
financial aid advising, transfer assistance, mentorships, field trips,
scholarship assistance, and study groups.

The project will address three challenges that Cabrillo College students face
while attempting to obtain a STEM degree (a) long time to transfer (four or more
years), (b) lack of math preparation and subsequent inability to succeed in
precalculus, and (c) the high cost of living in the area. The scholars will
participate in the Math, Engineering, and Science Achievement (MESA) program
facilitated through the STEM Center. MESA will provide students with intensive
precalulus preparation and peer-lead Academic Excellence workshops in math,
engineering, computer science, and physics for those students who pass
precalculus. Formative evaluation will address student and mentor satisfaction
(surveys), the viability of the students' educational plan, and academic
progress. Summative evaluation will consist of an analysis of how well the
project components align with successful attainment of the retention and
graduation targets. Dissemination of the results of evaluation will be done
through the annual MESA Leadership Retreat and the Research and Planning Group
Strengthening Student Success conference (for California community college
faculty and administrators) and help contribute to expanding the knowledge base
regarding the circumstances under which programs of this type are successful.