* 1456864
* Collaborative Research:  Integration of Glandular Trichome Metabolism and Development by a Flavonoid Pathway Signal
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Gregg Howe, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 03/31/2019
* USD 454,851.00

Trichomes are specialized epidermal cells present in most plants that optimize
the production of compounds that provide protection against environmental
insults. Broad interest in these epidermal "biofactories" is heightened by the
fact that many gland-derived substances are useful for industrial and medicinal
purposes. Although significant progress has been made in cataloging the
metabolic "parts list" of glandular trichomes, fundamental questions concerning
the regulation of metabolism within, and development of, the trichome structure
remain to be answered. In keeping with the analogy of the trichome gland as a
biochemical factory, this project seeks to address two major questions
concerning the operating principles of this highly evolved structure: how are
various assembly lines (metabolic pathways) within the factory coordinated, and
how do changes in the demand for the assembled products (bioactive compounds)
influence the way in which the factory is constructed? The research has
potential to transform current views of metabolism by advancing the concept of
cross regulation between seemingly disparate metabolic pathways, and defining
new roles for well characterized enzymes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glandular
trichomes produce a wide variety of bioactive compounds that protect aerial
plant tissues from biotic and abiotic stress. The metabolic activity of trichome
glands is often dominated by the production of terpenoids and flavonoids, which
comprise two of the most diverse and economically important classes of compounds
in nature. Progress in elucidating biosynthetic pathways for these and other
secondary metabolites has far outpaced efforts to understand the developmental
cell types and structures that are often key to the biological function of
defense chemicals. This research project builds on recent studies showing that
terpenoid and flavonoid biosynthesis in glandular trichomes of tomato is coupled
to gland development and, intriguingly, is coordinately impacted by the action
of the flavonoid biosynthesis enzyme chalcone isomerase (CHI). The broad
objective of the project is to combine experimental and mathematical modeling
approaches to achieve a systems-level understanding of how trichome metabolic
and developmental processes are integrated. The experimental approaches are
grounded in the use of purified trichome glands (a single cell type) for
transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic analyses, as well as powerful genetic
tools to manipulate functional processes affecting gland development and
metabolism. The research may also reveal new roles for a well-studied metabolic
enzyme (CHI) and broaden current views of how small molecules control
metabolism. The project provides multi-disciplinary training opportunities for
trainees from diverse backgrounds, including participation of undergraduate
students in the Plant Genomics REU Summer Research Program. The project will
increase access by diverse segments of the public to science through
partnerships with the MSU Horticulture Gardens and local industry. Project
scientists will partner with the 4-H Children's Garden, local elementary
schools, and commercial growers of mint and other aromatic plants to provide
children with hands-on learning experiences that illustrate the importance of
trichome-derived compounds in plant biology.