* 1456237
* Collaborative research: Measuring and modeling the ecological consequences of associational effects
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Brian Inouye, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2021
* USD 569,999.00

This project will study how insect pests affect individual plant populations
within the context of diverse assemblages of plant species. When insects search
for plants to eat, they can be influenced by the look and smell of surrounding
plants. Neighboring plants can both increase and decrease insect damage to
plants, and the term for this is associational effects (AE). Although it is
clear that associational effects can occur at the level of individual plants,
little is known about whether these effects are important enough to alter plant
populations in nature, or to what degree they contribute to affecting crop yield
in agricultural fields. This project will use short-term experiments in
combination with mathematical models to infer how associational effects
influence populations of native plants. The methods developed in this project
can also be used to determine how to use associational effects to maximize crop
yields. The project will provide STEM training for undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral students and a post-baccalaureate technician, and the researchers
will partner with K-12 teachers to develop activities for teaching science using
school gardens and associational effects between crops such as collards and
mustards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine mathematical models
and experiments to address whether and how associational effects influence the
outcome of plant interspecific competition (coexistence and/or relative
abundance) in an old-field system, using Solanum carolinense (Carolina
horsenettle) and Solidago altissima (goldenrod) as focal species. The project
will address three questions empirically: 1) What is the spatial scale of AE in
this system? (using a Nelder fan design field experiment) 2) How do AE from
multiple species combine? (using an experiment with monocultures, bicultures,
and tricultures at two different densities) and 3) how do associational effects
influence competition (using data from a previous competition experiment with
and without herbivores). Spatially implicit and explicit models will address how
plant spatial structure and the form of frequency dependence alter predicted
effects of AE on plant populations. The researchers will parameterize models
using data from the empirical studies to test how associational effects scale up
to the population level. Overall, this project will quantify directly for the
first time how associational effects influence plant competition and provide a
general framework for understanding how different forms of associational effects
influence population-level processes across different types of consumer-resource
systems. This project will also suggest how best to manipulate associational
effects in agriculture, in order to maximize crop yields.