* 1456430
* Acquisition of spectroscopic and mass spectrometric instrumentation for the evaluation of N cycling and provenance
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Peggy Ostrom, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 470,738.00

1456430 Ostrom

Studies of the isotopic composition of Nitrogen in various species yield
insights on the dynamics of biogeochemical processes and recent results suggest
that within the North Pacific Ocean, long-term nitrogen isotope chronologies are
indicating a marked ecosystem state change raising questions as to whether the
signal indicates a trophic decline resultant from overfishing by humans that has
shifted the entire trophic structure of the oceanic food web and/or an increase
in nitrogen fixation linked to climate-coupled changes in the environment.

This grant supports acquisition of a gas source stable isotope ratio mass
spectrometer (SIRMS), a laser optical cavity ring down mass spectrometer (LCOS),
materials to construct a compressor system for filling air tanks with a range of
N2O concentrations and isotopic compositions, and a gas chromatography nitrogen
(GC-N) compound specific isotope analysis system capable of improved amino acid
Ã¤15N values. The equipment will foster investigator research focused on global
nitrogen cycling in the oceans and aquatic systems with targeted studies of the
stable isotopic composition of Nitrogen in Nitrous Oxide (N2O), a greenhouse gas
and within amino acids recovered from aquatic and marine organism tissues. The
requested equipment will replace an aging SIRMS at Michigan State, the LCOS will
allow comparative studies of the value and precision of laser-based isotopic
analysis versus traditional SIRMS analysis and the PI will prepare and make
available to the broader community a suite of N isotopic standards needed for
LCOS measurements.