* 1456518
* Collaborative Research:  The Evolutionary Significance of Variability in Mammalian Chewing: Influence of Dietary Specialization and Oral Afferents on Jaw and Hyolingual Movement
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Edward Rothman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Swartz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 368,124.00

The complex movements involved in rhythmic chewing in mammals are influenced by
the morphology of the feeding apparatus as well as sensory receptors in the
tongue and teeth which relay information on the size, shape, and texture of
foods. In dietary specialists, anatomy may limit these movements to those that
are ideal for chewing a narrow range of foods. In contrast, generalists may be
capable of more variable movements to deal with broader diets. Given these
potential differences in the adaptability of the chewing movements, the role of
input from oral sensory receptors may also differ between generalists and
specialists. The goal of this study is to determine how oral sensory information
and morphology interact to influence the complex jaw and tongue movements that
occur during mastication in mammals. Understanding the link between anatomy and
diet has been a cornerstone of studies of mammalian biology and evolution but
there are no comparative studies on the contribution of oral sensation to
chewing movements and coordination within the context of dietary evolution.
Results will shed light on potential selective pressures influencing the
evolution of sensory and motor systems involved in mastication, a behavior that
is implicated in the early evolution and radiation of mammals. In conjunction
with the scientific outcomes of this project, PIs will contribute to public
school education, public outreach, training of scientists at all levels and the
development of research infrastructure. The Williams lab will work with the Ohio
University Department of Education, the South East Ohio Center for Excellence in
Mathematics and Science, WOUB Public Media and local public school teachers to
develop and implement educational modules on evolution, adaptation and
functional morphology for middle and high schools. The Gerstner lab will conduct
interactive science activities at local schools, and public venues and field
institutes in Michigan and Utah. Both PIs will provide interdisciplinary
research training for undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral
associates. Data will be made available through public online databases and FDA
methods will be disseminated through the web-accessible Comprehensive R Archive
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mastication involves very complex, small and fast
movements of the jaw, tongue and hyoid. In each chewing cycle, jaw movements
align the teeth to break down food. The tongue, supported by the hyoid,
maintains the food on the teeth. Morphological specializations for diet
influence these movements, as do interactions between oral sensory receptors and
central and peripheral motor systems. Currently, we do not know whether dietary
adaptations influence an animal's range of kinematic responses to changes in
sensory stimuli, or how oral sensory systems relate to the adaptive profile of
diverse species. Using X-ray Reconstruction of Moving Morphology (XROMM), this
project will determine how 1) morphological specialization for diet impacts
chewing kinematics and 2) movements are affected in the absence of oral sensory
feedback. XROMM allows the continuous measurement of the 3D masticatory
movements of the jaw, tongue and hyoid. Comparisons will be made between 4
dietary generalists and 4 phylogenetically-matched specialists. Data are first
analyzed by extracting predetermined kinematic variables from continuous
movement profiles. As this approach leaves most of the data unanalyzed, the
final aim of this work is to develop and test new analytic tools under the
rubric of Functional Data Analysis (FDA) and compare results to the previous
analyses. FDA is an ideal partner for XROMM because it analyzes the entire
movement profile. Results will be disseminated through peer reviewed
publications and presentations at scientific meetings.