* 1456134
* Social Science Research on Gender and Reproduction
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Rene Almeling, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 153,758.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
examine the historical and contemporary processes through which men have come to
be overlooked in the realm of reproduction with regards to biomedical knowledge.
Very recently, medical researchers have been making headlines with a surprising
series of findings about how men's age, health, and behavior at the time of
conception affect reproductive outcomes, including miscarriage, birth defects,
and children's health. The recent emergence of basic information about men's
reproductive bodies reveals a profound gap in biomedical knowledge that stands
in sharp contrast to the enormous efforts made to understand women's
reproductive bodies over the past two centuries. This gap is especially puzzling
in that the male body was the standard for research up to and including the
1990s; during this period, most medical research was conducted with samples of
middle-aged, white men on the assumption that the results would generalize to
the rest of the population. This project will not only examine how this gap in
knowledge came about, it will also explore the social, clinical, and policy
consequences that resulted from the gap. The results of this research result
will eventually be made available in a book published with an academic press, in
articles published in sociology journals, by way of lectures at social
scientific conferences, and by promoting increased public awareness of these
issues through media interviews and op-eds. The investigator will also publish
journal articles and commentaries in medical and public health journals, give
talks at medical conferences, and work with public health scholars to craft
messages for public health campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will build on social scientific research
on gender, medicine, and reproduction to address her primary research question,
which is: How do biological, cultural, and organizational processes interact in
the production, dissemination, and reception of biomedical knowledge about men
and reproductive health issues? She will answer it in three stages. First, she
will examine the production of biomedical knowledge by analyzing historical and
contemporary medical documents and by conducting interviews with researchers and
clinicians. Next, she will examine whether and how such knowledge is
disseminated to the public by conducting a content analysis of reports published
by federal health agencies, medical organizations, and the media. Finally, she
will examine the reception of biomedical knowledge by conducting interviews with
approximately one-hundred men to analyze how they think about their role in
reproduction, as well as how they respond to emerging biomedical knowledge about
how men's age, health, and behavior affects children's health. The project will
contribute to social scientific debates about how biological and social
processes coalesce to influence both medical knowledge and individual
experiences of reproduction. It will make theoretical and empirical
contributions to sociological, anthropological, and historical literature on
reproduction and gender, motherhood and fatherhood, bodies and embodiment,
knowledge, health and medicine. It will also generate an analytic framework for
examining how particular biological processes, such as those associated with
reproduction, come together with particular social processes, such as specific
cultural norms and organizational infrastructures, to produce gaps in biomedical
knowledge.