* 1456846
* Delineation of Semaphorin6a/PlexinA2 Signaling in Zebrafish Eye Development
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Bryan Ballif, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 06/30/2019
* USD 520,000.00

As an embryo develops its organs, the cells that form the organs increase in
number and take on different functions. Intricate developmental processes are in
place allowing cells to communicate with each other to specify the number and
types of cells required to form a functioning organ of the appropriate size.
This project will study two specific proteins that are required to form an eye.
One protein is on one cell and the other is on a neighboring cell and the two
proteins communicate with each other. The Principal Investigator hypothesizes
that these proteins control cell proliferation and cell type specification
during eye formation. Zebrafish embryos will be used for these studies because
they are transparent and allow examination of eye development in real time. The
proteins that govern eye development in the zebrafish are the same proteins that
govern eye development in all vertebrates. The project aims to understand how
this critical pair of proteins directs the cells to proliferate and become
functional. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in research.
High school seniors from Puerto Rico will be selected to participate in an
eight-week research program and to work on projects related to the proposed
research. The researchers and their graduate students will create and direct
inquiry based teaching modules at four primarily undergraduate institutions.
Students will have opportunities to learn about zebrafish development and the
effects of different environmental factors on development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator demonstrated that a cellular
signaling cue, Semaphorin6a, and its receptor, PlexinA2, are required for
development of the neuronal tissues of the vertebrate eye. Inhibition of either
of these proteins results in smaller eyes due to retinal cells abnormally
exiting the eye domain and due to decreases in cell division during the early
stages of eye formation. Wild type and mutated Plexin A2 receptors will be
expressed in cultured cells. The cells will be stimulated with Semaphorin 6a and
modifications to the receptors and changes in binding partners will be
determined by imunoprecipitation, immunoblotting, and mass spectrometry. To
validate the cell culture studies, PlexinA2 receptors will be expressed in both
PlexinA2 null and morphant zebrafish. These studies will focus on answering
whether 1) Fyn kinase directly binds to PlexinA2 via its SH3 domain, 2) Fyn and
Semaphorin6a induce phosphorylation of PlexinA2 at key regulatory sites, and 3)
phosphorylation of the receptor at these sites recruits binding partners
responsible for propagation of the signal and the transcriptional regulation of
genes involved in eye development. A second aim will be to determine how the
Semaphorin6a/PlexinA2-dependent gene targets control cohesion and proliferation
in the early zebrafish eye.