* 1456092
* SBIR Phase II:  Fast Switching Electrochromic Window
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Damoder Reddy, ARGIL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,036,661.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve light/heat control into the
automobile and enhance user comfort by replacing existing automotive glass with
dynamic automotive glass. Economic and environmental benefits of using dynamic
windows in automobiles include increase of miles per gallon by reducing air
conditioning load with enhance light/heat management. Replacing standard
automotive sunroof glass with dynamic sunroof glass will increase fuel
efficiency by 3 miles per gallon during summer time. If all the glass in an
automobile is replaced with dynamic glass then the impact will be much larger,
resulting in decrease in oil consumption by several millions of barrels per day.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will utilize
scalable solution processed techniques to create unique fast switching
electrochromic layers. Current dynamic window technologies have not reached
their market potential due to their high cost. Due to technological limitations,
current dynamic window products can only be used for sunroof applications as a
result there are not being used for side windows, rear glass or windshield. New
class of electrochromic windows based on innovative materials and device designs
that achieve fast switching, high contrast and low production costs will enable
wide spread adoption of smart windows in a broad range of automobiles. The novel
electrochromic layers developed during Phase I research will be improved further
and scaled up to commercially significant size prototypes. New smart windows
will cost 3-4x lower compared to current smart window products on the market or
in advanced development stage. These novel electrochromic devices will be
thoroughly characterized and their long term reliability established by the end
of Phase II research. At the end of Phase II prototypes of fast switching
electrochromic automotive glazing will be built that are suitable for
installation in a car for sunroof and/or side window.