* 1456652
* Collaborative Research: De Novo Evolution of Multicellularity in a Unicellular Volvocine Alga
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* William Ratcliff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2019
* USD 275,102.00

Life on Earth includes both very simple and rather complex organisms. The
central question motivating this research is how do simple organisms evolve into
complex organisms? The origin of organisms composed of more than one cell (i.e.,
multicellular organisms) was one of a few major events in the history of life
that created new opportunities for more complex biological systems, such as
plants and animals, to evolve. However, understanding how and why this kind of
complexity has increased in some lineages remains a major challenge for
evolutionary biology. The challenges posed by the evolution of multicellularity,
in the evolution of mechanisms for sharing labor and cooperating among the cells
within an organism, underlie many medical conditions and are foundational in
understanding genotype to phenotype relationships. This project will also
develop novel curriculum materials for teaching high school students about
cellular differentiation and the challenges of multicellularity.

The goal of this research is to experimentally evolve multicellularity in the
single-celled green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. C. reinhardtii is an
established model system with a well-developed set of genetic tools. Its
relatives among the volvocine algae range from species having single cells to
those having tens of thousands of cells of different cell types. Generation of a
novel origin of multicellularity in the lab will enable direct comparison of
multicellular descendants to their unicellular ancestors. Twelve replicate
populations will be evolved in the presence of a filter-feeding predator,
conditions known to favor multicellularity. Genetic changes that occur over the
course of these experiments will be tracked to reveal the genetic basis of
multicellularity and the evolutionary processes giving rise to those changes.
Experimental data will be compared with the evolutionary and genetic routes by
which multicellularity evolved in the volvocine algae. Finally, the role of
environmentally induced developmental changes in the evolution of
multicellularity will be evaluated.