* 1456664
* Emplacement of regularly spaced volcanic centers in the East African Rift: Melt production or melt extraction?
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Eric Mittelstaedt, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2019
* USD 225,924.00

Volcanoes and volcanic activity present significant natural hazards, but they
are poorly understood. The principal goal of this project is to constrain the
proccess that regulate the timing, location, and volumes of volcanism at the
Earth's surface, specifically within continental rifts, but more broadly in any
region undergoing tectonic extension. Observations at continental rifts, such as
the East African Rift, find changes in the style of volcanism from widely,
irregularly spaced volcanic centers in areas with small amounts of extension to
surprisingly regularly spaced, uniform volcanoes in significantly extended
regions. We propose that the changes in volcanic style may be controlled by a
balance between the location of faults and fractures near the surface and the
variability of magma production beneath the crust, in the Earth's mantle. To
determine the role of these two processes and how those roles may change with
extension, will will use both numerical simulations and analogue laboratory
models to develop mathematical tools that will inform our understanding of the
drivers of volcanic activity in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As continental
rifts evolve, volcanic centers within rift valleys often develop a
characteristic spacing, or wavelength, such as observed in the Red Sea Rift and
within the Afar depression, the Main Ethiopian Rift (MER), and the Kenya
(Gregory) Rift of the East African Rift System (EARS). The surprisingly regular
spacing of the volcanic centers within the EARS is attributed to lithosphere
thickness, pre-existing fault systems, and mantle processes. However, little
quantitative assessment of these hypotheses has been undertaken and few studies
attempt to include the visco-elastic-plastic rheology of the lithosphere. The
primary goal of this work is to use data from coupled numerical and laboratory
experiments along with observations from the East African Rift System (EARS) to
quantitatively assess the contribution of both melt production and melt
extraction processes on the distribution of volcanic activity along the three
main branches of the actively spreading EARS. We will perform two groups of
coupled laboratory and numerical experiments; the first will simulate Rayleigh-
Taylor type instabilities within the partially molten mantle (melt production),
and the second will simulate the importance of pre-existing fractures and
volcano loading on surface volcanism (melt extraction). Numerically, we will use
a 3D marker-in-cell, finite difference code to initially match the laboratory
experiments and then expand the parameter range beyond that possible in the
laboratory. Both sets of experiments will vary rift opening rate, lithospheric
thickness, pre-exiting fractures, and volcanic loading. Finally, we will develop
predictive scaling laws that relate volcano spacing and volume to the above
parameters. These scaling laws will permit the use of surface observations to
estimate the relative importance of melt production below the lithosphere versus
melt extraction through the lithosphere in both the EARS and other continental
rifts.