* 1456010
* Collaborative Research: The Effects of Keystone Individuals on Collective Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Noa Pinter-Wollman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 12/31/2016
* USD 310,000.00

The collective behavior of societies emerges from self-organized interactions
among group members. Traditionally, group members have been thought of as
identical individuals, but behavioral variation is prevalent in nature. This
variation can be extreme and one group member, referred to here as the keystone
individual, may have a greater impact on the collective behavior of a group than
all other individuals. For example, some individuals may lead a group, tutor
others or function as super-spreaders of information or disease. Despite the
potential impact of keystone individuals on the success of a group, little is
known about how and why this influence emerges. The investigators will use
social spiders that can be easily manipulated and observed at the individual and
group levels to test hypotheses about the emergence of collective behavior,
hypotheses that cannot be easily evaluated in more complex systems. In addition
to the numerous undergraduate and graduate research projects this project will
generate, the proposed work will also be translated into hands-on activities
about collective behavior geared towards the education of K-12 students though
established and successful outreach programs. Adult science education activities
to enhance public knowledge of invertebrate biology will include public
lectures, media coverage, and conversations at local communities where the field
work occurs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research aims to examine the mechanisms
by which keystone individuals affect collective behavior, the effects of
keystones on the development of collective behaviors and the ecological and
evolutionary consequences of the presence of keystone individuals in groups.
Using a model system that allows for detailed experimental manipulations, the
social spider (Stegodyphus dumicola), will allow the investigators to develop a
broad theory to enhance the progress of science on keystone individuals.
Specifically, this work will (1) test whether keystone individuals produce
tradeoffs among colony-level processes such as prey capture and disease spread,
and how these tradeoffs change colony performance in different environments; (2)
uncover the temporal dynamics of the effects of keystone individuals on the
development of collective behaviors in the field; (3) elucidate the behavioral
mechanisms that underlie the catalytic effects of keystone individuals on the
behavior of other group members and collective outcomes; and (4) design
versatile agent-based models that will uncover the general mechanisms by which
keystone individuals influence collective behaviors. The investigators will
address these questions by combining lab and field experiments, analyzed with
sophisticated image analysis technology and social network theory, with
computational modeling. Published data sets will be uploaded for use by others
to Dryad.