* 1456806
* WiFiUS: Collaborative Research: Joint Network and Market Design for Content and Spectrum Sharing in Future 5G Networks (JoiNtMaCS)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Hesham El Gamal, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 01/31/2018
* USD 149,999.00

Future wireless networks, as represented by the 5G concept and associated set of
future standards, are expected to meet a diverse range of new requirements,
leverage technological and regulatory advancements, and overcome the spectrum
scarcity challenges. However, the success of a new technology is not only
determined by its technical strengths but also by an intricate interplay between
the economic considerations of the consumers/users, competing service and
content providers, and governing/regulating public agencies. This project
explores new wireless spectrum and content sharing concepts from both
technological and business perspectives for future 5G networks. The overall
objective of this project is to investigate and develop fundamental
technological and business aspects of new spectrum/content sharing for 5G
networks, that potentially could lead to significant technical performance
improvements as well as revolutionize future wireless markets and operators
business. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the research can be
described around its four research thrusts: (i) new, potentially transformative,
business models for future 5G markets, and in particular new business models for
mobile operators, (ii) in-network dynamic spectrum and content sharing and
pricing mechanisms under various possible future architectures that take into
account the new business models and bridge the gap between technological and
economic considerations, (iii) collaborative content distribution that could
lead to win-win relationships for wireless stakeholders, and (iv) intelligent
content caching for improved performance for different network and business
scenarios. A unique aspect of the research plan is that it stresses business and
economic implications of various architectural choices, with formal models that
capture technology performance as well as business/economic considerations. The
research leverages the complementary expertise of the investigators to build a
cohesive multi-disciplinary international team between the five PIs in the three
institutions. It also leverages significant contacts with industry and start-ups
to guide the research directions of the project as well as influence future
technologies and markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project include (1) the development of course projects that prepare students to
understand the market/economic aspects of networking and the future
architectural choices regarding content and spectrum sharing, (2) the
development of a tutorial on this subject to be offered at summer schools and
conferences, (3) K-12 outreach, (4) enhancement of student diversity and
increase of number of women and under-represented groups in engineering, (5)
technology transfer through collaboration with industry, and (6) development of
dual-degree PhD programs.