* 1456912
* The neural basis of online error correction
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Samuel Sober, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 04/30/2019
* USD 510,000.00

A central question in neuroscience is how the brain detects and corrects errors
in behavior. This type of error correction is essential for the learning and
performance of complex tasks such as speaking and using tools, and deficits of
error correction resulting from neurological diseases can have devastating
effects on the ability of an individual to interact with the world. This
research will examine the mechanisms by which the brain corrects errors in vocal
behavior. By building mathematical models of how the brain detects and
eliminates errors in performance and by directly recording the electrical
activity of individual brain cells, these studies will provide novel insights
into this key aspect of brain function. Additionally, the investigators will
develop course materials based on their research to be used to enhance science
education in underserved communities in the Atlanta area. The benefit to society
of this work is therefore twofold: it will reveal previously unknown mechanisms
of brain function and will improve the general public's understanding of
neurobiology.

The proposed experiments combine a range of experimental approaches to test a
simple model of how the brain rapidly corrects errors in behavior. The central
hypothesis is that the brain is able to rapidly correct errors in vocal behavior
because brain cells that control the vocal output are affected by the sensory
(auditory) feedback arising from vocal output. By collecting electrical
recordings of single brain cells during both vocal behavior and auditory
stimulation, experiments in Aim 1 will compare the sensory tuning (the tuning
for the pitch of a recently-heard syllable) and motor tuning (effect on the
pitch of vocal output) of neurons that control behavior. Studies in Aim 2 will
use lesions and reversible inactivations to selectively eliminate auditory input
to premotor neurons, thereby facilitating tests of the hypothesis that such
sensory inputs are required for rapid online error correction.