* 1456970
* WiFiUS: An Architecture for Future Configurable Millimeter Wave Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Shivendra Panwar, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 04/30/2017
* USD 100,000.00

This project aims at addressing the fundamental challenges and developing novel
techniques to enable configurable millimeter wave (mmWave) small cell networks.
These techniques have great potential to meet the exponentially growing wireless
data demand in next-generation cellular systems. The research outcomes are
expected to significantly increase per-user network throughput, and could thus
influence future industry standards. Complementary to the research agenda, the
project also plans a broad range of education and outreach activities, including
the integration of the research findings into courses for graduate and
undergraduate students training in wireless systems, the involvement of
undergraduate students in research and testbed prototyping for valuable hands-on
experience, and the outreach to students from underrepresented groups via
various channels.

Technically, this project solves new problems and develops new mechanisms in the
following three thrusts that are critical to future mmWave networks: (i)
Modeling of correlated mmWave channel shadow fading, which focuses on deriving
realistic shadowing correlation models for mmWave channels in dense urban and
indoor environments by using field measurement data in order to gain a deep
understanding of mmWave transmission characteristics. These models in turn help
predict the impact of link variations on higher layer protocols and network
performance for optimal system design. (ii) Multipath media access control
(MAC), which develops a novel MAC protocol that allows a mobile device to
establish multiple connections to the core network over several base stations
and relaying nodes to address the challenges of unreliable and highly
directional mmWave links, as well as frequent shadow fading and handoffs in
mmWave small cell networks. (iii) mmWave configurable antennas and control
algorithms, where the team designs new configurable mmWave antennas that provide
great flexibility and performance in adaptive beamforming, as well as the
control algorithms for antenna adaptation and wireless resource management. In
addition, the project includes a testbed validation component that supports a
number of experimental tasks for validating the effectiveness of the techniques
developed in the project. The validation tasks also allow the integration of the
developed configurable antennas, the control algorithms, and the higher layer
protocols, so that their impact on the performance of the system as a whole can
be investigated, and the optimal cross-layer control and adaptation strategy can
be obtained.