* 1456039
* SBIR Phase II:  Enhanced Medical Ultrasound for Breast Cancer Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Matthew Pallone, Clarisond Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 904,089.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to address the need for alternative imaging
technologies for women with mammographically dense breast tissue by
significantly enhancing clinical breast ultrasound images. Mammography is the
gold standard for breast cancer screening; however, both dense breast tissue and
cancerous lesions appear white on a mammogram, making it difficult to reliably
detect cancers. Women who have dense tissue - 26 million in the United States
alone - need alternative imaging technologies for early stage cancer detection.
Studies show that the addition of a single screening ultrasound increases cancer
detection by 28% over mammography alone, with significantly higher combined
diagnostic accuracy. Despite these findings, a fourfold increase in the false
positive rate undermines ultrasound use by physicians in breast imaging. A
technology that improves ultrasound image clarity in dense breast tissue would
revolutionize breast cancer imaging by allowing physicians to noninvasively
detect malignancies previously obscured by their size and/or poor contrast and
distinguish them from benign lesions. There is the strong potential to save
lives by substantially increasing the overall cancer detection rate while
simultaneously reducing the number of false positives.

The proposed project seeks to develop an adaptive beamforming technology that
will significantly improve the clinical utility of ultrasound imaging. Unlike
traditional beamforming, adaptive beamforming estimates the time delays between
ultrasound probe elements and does not require prior knowledge of the speed of
sound along the beam path to produce an image of the tissue. The more accurate
time delays result in improved beam focusing and allow for larger transducer
arrays, which in turn allows for deeper signal penetration - enhancing signal
strength, spatial resolution, and image contrast. The preceding Phase I project
used simulated ultrasound data to develop a novel adaptive beamforming technique
with least-mean square filters that improves signal-to-noise ratio by up to 32
dB and image contrast by up to 38%. The Phase II project objectives are to
acquire raw, radio-frequency ultrasound data from both representative breast
phantoms and an in vivo study; to optimize and finalize the adaptive beamforming
algorithm; to process the study data and evaluate improved image contrast and
clinical benefit; to produce a software application embodying the adaptive
beamforming technique; and to design the network architecture and data
management approach required to deliver that software as a license or as a
Software as a Service (SaaS) product to medical facilities.