* 1456706
* Glucocorticoid hormone entrainment of prefrontal cortex circadian function
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Robert Spencer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2020
* USD 541,846.00

Optimal brain function depends on a daily cycle of fluctuating operation (a
circadian rhythm) and synchronization of that rhythm to the environmental day-
night cycle. A specific region of the mammalian brain, the suprachiasmatic
nucleus, is responsible for coordinating the brain's circadian rhythms. Little
is known about how this coordination happens. This project examines the
circadian function of the prefrontal cortex, a brain region involved in complex
thinking, such as planning and decision-making, and the control of mood and
emotions. The project will test the innovative hypothesis that a specific
hormone (glucocorticoid hormone) serves as communicator between the
suprachiasmatic nucleus and the prefrontal cortex. The project will use a
systems biology approach to determine how glucocorticoid hormones regulate
prefrontal cortex circadian rhythms in rats. The project also will use cutting-
edge manipulations of prefrontal cortex gene expression to discern the
mechanisms by which circadian rhythms contribute to optimal prefrontal cortex
function. The studies will result in new understanding of glucocorticoid hormone
physiology and its role in the coordination of brain circadian function. This
new understanding could have significant benefit for society by promoting new
strategies to combat disturbed circadian function, such as occurs with night-
shift work, jet lag, seasonal extremes, aging, and certain disorders. The
research will provide excellent research opportunities for high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students from diverse backgrounds through an ongoing
partnership with the University of Colorado's STEM Center for Learning and
Diversity. Findings from this research will be disseminated to the scientific
community and the general public through research team presentations on campus,
at regional and national scientific meetings and community forums, and postings
on a public lab web-site.

The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) is central to the advanced cognitive
function in mammalian species. Strong diurnal variation in cognitive function
suggests that mPFC operation is under circadian control. The mPFC lacks direct
neural connection with the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the master clock in
the brain, but has high expression of glucocorticoid receptors, supporting the
prospect that corticosterone (CORT) participates in the entrainment of mPFC
rhythmic clock gene expression. Preliminary data show dynamic modulation of mPFC
clock gene expression that depends on the prior daily profile of diurnal
circulating patterns of CORT. Moreover, a mPFC-dependent memory task,
conditioned fear extinction, displays a diurnal variation in expression that is
absent in adrenalectomized rats. Based on these supporting preliminary data, the
project will determine whether: 1) CORT contributes to entrainment of mPFC
rhythmic clock gene expression, 2) an appropriately timed daily CORT pulse is
necessary for normal entrainment of diurnal variation in mPFC-dependent
conditioned fear extinction, and 3) CORT entrainment of mPFC-mediated
conditioned fear extinction depends on CORT activation of mPFC glucocorticoid
receptors and rhythmic mPFC clock gene expression. The proposed research will
provide excellent scientific training opportunities for a diverse group of high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students. A range of avenues will be used
for dissemination of the findings of this project and their value to society.