* 1456577
* RUI: Neural Basis of Pubertal Shifts in Stress Reactivity
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Russell Romeo, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 03/31/2020
* USD 393,990.00

Puberty is a significant stage of development marked by transitions in both
physiological and neural function. Though most people appreciate the hormonal
changes that occur during this period, the types of experiences that an
adolescent encounters also change dramatically. These experiences can result in
increased exposure to stressors in the environment. A growing body of research
indicates that how an individual responds to stress changes substantially during
this stage, but we know little about the biological mechanisms that underlie
these shifts. It is important to address these gaps in our understanding,
because stress can disrupt body and brain systems that are developing into their
adult-like patterns during this time. Using an experimental animal model that
combines studies at the neuroanatomcial and biochemical levels, these
experiments will begin to reveal the neural mechanisms that mediate the pubertal
changes in stress responsiveness. The results of these studies will extend our
understanding of how puberty and stress interact to affect both the brain and
body. Importantly, these studies will be undertaken at Barnard College, an all
women's liberal arts college. Thus, in addition to leading to advances in our
understanding of neurodevelopment, support of this proposal will provide many
female undergraduates with educational opportunities to take part in all aspects
of experimental research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The paraventricular nucleus of
the hypothalamus (PVN) plays a pivotal role in integrating information from
brain areas that coordinate the stress response. Greater levels of neural
activation have been found in the PVN of prepubertal compared to adult animals
in response to stress, leading to the hypothesis that developmental changes in
the connectivity and/or function of the PVN contribute to pubertal alterations
in stress reactivity. This project will test this hypothesis by assessing
pubertal differences in the connectivity, phenotype, and activation of brain
areas that project to the PVN. Specifically, neural tract tracing combined with
immunohistochemical markers of excitatory or inhibitory neurons will be used in
prepubertal and adult rats exposed to stress. This project will also examine
pubertal changes in excitatory and inhibitory signaling in the PVN by assessing
receptor expression and measuring hormone levels following site-directed
delivery of excitatory or inhibitory receptor modulators in the PVN of
prepubertal and adult rats exposed to stress. These studies will probe neural
mechanisms responsible for the pubertal transitions in stress reactivity, and
provide information on how the adolescent and adult nervous systems
differentially process stressful stimuli.