* 1456725
* IOS:  Interpretation of Stem Cell Promoting Transcription Factor Gradient
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Venugopala Gonehal, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

The growing tips of plant shoots give rise to all aboveground organs, such as
leaves, flowers, and fruits. To continuously develop these organs throughout
their lives, plants must maintain pools of stem cells - i.e., cells with the
capacity to adopt numerous possible fates. Despite the differentiation of these
stem cells into unique above-ground organs, these stem cell pools remain
relatively constant. Precisely how plants (and other organisms) manage this
delicate balance of stem cell maintenance and differentiation remains an
important outstanding question in the field of biology. To further address this
question, this project will use gene manipulation methods, biochemical analyses,
and high-resolution live imaging to precisely describe how the gene expression
processes that regulate this balance are controlled in plant stem cells.
Understanding this delicate balance of stem cell maintenance and differentiation
will facilitate the development of crop plants with optimal biomass and grain
yield, as well as broadly provide new paradigms for gene regulation.
Additionally, the dynamic live imaging of gene expression will be integrated
into an outreach campaign aimed at explaining inquiry-based scientific learning
techniques to high school students from lower income and Latino-dominated local
area schools (http://cybersam.ucr.edu/Plone/lab-outreach-2). The project will
additionally train a postdoctoral fellow, a graduate student and several
undergraduate students in methods and principles of gene regulation in actively
developing tissues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Arabidopsis, WUSCHEL (WUS), a stem
cell promoting transcription factor, moves from the rib meristem (RM) into the
stem cell domain/central zone (CZ) where it represses transcription of
differentiation promoting transcription factors and activates transcription of
its own negative regulator-CLAVATA3 (CLV3) by directly binding the promoters.
How WUS manages to activate CLV3 at a distance from the RM, and how it activates
some genes and represses others is not understood. Unpublished work from the
Gonehal Lab reveals that WUS binds several closely spaced cis-elements with
different affinities (a cis-regulatory module [CRM]) in the CLV3 enhancer region
as monomer and as dimer at lower and higher protein concentrations,
respectively. The in vivo cis-element manipulations and manipulation of the WUS
protein levels reveal that WUS utilizes the CRM to repress CLV3 at higher WUS
concentration in the RM and activate at lower concentration in the CZ. This work
aims to understand the regulation of spatio-temporal precision of CLV3
expression by understanding the mode and mechanism of action of the CLV3 CRM,
characterize WUS binding cis-elements in a gene repressed by WUS and understand
mechanisms of concentration-dependent transcriptional discrimination through
functional analysis of putative co-factors that interact with WUS. This activity
will lead to a new paradigm in transcriptional regulation in plants and in
concentration-dependent transcriptional regulation in general. Insights obtained
from this work will facilitate comparative analysis of transcriptional
regulation in shoot and root stem cell niches.