* 1456447
* Gravitational Waves, Gamma-Ray Bursts, and the Multi-Messenger Exploration of the Transient Sky
* MPS,PHY
* 07/31/2014,04/30/2016
* Alessandra Corsi, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2016
* USD 99,259.00

The detection of gravitational waves will provide a totally new view of the
transient sky. The advanced LIGO, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave
Observatory, will soon open an era when mysterious questions regarding gamma-ray
bursts, the most relativistic and energetic stellar explosions, will be
clarified via multi-messenger studies. In this framework, the present award
supports: (i) the training of a graduate student who can work, within the LIGO
Scientific Collaboration, on LIGO searches in coincidence with gamma-ray bursts;
(ii) studies related to the electromagnetic follow-up of LIGO-Virgo triple
coincidence triggers; (iii) searches for "longer-duration" gravitational wave
signals, aimed at probing the magnetar progenitor scenario for gamma-ray bursts.
The detection of gravitational waves could probe, for the first time directly,
the nature of gamma-ray burst progenitors. The discovery of an "orphan
afterglow" via electromagnetic follow-up of a gravitational wave trigger, would
yield the most dramatic confirmation of the jet model for gamma-ray bursts. The
detection of a longer-duration gravitational wave signal in coincidence with a
gamma-ray burst, could probe the nature of the central engine (magnetar versus
black-hole), and explain some of the most puzzling observational properties of
the early afterglow phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important component of this
project is the training of graduate and undergraduate students at being the next
generation of astrophysicists: scientists capable of bridging astronomy and
gravitational physics. Students' participation in LIGO engineering runs
dedicated to the preparation of the advanced detectors, is encouraged. A wider
dissemination of the concept of gravitational wave astronomy, and awareness of
LIGO as the US national facility dedicated to opening a new era in astronomy,
are promoted through lectures offered at a local planetarium. The last serves
public school students belonging, for the vast majority, to underrepresented
groups.