* 1456471
* Neuromechanics of Soft-bodied Locomotion
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Barry Trimmer, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 07/31/2019
* USD 610,000.00

Animals are remarkably good at moving in complex and changing environments, far
exceeding the capability of the most advanced robots. This adaptability is
possible because the nervous system and the body interact with the environment
as a single "neuromechanical system". In animals, this process is dominated by
soft tissues such as muscles and skin but it is largely unknown how the
movements of soft materials are controlled. This project will answer this
question by studying how neural, mechanical and sensing mechanisms contribute to
adaptable locomotion. The experiments will be carried out on caterpillars
because they provide a unique opportunity to use electrophysiology (recording
the electrical activity of neurons and muscles), motion capture and mechanical
measurements during free behavior. In addition to addressing issues that are
largely missing from our understanding of terrestrial soft animal locomotion,
these studies have wide applications in robotics including the design and
control of climbing machines, building assistive devices and manipulators and
for controlling better prosthetics. Understanding the mechanical and sensory
features that are important for caterpillar locomotion could also impact the
development of pesticide-free pest-control strategies (e.g., plant surface
engineering), managing sensitive ecological niches and modeling insect/host
plant interactions.

Three areas of research will determine how caterpillars adjust their locomotion
in different environments. The first uses motion capture to analyze the stepping
patterns (gaits) on different substrates and changes in orientation. The
mechanical properties of the substrate (including stiffness, density, curvature,
resilience, pseudo-elasticity, friction) will be altered systematically to
establish what mechanical features of the environment are essential cues for
caterpillars. The second will use implanted flexible electrode arrays to monitor
the activity of neurons that underlie each gait. The Environmental Skeleton
hypothesis predicts that motor patterns controlling the body wall muscles will
change with orientation but that motor patterns controlling grip will determine
the gait. Recently developed Softworm robots (entirely soft, 3D-printed crawling
robots) will be used to further examine the mechanisms of gait switching and the
evolution of inching behavior. Third, to begin identifying how interactions with
the environment are detected by soft animals, recordings will be made from
specific groups of touch and other mechanosensing neurons in the body wall to
ascertain what movements they encode and how that relates to crawling and
changes in gait.