* 1456174
* Adolescent and Adult Outcomes of Early Life Lactroncrine Programming of Temperament: Neuroenergetics and Social Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Katherine Hinde, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 04/30/2017
* USD 475,000.00

Who we are- our behavior, physiology, and health throughout our lives- is
strongly influenced by our early life. Decades of experimental research in
animal taxa and epidemiological studies of humans have demonstrated that
nutrition in the womb and behavioral care after birth are instrumental for the
developing young. Mother's milk sustains infant growth, development, and
behavioral activity, but little is known about the effects of milk on offspring
brain and behavior, especially after weaning during adolescence and adulthood.
Importantly, mother's milk is food, medicine, and hormonal signal. This project
will investigate how mother's milk ingested in infancy influences neurobiology
and social behavior in adolescence and adulthood by programming behavior during
early life. Longitudinal, interdisciplinary research on how mother's milk shapes
offspring, not only addresses key theoretical questions in animal behavior, but
has important implications for infant nutrition, clinical recommendations, and
human well-being. Such knowledge will inform maternal decisions about breast-
feeding initiation and duration, improve replacement and supplemental formula
compositions, influence clinical interventions during early life, and can shape
institutional policy (e.g. parental leave). Researchers in the Comparative
Lactation Lab create research opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and
post-doctoral trainees, particularly through minority tracks of the PRISE
(Program for Research in Science & Engineering) and HGWISE (Harvard Graduate
Women in Science and Engineering). The results will be communicated to the
general public through "Mammals Suck... Milk!" a blog written accessibly for
clinical and lay audiences, as well as science outreach lectures in K-12
classrooms, natural history museums, and science centers.

The study will address two key questions in rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta): 1)
How does early life nutrition and hormonal signaling via mother's milk affect
social behavior, particularly social networks, mating, and maternal behavior
during transitions from adolescence to adulthood and 2) How are these behavioral
effects mediated through the organization of temperament and neurobiology during
infancy. Neurobiological (PET and MRI) and behavioral investigations of
lactocrine programming, both nutritional and hormonal, are needed in long-lived,
socially-complex, singleton-rearing taxa. This project provides an unparalleled
and ephemeral opportunity to prospectively assess neurobiological and behavioral
outcomes in a targeted cohort of adolescent and adult rhesus monkeys that were
intensively studied as infants, including systematic analysis of the milk their
mothers produced. Longitudinal integration of early life experiences with
neurobiology, behavioral phenotype, and fitness outcomes addresses fundamental
aspects of maternal effects and developmental programming and advances an
understanding of how selection has shaped maternal investment strategies and
consequences for offspring. Results generated from the proposed research will be
disseminated to the scholarly and clinical community via open access publication
and data will be made searchable, available, and citable through the online
Dryad Data Repository.