* 1456317
* Collaborative Research: The Aquilegia Petal as a Model for the Elaboration and Evolution of Organ Shape
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Scott Hodges, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 463,579.00

The body of a plant is made of just a few repeatedly produced structures, such
as leaves and stems. However, these structures can vary tremendously in their
shape both within an individual and between different species in predictable,
consistent ways. This variation in shape is controlled by a combination of cell
division and cell shape, which in turn must be controlled by variation in gene
expression. The proposed research seeks to determine how complex shapes arise
through development and the genes that control these processes. Thus this
research will address the fundamental question of how organisms achieve the
shapes of their bodies, which is critical to their survival. This research will
also have broader impacts through the training of young scientists including
undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows with outreach efforts
to recruit female and underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
nectar spur of Aquilegia is a complex three-dimensional structure that is
recently derived and highly variable among species and, thus, can serve as a
powerful model for investigating the control and evolution of complex organ
shape. Nectar spurs develop via an early phase of localized, oriented cell
divisions that create the prepatterned spur cup, which is then followed by a
period of highly anisotopic cell elongation that gives rise to the final length
and shape of the spur. Among the closely related and interfertile species of
Aquilegia, variation in spur length and shape is generated by changing several
developmental parameters: length is primarily controlled by cell anisotropy,
which is in turn controlled by the duration of cell elongation; curvature is
generated by varying cell elongation between the distal vs. proximal
compartments of the spur; and circumference is controlled both by changes in
cell anisotropy and cell number in the radial orientation. Thus, understanding
the development and evolution of Aquilegia spurs will provide insight into all
of these fundamental aspects of lateral organ development, which can provide new
perspectives on the evolution of lateral organs more broadly across the
angiosperms. The proposed research seeks to integrate multiple lines of study
drawn from the fields of developmental genetics, evolutionary genomics/genetics,
and biophysics. Specifically, the project will elucidate the fundamental genetic
control of petal spur development, explore the roles of hormonal signaling and
biomechanical strain in controlling spur development, use QTL-based approaches
to identify the genes involved in the diversification of spur shape and use
comparative genomic approaches to identify selective sweeps associated with the
origin of nectar spurs.&lt;br/&gt;