* 1456830
* Reticulospinal Execution of Innate Decision-Making
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* David McLean, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 06/30/2020
* USD 900,000.00

The decision to approach or avoid is a fundamental aspect of animal behavior.
How this decision is made by networks of motor neurons that are located in the
brainstem and spinal cord, and which trigger muscle cell contraction, is still
unclear. This project will investigate the neural and mechanical basis of innate
decision-making in vertebrates. Studies will be carried out using zebrafish
larvae because they undergo a change in their innate decision-making ability
during the first few days after hatching. Immediately after hatching, zebrafish
larvae have the ability to generate escape behavior in response to threats.
Three days later, they add the ability to not only avoid, but to approach and
attack small objects. The goal of this project will be to determine how the
neural circuitry supporting the decision to escape or approach visually detected
objects is organized during development. Graduate students will be trained in
the use of cutting-edge electrophysiological, imaging, computational and
behavioral techniques uniquely applied in the zebrafish model system. In
addition, an outreach program will be designed and implemented to introduce
local high school students to basic neurobiological concepts addressed in this
project. The program will involve intuitive and interactive experiments using
simple robots with circuits that can be modified to create the approach or
avoidance behaviors observed in fish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will pursue several hypotheses regarding the development of approach and
avoidance behaviors in larval zebrafish. Aim 1 will use high-speed videography
and automated body tracking to evaluate the hypothesis that the circuitry for
approach is not in place until later on in development. The expectation is that
only the older larvae will be able to generate kinematically-distinct responses
to attractive visual stimuli. Aim 2 will distinguish between two leading
possibilities for how reticular circuitry mediates approach and avoidance,
either via the addition of new components or the modification of pre-existing
ones. In vivo dye labeling combined with functional calcium imaging approaches
will assess changes in the morphologies and responses to visual stimuli of
readily identifiable reticular neurons during development. In vivo patch clamp
recordings will also be used to confirm outputs to spinal circuitry. Aim 3 will
examine the likelihood that newly developed approach circuitry in the spinal
cord is either overpowered or shut off by reticulospinal drive during avoidance
maneuvers. The predictable read-outs of either scenario will be assessed using
electrophysiological recordings of motor output, advanced computational fluids
and body modeling, and targeted laser ablations followed by kinematic analysis.