* 1456707
* An Ethnographic Study of Social Justice Issues in Community Synthetic Biology Labs
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Sara Giordano, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 11/30/2016
* USD 240,000.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores public
spaces for science that are outside of traditional scientific lab spaces, such
as home based and community lab spaces, where amateur scientists gather together
to learn and to create. It focuses on public lab spaces that engage in the new
field of synthetic biology, which brings engineering principles to the sciences
of genetics and recombinant DNA technologies. The investigator will conduct
interviews in two community labs, Genspace in New York City and LA Biohackers in
Los Angeles. The aim of the study is to understand how diversity and democracy
are operative in synthetic biology community lab spaces, and to determine how
these values are interpreted through the practice and knowledge frameworks of
synthetic biology. The results of this research will have the potential to
impact policy debates and decisions about science ethics and public
participation. They will help inform future projects that aim to create more
democratic sciences both within and beyond the specific field of synthetic
biology. Specifically, the PI will use the project and the results generated
from it to engage students researchers, faculty and community members in
producing socially relevant knowledge about community-based
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to understand the ethical and epistemological values that
underlie the investments of synthetic biologists in community and Do-It-Yourself
(DIY) projects. Synthetic biology is a still nascent field; it is only about a
decade old. During this time, it has been the subject of much research and
public attention. This attention has focused on concerns about biosafety or
questions of whether it is ethical for scientists to synthetically create new
life forms. Science studies scholars have begun to work on understanding this
emergent technology, its ways of producing knowledge, its return to reductionism
and its overlap with DIY communities. However, an analysis of the role of social
justice principles in the field has been largely absent. By asking questions
about how to make these spaces accessible, by considering who is traditionally
kept out of science and by what means, this project would substantially expand
the range of scholarship on synthetic biology in providing the first analysis of
the field from the standpoint of democratic values. It has the potential to
impact the development of these community lab spaces and the principles
underlying their development. More broadly, it will add to the fields of ethics,
governance studies, science and technology studies, and to the science itself.