* 1456443
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Partnered Teaching of Interdisciplinary CS+X Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Lori Pollock, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2017
* USD 31,854.00

Computation in all its definitions (Computer Science, Computing, Computational
Thinking, etc.) is becoming increasingly significant in STEM and non-STEM
disciplines. Historically, Mathematics has been the discipline seen as required
by all other disciplines. Computer Science faculty are wrestling with
determining whether there is a single approach to infusing computation in other
disciplines or whether there are many approaches. Coupled with the increased
computational ability of students in other disciplines, it is known that
interdisciplinary courses are more appealing to underrepresented groups.
Ideally, the Computer Science community would be provided with a set of
validated approaches to interdisciplinary education. In order to reach this
goal, the community must investigate the educational value of various
approaches. This workshop seeks to begin cataloging experiences to attain that
goal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative proposal a number of PIs from
different college level institutions (research university, technology focused
university, four-year engineering college, and four-year liberal arts college)
will cooperate on holding a workshop where a number of different approaches to
cross-disciplinary education will be investigated. This workshop will gather a
number of faculty who have attempted such courses. The outcome will be a report
that outlines approaches to computational interdisciplinary courses. This report
will be made widely available.