* 1456729
* LTREB renewal: Climatic change and community organization across three trophic levels: long-term research at a sentinel site in semiarid north-central Chile
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Peter Meserve, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2021
* USD 470,125.00

Increases in semi-arid and arid lands may affect economic stability and
societies globally. This long-term project examines the shifting forces that
influence a semi-arid community and thus serves as an important sentinel for
societal ramifications of increased aridity with climate change. Since 1989,
unexpected changes in rainfall patterns and species invasions have replaced
native species interactions as key drivers of a semi-arid thorn scrub community
in northern Chile. Long-term ecological data from this site contribute directly
to decisions on wise management of these changing environments. It also will
provide information to help the general public understand the decision-making
process by improving their knowledge of its wildlife and natural areas. The
project will provide important comparisons with ongoing research in semi-arid
sites in North America, where important drivers of long-term change differ. The
project represents a long-term collaboration between US and Chilean researchers
and managers, and will provide valuable opportunities for US students to
participate in international research.

This long-term field project utilizes 20 experimental grids in which small
mammals and ephemeral plants are sampled monthly, cover by shrubs is measured
every three months, soil samples are taken every 4 months to estimate seed
density, and fox owl diets are assessed. Previous results document the effects
of predators on small mammals and plants that were overwhelmed by El
Niño&#8208;associated rainfall. Based on predictions of more frequent and
intense El Niño events as a consequence of ongoing global climate change, the
project will emphasize the dual and interactive roles of climate change and
invasive species (lagomorphs, numerous ephemeral plants) on community-level
dynamics in this habitat. Data collected over the next five years will be
analyzed to answer three important questions: 1) will a major El Niño event in
the next 5 years reverse the trends that have been apparent since 2002, or has a
critical transition occurred that will be stable for the foreseeable future? 2)
what further changes may ensue from the apparent decline in perennial shrub
cover and an increase in invasive vegetation since 2003? and 3) what will be the
consequences of these changes for the north-central Chilean semiarid zone more
generally? These goals are facilitated by extensive collaboration with multiple
investigators in Chile, Spain, and the United States. This research integrates
population, community, and geographical ecology in the context of global climate
change and predicted vegetative responses, spans 3 trophic levels, and provides
important insight into the relative importance of biotic vs. abiotic factors,
and top-down versus bottom-up control in semi-arid systems.