* 1456658
* The role of the FEI Pathway in Regulating Cell Wall Synthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Joseph Kieber, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2019
* USD 841,776.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;Plant cell walls are diverse and highly dynamic
structures that respond to developmental and environmental cues. They are a
primary source of building materials, paper, biofuels, cotton, and many other
useful products and also plays a crucial role in the growth and development of
plants. Despite their importance both from a practical and fundamental point of
view, the signaling pathways regulating the function and assembly of plant cell
walls are just beginning to be understood. This project seeks to gain
fundamental knowledge regarding how plants regulate the synthesis of their cell
walls, which should ultimately help improve the diverse products derived from
them and will provide insight into basic aspects of plant growth and
development. In addition to providing interdisciplinary training opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students, this project will work with programs
designed to increase the representation of minorities in the sciences and with
several outreach programs designed to increase the public understanding of plant
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description of the
Project:&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies identified a pair of transmembrane protein
kinases, called FEI1 and FEI2, that play a role in regulating the biosynthesis
of cellulose, which is a critical component of the plant cell wall and acts as
the primary load-bearing element. These kinases define a novel signaling pathway
that includes a non-canonical role for 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid
(ACC), a molecule previously thought to act only as a precursor in the
biosynthesis of the phytohormone ethylene. A series of experiments to further
characterize the FEI signaling pathway and its role in regulating cell wall
function will be pursued. The mechanism by which the FEI pathway regulates
cellulose biosynthesis will be explored (Aim 1). The signaling role of ACC and
other potential ACC-derivatives in regulating wall synthesis will be examined
(Aim 2). Other components involved in this FEI pathway will be identified and
characterized, including SHOU4, a protein that appears to act in the FEI pathway
and which is likely associated with the cytoskeleton (Aim 3). These studies will
answer fundamental questions regarding how this pathway regulates the production
of cellulose and how it interacts with other elements to regulate cell wall
synthesis. Further, the FEIs are belong to a group of kinases call the receptor-
like kinase, which are one of the largest families of genes in plants; the
function of only a handful of RLKs are known, and thus these findings will shed
light on a poorly understood class of plant signaling elements. Finally, these
studies should help elucidate a role for ACC in plant signaling and may uncover
important roles for a novel signaling compound in plants.