* 1456297
* A comparative proteomic approach to understand animal circadian clock
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Joanna Chiu, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2020
* USD 771,902.00

The overall goal of this project is to gain insight into the mechanisms that
generate the rhythms of life. The circadian clock is an endogenous timing system
that exists in all kingdoms of life, from bacteria to animals. Its main function
is to enable the integration of environmental signals and metabolic status to
ensure that organisms perform necessary tasks at biologically advantageous times
of day. It is known that protein-protein interactions are important in the
transduction of circadian timing information within an organism. Although a
number of key conserved proteins that make up the core oscillator in the
circadian timing system have been identified in animals, the mechanisms by which
the oscillator protein module receives input time cues and subsequently
transduces this timing information to generate physiological rhythms are not
well understood. In this project, protein network analysis centering on the
oscillator protein module in three insect species with distinct clock designs
will be conducted using mass spectrometry-based analyses over a circadian
timeframe. Algorithms will be developed to model the dynamic changes in the
network connections between the oscillator and cellular protein complexes with
respect to circadian as well as evolutionary time. This project will uncover
previously unknown protein interactions and shed light on the dynamic protein
network rewiring necessary for properly timed biological activities. This
project will provide training opportunities and career development for graduate
students, undergraduates, high school teachers and students from K-12 levels.
Exhibits showcasing insect circadian rhythms will be organized at the Bohart
Museum of Entomology at UC Davis. Laboratory workshops providing hands on
laboratory experience will be organized to benefit high school teachers and
students. Video training tools will be developed as resources for laboratory
workshops and for training students involved in this project.

This project aims to profile and model temporally-regulated and dynamic protein
networks centered on core transcription factors that make up the circadian
oscillators in three insect species, Drosophila melanogaster, the Monarch
butterfly Danaus plexippus, and the honeybee Apis mellifera. Interactomic
comparisons between these relatively closely related insect species with
distinct clock designs will be valuable not only in identifying conserved and
likely important cellular protein modules for clockworks, but also in
highlighting network rewiring and differential interactions that can reflect
inherent flexibility and adaptability of the clock network. Results from this
project will lay the foundation for testing new hypotheses regarding animal
clockwork and predicting the behavior of the clock system in response to
perturbations. Since protein networks are tissue and cell-type specific, a novel
framework to overcome current limits of mass spectroscopy sensitivity and model
cell-type specific protein networks from network data assembled from broader
tissue samples using a trans-omics approach will be tested. This project will
develop proteomic methods as well as bioinformatic tools for understanding a
dynamic and oscillating biological system, all of which will be valuable to the
scientific community.