* 1456401
* SBIR Phase II:  Multi-dimensional Cardiogram Device for Monitoring of Heart Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Kaustubh Kale, AventuSoft L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2017
* USD 838,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in developing a first-of-its-kind hemodynamic
parameter monitoring device for the early detection of heart disease that will
significantly improve the management of patients with compromised heart
functions. Heart disease is perhaps the next cardiac epidemic, as over the past
50 years, a steady rise in life expectancy has led to progressively increasing
frequency of degeneration. Heart disease is associated with significant
morbidity and mortality, and treatment, particularly by surgery, is expensive.
Many technologies have emerged to assist the diagnosis such as the
electrocardiogram, magnetic resonance imaging, and cardiac catheterization, and
the 2-D echocardiogram. Existing 2-D echocardiogram instruments have been
inadequate tools for screening as they require significant support staff and
infrastructure. Considering the cost, risks, and availability of these
diagnostic tools, cardiac auscultation remains an important part of the initial
investigative process for heart disease patients. The societal impact of this
project is significant as a new modality will be made available. The device is
not an improvement over existing technologies but a step up from current
technology that does not exist today and opens the door to numerous commercial
possibilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
develop a novel device for the non-invasive assessment of heart disease called
Multi-Dimensional Cardiogram (MDCG). This technology addresses the market for
early detection of heart disease by offering, novel multi-transducer framework,
advanced hardware and algorithmic signal processing. The phase II will consist
of development of the hardware and software for a portable device. The device
will provide physicians with multiple dimensions of information from the heart
signal to diagnose heart disease based on the Mitral, Tricuspid, Aortic and
Pulmonary valve sounds; enabling earlier detection, close outpatient follow up,
and remote home monitoring. Physicians rely on auscultation and evaluation of
risk factors since access to cardiologists and certain diagnostic modalities are
not always available or practical. We have identified and propose to meet this
important need for a device that can enable non-cardiologist physicians and
healthcare professionals to perform examinations for heart disease which are
more detailed than possible with stethoscope auscultation. The MDCG technology
improves the diagnostic accuracy required for monitoring patients with heart
disease. The intellectual merits of this device include the development of a
high-performance system in a single, low-power compact package that is easy-to-
use and has a small transducer array footprint.