* 1456196
* Collaborative Research: ARTS: Integrative Research and Training in Tropical Taxonomy
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Estefania Rodriguez, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2020
* USD 73,906.00

Taxonomy, the science of finding, describing and naming organisms, is vital to
biological research and conservation of life's diversity. The on-going effort to
survey, inventory, and preserve the ocean's biological diversity is threatened
by a shortage of taxonomic expertise. Although focused on Caribbean
biodiversity, the overarching goal of this project is to promote conservation of
marine biodiversity around the world. This project will make it easier to
correctly identify and document marine biodiversity, to detect invasive species,
and to protect rare and endangered species by training new taxonomists, by
developing Internet-based resources to support taxonomic research, and by making
taxonomic methods easily accessible to non-specialists. This project will create
new taxonomic descriptions and revisions of currently undescribed species from
the Caribbean, which will be immediately useful to any researcher, manager, or
conservation practitioner working in the region, and will contribute to the
species inventory of the Caribbean. Open-access videos and how-to guides will
allow specialists to convey enthusiasm for these organisms to the public, to
managers, and to policy makers, and provide a way for students and the general
public to learn more about taxonomy.

This project has three parts with complementary aims. Part A will document the
biodiversity of 6 groups of marine organisms with high, but poorly known,
diversity in the Southern Caribbean (sponges, hydroids, sea anemones, sea
squirts, ribbon worms, and seaweeds). This work will emphasize the integration
of traditional morphological and molecular characters with non-traditional
characters such as larval morphology, live coloration, and characters derived
from confocal and electron microscopy. Established experts will work closely
with experts-in-training, with a focus on species from the Caribbean coast of
Panama that are known to be in particular need of taxonomic revision. Part B
will provide training workshops for graduate students and junior researchers
interested in developing taxonomic expertise in one of 6 focal groups; enabling
them to (1) identify species in the field, (2) efficiently collect and preserve
material for subsequent taxonomic work, (3) use existing keys or monographs to
identify material to species, and (4) develop personal connections with a global
network of other students and specialists. Part C will make the basic skills and
vocabulary involved in the taxonomy of all 6 groups globally accessible to both
expert and non-specialist workers in biodiversity and conservation. This part
will develop a standard package of internet-based tools for each group,
including a set of how-to videos and illustrated definitions of technical terms,
with translations into several languages. This toolkit will be designed to
facilitate rapid biodiversity documentation and to increase the precision of
preliminary field identifications.