* 1456339
* SBIR Phase II:  Surface Coatings for Enhanced Efficiency of Industrial Condensers
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Sara Beaini, NBD Nanotechnologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2017
* USD 899,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in demonstrating the commercial
implementation of NBD Nanotechnologies, Inc.'s (NBD) Enhanced Condensation
Coating. NBD's external surface coating sustains dropwise condensation on
copper-based tubes, resulting in energy savings and increased efficiency for
industrial condensers in steam power and thermal desalination plants. NBD's
innovative and proprietary techniques ensure adhesion onto the substrate while
not compromising the thermal resistance with the coating's sub-microscale
thickness. NBD has validated the increased efficiency of its external surface
condenser coating technology at a lab-scale and will carry out pilot tests to
quantify the efficiency gain and technology durability at a system-level in
industrial condensers, as requested by utility customers. NBD presents a
technology that addresses the key commercial bottlenecks of durability,
scalability and performance, which have stymied coatings in condensers,
presenting a leapfrogging technology that addresses the water-energy nexus.
Every 1% improvement in power plant efficiency results in $10MM revenue per
plant per year, as stated by a partnering power generation company. Thus, any
improvement in the efficiency of a steam condenser has significant impact that
directly benefits both global energy and water sustainability
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to
R&amp;D advancement focused on: large-scale chemical and coating processing,
surface wettability, nano-and micro-scale heat transfer, condensation, and water
and energy resource sustainability. The project's multidisciplinary nature
reflects the dynamic aspects of condensation heat transfer phenomenon, which
covers varying length scales (nano, micro, meso and macro scale) and time
scales. Thus, the challenging nature of optimizing and sustaining enhanced
condensation invites innovative and creative solutions to mitigate the water and
energy resource management problems. During Phase I, the project demonstrated
the proof of concept of the coating's condensation enhancement for both
industrial condensers with pure steam (and trace amounts of non-condensable
gases) and for HVAC/dehumidification systems where condensation occurs with
higher concentrations of non-condensable gases. The objective of phase II
proposal is to address and facilitate the required steps for scaling up and
integrating NBD's condenser coating into industrial condensers' supply chain.
NBD has identified industrial condensers as its primary entry market, where a
greater increase in condenser system performance and savings in cost and fuel
consumption can be reached. NBD has been establishing partnerships for pilot
studies to perform larger scale experimental tests to validate its technology's
performance, durability and system-level efficiency gains empirically.