* 1456923
* Geomagnetic Imprinting and Natal Homing in Sea Turtles
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Catherine Lohmann, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2020
* USD 555,000.00

The ability of animals to guide themselves unerringly during long-distance
migrations has inspired both awe and envy in humans, who only recently, through
global positioning technology, managed to equal the skills of elite animal
navigators such as loggerhead sea turtles. These turtles leave their home
beaches as hatchlings and migrate across entire ocean basins before returning
years later to nest in the same coastal area where they originated. How adult
turtles navigate to their natal beaches has remained enigmatic, but accumulating
evidence suggests that turtles imprint on the unique geomagnetic signature of
their natal beach and then use this information to return. The research will
investigate the geomagnetic imprinting hypothesis using a multidisciplinary
approach. Results will assist efforts to conserve animals such as sea turtles
that undergo natal homing. For example, attempts to reintroduce sea turtles to
geographic areas where they once nested have been largely unsuccessful because
young turtles released in such areas seldom return as adults. An improved
understanding of how turtles find their home beaches may help save these
jeopardized species from extinction. Findings are also likely to reveal new
modes of navigation that can be adapted for guidance systems of humans and
autonomous vehicles. Broader impacts include providing research experience for
undergraduate and graduate students, broadcasting findings into K12 classrooms
through the North Carolina Museum of Natural History, and creating instructional
web modules for K12 education, thereby enhancing both science education and
public awareness of endangered sea turtles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
objective of the research is to determine the behavioral and sensory mechanisms
that underlie natal homing in sea turtles and other long-distance marine
migrants. The research will test several central predictions of the geomagnetic
imprinting hypothesis: (1) behavioral experiments will investigate whether
nesting adult female turtles locate their natal beaches using the unique
magnetic signature of their natal area; (2) statistical analyses will be used to
determine whether the spatial distribution of turtle nests along continental
coastlines is affected by fluctuations in Earth's magnetic field, as the
geomagnetic imprinting hypothesis predicts; and (3) magnetic orientation
behavior of turtle embryos prior to hatching will be studied to determine if
imprinting might occur during development. Results and data will be disseminated
primarily in scientific journals; when possible, appropriate data and metadata
files will be posted in online supplementary materials or with services such as
Dryad, which many journals now support.