* 1456300
* A Novel Selective Autophagy Pathway in Plant Immune Responses to Necrotrophic Pathogens
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Zhixiang Chen, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

Necrotrophic pathogens are an important group of plant pathogenic fungi and
bacteria notorious for their aggressiveness and broad host range. They actively
kill plant cells to extract nutrients from dead tissue. Control of crop diseases
caused by necrotrophic pathogens often relies on pesticide application because
resistance to necrotrophic pathogens is usually controlled by multiple genes,
making it difficult to breed for resistance. Presently, knowledge about, and
understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms for resistance to this type
of pathogen is very limited. It is known to involve a process called autophagy
in which specific cytoplasmic constituents are degraded, which in turn somehow
prevents the invading necrotroph from inducing cell death. This project aims to
elucidate the mechanism by which autophagy protects plants from necrotrophic
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the focus of this project is a novel
selective autophagy pathway mediated by the plant-specific ATI3 autophagy
receptor, which is recruited to autophagosomes through interaction with ATG8.
Genetic analyses suggest ATI3 plays a critical role in plant resistance to
necrotrophs. ATI3 also interacts with UBAC2a and UBAC2b, homologs of a conserved
ubiquitin-binding component of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation
(ERAD). This project will test whether the ATI3 selective autophagy pathway
plays an important role in plant immunity to necrotrophs by targeting
deleterious ER constituents, thereby protecting against pathogen-induced, ER
stress-mediated cell death. Specific objectives are to (1) confirm the critical
role of ATI3 and UBAC2 in plant disease resistance through comprehensive genetic
analysis; 2) determine whether the ATI3/UBAC2-mediated selective autophagy
protects plant cells against pathogen-induced ER stress; and 3) analyze the role
of the ER stress sensor IRE1 and the physical ATI3-UBAC2 interaction in the
regulation of the ATI3 selective autophagy pathway. The goal of the project is
the discovery of distinct pathways of selective autophagy associated with plant
responses to specific plant biotic and abiotic stresses. Detailed knowledge on
the role of autophagy in plant immune systems will lead to development of novel
strategies for creating disease resistant crops. Autophagy and ERAD are also
involved in many diseases in humans including cancers and, therefore, the
knowledge from the project will have implications beyond the plant world. This
project will provide a strong interdisciplinary training environment for
graduate students. Some aspects of project will be incorporated into programs
for training undergraduate students with hands-on experience in molecular
biology techniques and for creative teaching in classrooms.