* 1456765
* Complex Evolutionary Genetics of Gonadal Differentiation in a Classic Model of Behavior, Astatotilapia burtoni
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Reade Roberts, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 04/30/2019
* USD 780,000.00

Proper gonadal differentiation is absolutely fundamental to the fitness of
sexually reproducing species, yet surprising diversity exists among species in
the mechanisms that determines males vs. females. Genetic sex determination is
one common mechanism, yet little is known about how novel sex determination
genes arise, interact, and evolve in populations. Historically, genetic sex
determination research has largely focused on a handful of single-factor,
chromosomal sex determination systems. More recently, genetic sex determination
has been mapped in a broader set of species, revealing a diverse catalog of sex
determination genes in a variety of chromosomal contexts. Polygenic sex
determination (PSD) has also been confirmed in multiple taxa, where multiple
genetic factors direct sexual development. PSD challenges traditional thinking
regarding genetic sex determination systems, while providing powerful strategies
to explore the evolution and development of sex determination, including
comparisons of siblings with multiple genetic modes of sex determination. In
other words, while individuals of species with PSD develop as male or female,
several genetic types of males and females may exist. The cichlid fish species
Astatotilapia burtoni uses PSD to determine male vs. female development,
providing a model to understand the evolution and development of genetic sex
determination. This work aims to provide the most comprehensive analysis of a
PSD system to date, using A. burtoni as a model system. The project should
reveal novel genes and gene networks driving gonadal differentiation and
development, while yielding important evolutionary insights. The research will
also produce important genome resources for A. burtoni, a model for neural and
behavioral biology. Undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
will carry out proposed experiments, preparing them for careers in science.
Additionally, K-12 teachers will be given direct research experience through co-
mentoring by the researchers and the Kenan Fellows Program, together developing
educational materials broadly scaled for state classrooms, regional public
outreach venues, and the world wide web.

Multiple sex determination loci segregate in A. burtoni, producing many
genotypic sexes and the opportunity to study the interaction of multiple sex
determination genes within individuals. The proposed research uses an integrated
approach involving genetic mapping, genome assembly and annotation of sex
chromosomes, comparative genomics, and gene network analysis during gonadal
differentiation. Aims include mapping and functional testing of multiple novel
sex determination genes, and tracing the evolutionary impact of novel sex
determination alleles on the structure of chromosomes where they reside,
including functional evolution of linked genes. Gene expression analyses through
sexual development will supplement these mapping and annotation efforts, and
provide understanding of how multiple genetic sex switches are integrated during
development. Gene expression analyses among different genetic sexes during
development will also reveal core genetic networks underlying gonadal
development, and yield insight into how genetic networks evolve without
negatively impacting indispensable complex traits. Since A. burtoni is a
longstanding behavior model, it provides excellent context for analysis of
secondary sexual characteristics, including existing behavioral gene expression
data, in relation to the various modes of sex determination present in the
species.