* 1456866
* Collaborative Research: GABA A Receptor Control of Hyperactivity in Developing Zebrafish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Gerald Downes, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2020
* USD 757,746.00

Walking and swimming are produced by the coordinated activity of brain cells
called neurons that communicate with each other using chemical signals known as
neurotransmitters. The chemical signals are passed from one neuron to another
across a network of neurons in the brain, then on to neurons in the spinal cord,
and finally, the signal is passed to muscles. Some neurotransmitters increase
neuron activity, whereas others decrease neuron activity. It is not known how
different neurotransmitters balance their effects to coordinate neuron network
activity and enable normal locomotion. The goal of this project is to
investigate the role of one particular neurotransmitter in the brain to better
understand how it regulates locomotion. The project will be carried out using
zebrafish because this vertebrate animal has a more simple brain and spinal cord
organization than mammals, and it is transparent, which makes it easy to examine
under a microscope. Due to the many similarities in neurotransmitters and
locomotor networks between zebrafish and mammals, this work can have wide-
reaching implications. This project is a collaboration between four faculty
researchers from three colleges. Undergraduates at each institution will
participate in the research and have access to the expertise across
institutions. The research team, including faculty, graduate and undergraduate
students, will perform teaching demonstrations about neuroscience at nearby
middle and high schools, and students from these schools will visit the
investigators' laboratories. Through this outreach effort, 300-600 primarily
underrepresented minority middle and high school students will be exposed to
scientists and neuroscience.

The central hypothesis that will be tested in this project is that, during early
larval stages, a limited number of gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) type A
receptor isoforms regulate locomotor networks through a small number of
hindbrain reticulospinal neurons. To test this hypothesis, the expression of
GABA-A receptor subunits will be determined, the effects of genetic inactivation
of GABA-A receptor subunits on locomotor network activity and behavior will be
investigated, and the contribution of select hindbrain neurons in generating
GABA-A receptor-mediated hyperactive behavior will be assessed. These studies
will be carried out in genetically modified zebrafish using microscopy,
electrophysiological recordings, quantitative analysis of locomotor behavior,
and a novel photochemical approach that enables control of specific GABA-A
receptors using different wavelengths of light.