* 1456256
* MKP1 regulates plant metabolite signals that induce bacterial virulence: How and where are these signals controlled?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Scott Peck, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2019
* USD 740,000.00

Many plants normally become infected by bacterial pathogens that then cause
reduced food yields or even death. However, the investigators recently
discovered a mutant plant with a novel mechanism for enhanced resistance against
bacterial pathogens whereby the plant prevents the bacteria from becoming
infectious. In this project, the investigators will determine how the mutant
uniquely stops the pathogen by studying both the location of and the
mechanism(s) controlling this resistance. The investigators will also examine if
the mutant has enhanced resistance against other types of pathogens (e.g. fungal
pathogens) or if the mutation causes a trade-off of enhanced resistance against
one type of pathogen at the expense of increased susceptibility to another. The
goal of this project is to determine if there is a novel, genetic means of
improving crop survival against pathogens without any unintended
penalties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most pathogenic bacteria express a type three
secretion system (T3SS) to suppress the plant's immune responses, thus allowing
the pathogen to acquire nutrients needed to replicate. The investigators
recently identified an Arabidopsis mutant (mkp1) that produces less of the
chemical signals that induce the T3SS in bacteria, thus resulting in a plant
with enhanced resistance. Translating this discovery into improved resistance in
the field requires a better understanding of the underlying principles. Does
MKP1 regulate levels of transporters controlling movement of metabolites across
the plasma membrane (PM) to restrict the chemical signals (addressed by
quantitative plasma membrane proteomics)? Does MKP1 regulate the cellular
production of these metabolites (addressed by quantitative metabolomics)? Do all
cell types in the leaf contribute equally to the production of the metabolites
and, therefore, resistance (addressed by cell/tissue-specific complementation?
Finally, it is critical to test an informative spectrum of pathogens to
determine if resistance in mkp1 extends to other types of pathogens or, perhaps
more importantly, if the changes in mkp1 may have negative consequences making
it more susceptible to unrelated pathogens. A better understanding of this
apparently novel mechanism of resistance may provide an important basis for
improving sustainable resistance in the field. The investigators will expand a
Plant Biology &amp; Public Policy Workshop they developed for undergraduates
where students learn how policy makers at the local, state, and national level
affect research at universities. Students will learn to communicate the
importance of basic research by providing the most useful information.