* 1456832
* LTREB Renewal: Life History and Behavior in a Primate Hybrid Zone
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Susan Alberts, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2021
* USD 449,980.00

Hybridization (genetic mixing between two adjacent species) occurs in many
animal and plant species, and is among the most important sources of new gene
combinations and new traits in natural populations. Most studies describe
hybridization at the population level, rather than describing how hybridization
affects individuals. Understanding how hybridization affects individuals will
reveal the processes that determine whether genes from one species permanently
mix with those of another, or whether this mixing is limited to one or a few
generations. Using a wild population of baboons in southern Kenya, this research
will provide a detailed description of how hybridization affects individuals. As
such, it will be an important model for similar processes in many other
organisms, including ancestral humans (who are known to have hybridized with
Neanderthals and, before that, with other members of the human lineage). The
research involves an international team with substantial participation by women
and underrepresented minorities. The team will also contribute teaching modules
for middle schools and conduct numerous public outreach activities discussing
baboon behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first five years of the LTREB
project, the Principal Investigator measured the effects of hybridization on a
suite of traits that could limit or enhance genetic introgression. The objective
of this renewal is to expand this suite of traits, using methods or data that
require the longer time horizon afforded by the LTREB mechanism. The specific
aims are to (i) identify the sources of the admixture-by-sex interaction
previously documented in the maturation schedules of wild baboons, (ii) measure
the contribution of genetic admixture to social behaviors that predict male
reproductive success, (iii) measure the contribution of genetic admixture to
social behaviors that predict female reproductive performance, and (iv) measure
the contribution of genetic admixture to social behaviors that predict female
lifespan. The proposed work will produce an exceptionally detailed study of the
effects of admixture on fitness-related traits in a naturally hybridizing mammal
population, which in turn will help shape future hypotheses about mechanisms
promoting or inhibiting genetic introgression during hybridization in other
species. The data for this project will be stored on a web-accessible PostGreSQL
database. A detailed description of the standards for data and metadata can be
found in publicly available documents with links at the Amboseli Baboon Research
Project website (https://amboselibaboons.nd.edu/ ). All datasets underlying
published papers are deposited in the public Dryad Data Repository.