* 1456615
* OPUS: ECOLOGICAL AND EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVES ON THE ORIGINS OF COMMUNITY DIVERSITY
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Douglas Schemske, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 10/31/2018
* USD 190,786.00

Fundamental to preserving the Earth's remarkable biodiversity is an
understanding of the processes that determine the number and types of species
found locally and regionally. This understanding is even more critical as humans
rapidly mix the world's biota and introduce exotic species to new habitats at an
increasing rate. This project will synthesize research in the fields of ecology
and evolution to fill this gap. Results will significantly advance a major
hurdle in fundamental research and in conservation, which is a clearer
understanding of how ecological diversity evolves over time. They will also
guide efforts to restore ecological communities of conservation concern in the
face of species introductions and the invasion of exotic species. Results from
this synthesis form the basis for graduate-level courses, will be incorporated
as part of Michigan State University's Sparta Nature Program, which introduces
incoming freshmen to research questions in the biological sciences, and will
contribute to the Michigan Science Olympiad, which fosters learning in science
for middle and high school students. Educational benefits are significant, as
the project will introduce students at all levels to the value of synthesis
across fields of study.

The richness and composition of biological communities vary dramatically in time
and space, and the causes of this variation have been the subject of ecological
research for decades. The standard model of community assembly is based on the
dispersal of species from a regional species pool and filtering by the abiotic
and biotic environment to determine which species are successful in colonizing
and coexisting at a local site. Ignored in this conceptual framework, however,
is the question of how ecological and evolutionary processes interact to
generate species pools, differences in the size and composition of these pools
among regions, and whether the concept of a regional species pool is
biologically valid. This OPUS award will support a collaborative effort to
develop, through a series of publications, a synthesis that better incorporates
the ecology of species interactions with the geography of speciation to
illuminate the evolution of community diversity. Publications resulting from
this award will broadly influence thinking by ecologists and evolutionary
biologists alike as they address fundamental questions regarding the evolution
of ecological communities, and will support graduate training and graduate
education, where integration between ecology and evolution is critically needed.