* 1456817
* Collaborative Research: Navigation and the Neural Integration of Multimodal Sensory Information in the Brain of an Arthropod
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Eileen Hebets, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2022
* USD 331,353.00

The ability of animals to navigate through their environment often far exceeds
human capabilities (without the help of technology). Exceptional navigation is
not limited to animals with large brains, like birds and mammals. It can also be
found in animals with simpler nervous systems. The tropical amblypygid, a
scorpion-like animal, is able to find its way home at night over distances
exceeding 10 meters through dense, tropical forest understory. The study of how
different types of sensory information (visual, chemical, tactile) are processed
by amblypygids as they solve navigation problems can reveal fundamental design
properties of simple nervous systems that are somehow capable of controlling
complex, learned behavior. These design properties can inspire engineering
solutions applicable to robotic and artificial intelligence systems. The study
of charismatic tropical amblypygids also serves as an alluring gateway for
teachers to introduce K-12 students to the importance of neuroscience for
understanding how organisms acquire and process information from their
environment and how this information influences learning, memory and associated
behavior. To support engagement with K-12 students, their teachers and the
general public, researchers will, among other activities, develop internet-based
educational materials in both English and Spanish and develop various scientific
inquiry activities for science events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By conducting
behavioral experiments that assess amblypygid (Phrynus pseudoparvulus) movements
after they are displaced from a home refuge, researchers will assess the
relative importance of visual, chemical and mechanical information in supporting
navigation. These experiments will either involve manipulation of animal sense
organs or the sensory cues in their environment. The neurobiological work will
focus on a brain area known as the "mushroom bodies", which are thought to
support spatial memory. In parallel with the behavioral work, researchers will
explore the nervous system routes by which information from different sensory
stimuli is sent to the mushroom bodies. Particular attention will be given to
how the mushroom bodies "engineer" or "integrate" the different sensory inputs.
The integration of sensory inputs is hypothesized to be necessary to support
complex navigation and will likely be crucial for the design of any
sophisticated artificial system. Finally, the importance of the mushroom bodies
in navigation, and their capacity to combine different sources of sensory
information, will be tested under the same conditions of the behavioral
experiments noted above, except using animals whose mushroom bodies are
impaired.