* 1456394
* SBIR Phase II:  Flat ceramic nanoparticles with two functionally different surfaces for self-generating coatings: Scale-UP
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Pavlo Rudenko, TriboTEX
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2018
* USD 743,106.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is a new product for improving the performance of
existing machinery. If this project is successful, numerous industrial and
commercial applications will benefit from increased component longevity and more
efficient operation of machinery, coupled with labor and energy savings. From a
societal perspective, this technology has the potential to save a large portion
of the substantial amount of energy lost to friction in ubiquitous components
such as generators and engines, while simultaneously reducing wear-related
material/component failures and associated downtime costs. Previous research has
predicted that a successful global application of the proposed technology in
existing transportation systems will enable an absolute energy savings that
exceeds the total energy generated by all currently-deployed photovoltaic,
geothermal, and biomass sources combined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
focus on the further development and scale-up of ceramic nanosheets with
structurally different sides (sticky/slick), which will be used to form a self-
generating tribological thin film coating for improved lubrication. This coating
is formed during normal operation, particle by particle. The creation of these
low-friction tribological coatings has been previously observed but requires
further optimization for robustness and additional engineering and testing for
commercial applications. Understanding the influence of composition and surface
dopants is required for market application of the resulting, nearly frictionless
coatings. Additional material testing and successful scale-up of the production
of these nanosheets are needed for commercial viability. Follow-on applications
of these anisotropic nanostructures are envisioned in the areas of catalyst
supports, plastic fillers, and smart materials.