* 1456064
* Modulation of carbon dioxide response in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Elissa Hallem, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 05/31/2018
* USD 508,527.00

The overarching goal of this project is to address a fundamental question in
neuroscience: how do sensory neural circuits support flexible behaviors? In
nearly all animals, behavioral responses to sensory stimuli vary as a function
of age, prior experience, nutritional state, and environment. However, the
molecular and cellular mechanisms that enable animals to generate context-
appropriate behaviors are poorly understood. This project will investigate the
neural basis of behavioral flexibility using the response of the free-living
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to carbon dioxide (CO2) as a model system. It
will elucidate the context-dependent changes in neural circuit function that
determine whether CO2 is attractive, repulsive, or neutral to C. elegans.
Because the survival of nearly all animals depends on the ability to adapt to
changing internal and external conditions, this study will have broad
implications for animal behavior. In addition, CO2 is a host cue for many
harmful parasitic nematodes of humans, livestock, and plants. A better
understanding of how nematodes respond to CO2 may enable the development of new
strategies for preventing harmful nematode infections. In addition, CO2 response
by C. elegans will be used as an educational platform for mentoring, teaching,
and outreach activities designed to engage students of all levels in scientific
research.

Preliminary studies conducted in the lab of the Principal Investigator
demonstrated that CO2 response by C. elegans can be rapidly modulated by ambient
oxygen (O2) levels and nutritional state such that CO2 can be either attractive,
repulsive, or neutral. Modulation of the CO2 circuit may be attributable to
changes in the extracellular signaling molecules used, changes in the
interpretation of these signaling molecules by downstream neurons, or a
combination of both. This proposal aims to distinguish among these possibilities
using an integrated approach that includes molecular biology, genetics, calcium
imaging, and behavioral analysis. By comparing the functional properties of the
CO2 circuit under high vs. low O2 conditions and in well-fed vs. starved
animals, and by elucidating the molecular pathways that regulate CO2 response
under these different conditions, this work will pinpoint the specific molecular
and cellular features of the CO2 circuit that determine the behavioral response
to CO2. The results of this study will elucidate basic principles of circuit
design that support flexible behavioral outputs. Many of the molecular pathways
and circuit motifs that operate in nematodes also operate in other animals,
including mammals. Thus, results from this study will be relevant to many other
animal species.