* 1456486
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Maternal Transitions in a Mouth-Brooding Cichlid
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,02/28/2023
* Susan Renn, Reed College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 829,595.00

Maternal care has evolved in many animals, yet most research on the underlying
neural mechanisms has been carried out only in mammals. This project capitalizes
on that rich body of research to study maternal mouth-brooding in the cichlid
fish Astatotilapia burtoni. This species offers an independently-evolved
instance of robust maternal care. Here, the neural circuits regulating maternal
behavior must interact intimately with the neural circuits regulating feeding to
allow voluntary starvation in order not to eat the young despite significant
loss of body mass. The proposed experiments will be conducted at Reed College
&amp; Louisiana State University, providing research and exchange opportunities
between undergraduates at a top liberal arts institution and both undergraduate
and graduate students from an EPSCoR institution (LSU). Understanding the degree
to which mechanisms and brain regions for feeding have been co-opted for
maternal care will inform our general understanding of the evolution of this
important adaptive social behavior. In addition to addressing the evolution of
maternal care, this research may impact human health research related to
metabolic and feeding disorders as it may uncover novel mechanisms that allow
decoupling of these circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research
project aims to understand the molecular and physiological mechanisms that
underlie the behavioral switch from self-promoting behavior to offspring-
promoting behavior that is required for robust maternal care. Astatotilapia
burtoni has been a long standing model for sociogenomics and integrative animal
behavior. Using immunohistochemistry, researchers and their students will
quantify immediate-early gene expression in specific neuronal types across the
"maternal brain" as well as assay cell types for changes in size or number.
Using transriptomic approaches, they will quantify gene expression differences
in candidate brain nuclei as well as peripheral signaling systems. Finally, in
vivo neural recordings from neurons in the preoptic area will be used to
determine physiological sensitivity to egg/fry versus food-related stimuli
during different stages of maternal care. Fully describing the cichlid maternal
brain as it interacts with feeding regulation is the long term collaborative
agenda of the two researchers and allows them to capitalize on the synergy of
simultaneously describing gene expression and functional studies. Students from
Reed College and Louisiana State University will be involved in all aspects of
this research. This project includes a math-biology collaboration to have
students develop R scripts to interrogate similarity and differences between
different gene expression networks in the different brain regions and different
female groups. All resulting scripts and algorithms will be hosted online,
disseminated through publication and presented by students at scientific
conferences.