* 1456710
* Collaborative Research: Magnetotelluric and Seismic Investigations of Arc Melt Generation, Deliver and Storage Beneath Okmok Volcano
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2017
* Kerry Key, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 529,976.00

Part 1 The investigators will conduct a magnetotelluric (MT) survey at Okmok
volcano in the Aleutian arc in order to characterize the magmatic system beneath
the volcano. New onshore passive seismic and MT data and offshore MT data will
be collected to test hypotheses regarding the role of slab fluids in arc melt
generation, melt migration within the crust, and the crustal magmatic plumbing
and storage system beneath an active caldera. The project will support a female
early career investigator several graduate and undergraduate students providing
the latter hands-on research at sea. Data from this project is planned to be
incorporated into undergraduate Earth Sciences courses and presentations.

Part 2 The Aleutian volcanic arc is a GeoPRISMS primary investigation site that
is tectonically active region considered to be ideal for studying arc magmatism.
Okmok, an active volcano located in the central Aleutian arc, is only about 100
km from Dutch Harbor making it a logistically advantageous for an amphibious
onshore and offshore geophysical imaging of the arc?s magmatic system. Okmok is
also selected due to its known volcanic activity, the presence of a crustal
magma reservoir, as inferred from previous studies, and the volcanic hazard it
presents, as evidenced by the lack of warning prior to 2008 eruption. It has
hosted 2 caldera-forming eruptions (CFE) and is representative of volcanoes both
within the Aleutian arc and worldwide that experience long periods of effusive
eruptions punctuated by much larger explosive CFE. The project will test
hypotheses on the role fluids play in melting the mantle wedge and how melts
ascend through the corner flow regime of the mantle wedge. It will also test
competing hypotheses about melt migration and storage within the upper mantle
and crust and how this impacts explosive CFE. Data collected by this project
will be used to map seismic velocity and electrical conductivity variations
within the arc, providing unique constraints on temperature, mineralogy and
fluid content. These constraints will be used to study the mantle melt flux, its
possible storage at the base of the crust, the distribution of partial
melt/magma bodies in the mid-upper crust, and the thermal and mechanical
properties of the upper crust beneath the caldera.

Broader Impacts: The proposed work would help improve our understanding of magma
storage and transport and its implications on volcanic hazards at Okmok volcano.
A female early career investigator and three graduate students (1 Scripps; 2 UW-
Madison) would be supported. Seven undergraduate students would be supported
(partially through funds from this project and via Scripps NSF REU supported
SURF program) to participate in onshore/offshore fieldwork. Data from this
project will be incorporated into undergraduate Earth Sciences courses and
presentations will be given at local K-12 schools and via live webinars to a few
Alaskan schools. A short course on MT methods will be given at UW-Madison and a
computer display for this project will be created for the UW Geology Museum?s
Active Earth display.