* 1456821
* Phylogenetic niche conservatism as a driver of microbial diversification and biogeography
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Daniel Buckley, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 749,301.00

Bacteria in the genus Streptomyces are widespread and common in soils. They have
important roles in the carbon cycle, and they are a major source for the
discovery of antibiotics and other natural products. More than half of clinical
antibiotics were first discovered within this genus, yet the genus still lacks a
robust taxonomic framework. Even more striking, there is nearly a complete
absence of information about Streptomyces biodiversity and biogeography. The
evolution of antibiotic resistance is a critical concern and a growing crisis.
Addressing this crisis requires both efforts to identify novel antibiotics and
efforts to combat the evolution of resistant strains. Understanding the
evolutionary history of Streptomyces will ultimately provide insight on the
evolutionary dynamics of antibiotic production and resistance. While of critical
societal value, research on the biogeography and evolutionary history of non-
pathogenic soil organisms such as Streptomyces is understudied. An understanding
of the biogeography of Streptomyces and mechanisms that promote their
evolutionary diversification should stimulate discovery of novel genetic
diversity and new bioactive compounds from natural populations.

This project will examine the ecological and evolutionary forces that underlie
patterns of microbial biogeography for soil bacteria in the genus Streptomyces.
The main hypothesis is that Streptomyces exhibit a latitudinal gradient of
diversity caused by post-glacial range expansion in northern latitudes coupled
with dispersal limitation due to phylogenetic niche conservatism. This
hypothesis will be tested by (1) using a high-throughput sequencing approach and
computational analyses to characterize Streptomyces biogeography in North
America and (2) performing genomic and physiological analysis of strains from
latitudinally defined sister-taxa. This project is transformational in that it
examines a new paradigm for understanding the biogeography and diversification
of terrestrial microorganisms. Furthermore, by examining microbial genome
dynamics in stains of sister-taxa and their most recent common ancestors as a
function of their evolutionary history, geography, and habitat, this project
will reveal fundamental principles on the role of selection and horizontal gene
transfer on gene and organismal phylogenies.