* 1456959
* IEP: Deconstructing bacterial community biomass stoichiometry one cell at a time
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Edward Hall, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2019
* USD 454,358.00

Over the last ten years our ability to uncover the complexity of the living
world has increased in leaps and bounds largely due to our ability to read the
genetic sequence of microorganisms that cannot be grown in the laboratory. This
plethora of information has revealed a diversity of environmental microorganisms
beyond our wildest estimates. Microbes that live in virtually all environments
are responsible for maintaining the ecosystem services that are vital for all
life on earth. However, even with advances in understanding of microbial
biodiversity we still have very little ability to link the presence of a given
microorganism to the task it is performing. This research addresses that gap by
developing and applying new tools to understand which molecules (proteins,
nucleic acids, lipids) and how much of certain elements (e.g. nitrogen and
phosphorus) are contained within living cells in the environment without having
to grow them separately in the laboratory. More importantly, the proposed
research provides an opportunity to link the information on genetic biodiversity
with molecular and element composition of cells growing in the environment (i.e.
without culturing). These approaches will allow us to began to make inferences
on how microorganisms partition limiting resources under different conditions
and how they alter availability of limiting nutrients to other organisms.
Inferences from this will improve our understanding of fundamental constraints
of life on earth and the role of biodiversity in maintaining the ecosystem
processes essential for all living organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
proposes to apply existing ecological theory (Ecological Stoichiometry) to
natural microbial communities using novel molecular and single-cell techniques
to address pressing questions in environmental microbiology. He has proposed to
couple analyses of Raman microspectroscopy (which allows for analysis of
macromolecular content of single cells) with xray microanalysis (which allows
for analysis of elemental composition of single cells) with in situ
hybridization (e.g. FISH or EL-FISH, which allows for phylogenetic
identification of cells visualized in both eplifluorescence (Raman MS) and
transmission electron (XRMA) microscopy). Each method is established for use in
environmental microbiology however the synthesis of molecular microbiology with
single cell approaches to extend the application of ecological theory provides a
unique and novel approach to understanding the controls and constraints on an
important ecosystem parameter (microbial community stoichiometry).
&lt;br/&gt;While microorganisms are exceptionally important to the functioning
of all ecosystems our ability to understand how they influences even the most
basic ecosystem function (e.g. CO2 release) is limited by the exceptional
complexity of the genetic and metabolic diversity inherent in natural microbial
communities. Sequencing microbial genes directly extracted from the environment
has dramatically increased our understanding of the breadth and depth of
microbial diversity in the environment. However, information on phylogenetic
structure of a community often comes unaccompanied with any additional
information on that organism's physiology or phenotype. This project will use
new empirical tools to track the response of natural microbial communities to
nutrient additions from the relative abundance of macromolecules through changes
in phylogenetic structure to the elemental composition of the whole community.
The research will advance the current understanding of how complex microbial
communities alter fundamental ecosystem processes (i.e. nutrient cycling). While
this project focuses on aquatic planktonic communities, because it is rooted in
microbial physiology and ecological theory the results should be applicable to
analysis of microbial communities from a wide range of ecosystems.