* 1456757
* How development forms specific function: the highly unusual visual system of diving beetle larvae.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Elke Buschbeck, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

A fundamental question in biology is whether particular genes serve the same
function in all animals. Eyes are a good system to address this type of question
because there is such a diversity of eye types in the animal kingdom. There are
many genes that are known to be important for both vertebrate and invertebrate
eye development, but the eye genes that have been studied have only been studied
in a very few organisms. So, it remains unclear how specific eye genes
contribute to eye diversity. To address this question, the PIs have developed
tools allowing them to investigate the development of the functionally complex,
image-forming eyes of Sunburst Diving Beetle larvae. The beetle larvae eyes are
quite different from the commonly studied fruit fly eyes and, in some ways, are
more like vertebrate eyes. In this project, the PIs will compare genes for eye
functions in these animals to see what is common and what is different between
the two eye systems. The goal of the project is to understand the molecular
basis for functional and structural eye diversity. This project will provide
opportunities for training high school, undergraduate and graduate students to
carry out molecular and physiological research. In addition, monthly outreach
activities at the nearby Cincinnati Zoo and Botanical Garden (which houses a
large Sunburst Diving Beetle display) will allow the research group to widely
disseminate their findings and foster awareness of the value of conducting basic
comparative research.

Preliminary data from this research group suggest that many key genes are
present in the eyes of beetles and flies, pointing towards fundamental molecular
mechanisms of wide interest. However, there are informative differences in
regards to when and where key genes are active. To investigate this further, the
PIs will analyze tissue-specific gene and protein expression profiles (which is
only possible in the very enlarged beetle eyes) and determine when and where key
eye development genes are expressed within these eyes. In addition, using a gene
knock-down approach in the beetle (Thermonectus marmoratus), developed in the
lab, and accompanying state of the art genetic tests in the fruit fly
(Drosophila melanogaster), different factors will be functionally dissected to
compare and contrast the roles of genes associated with Drosophila eye and
photoreceptor specification, photoreceptor function and lens development.