* 1456160
* Collaborative Research: Integration of Physiological, Life-history, and Macro-ecological Approaches for Understanding Thermal Limitation in Aquatic Insects: Implications for Freshw
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Goggy Davidowitz, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2019
* USD 80,652.00

Freshwater ecosystems support a disproportionate percentage of Earth's
biodiversity and are among the most threatened by human activities and global
climate change. Insects dominate fresh-water ecosystems in terms of animal
biodiversity and ecological processes. Temperature controls insect growth,
developmental timing, survival, and reproduction, which influence both the
distributions of individual species and the specific set of species that occur
in different freshwater ecosystems. Thus, many effects of global change and
other anthropogenic activities on freshwater ecosystems will likely be
manifested through their thermal effects on aquatic insects. The thermal limits
of individual freshwater insect taxa and the underlying physiological mechanisms
that determine those limits still remain poorly understood. This research has
practical importance because resource agencies use aquatic insects and other
invertebrates to make inferences about ecological health and water quality.
However, these data are often difficult to interpret, because we have a poor
understanding of how and why species are differentially responsive to elevated
temperatures. This collaborative project links researchers with a broad range of
expertise to understand how temperature affects organismal physiology, life-
history outcomes, and ultimately the distribution of species across entire
landscapes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will experimentally
manipulate thermal regimes to quantify the effects of temperature on life-
history outcomes (survival, growth rates, development times, size and fecundity)
of a diversity of mayfly (Ephemeroptera) species. Laboratory experiments will
identify how the specific physiological processes that affect life-history
outcomes (respiration, energy allocation, the production of metabolites, and
gene expression) respond to different temperatures. These laboratory studies
will be used to refine ecological niche models (empirically derived
relationships between environmental temperatures and species distributions in
time and space) that are used in freshwater biodiversity assessment and
monitoring. In particular, these studies will clarify which descriptors of
environmental temperatures (e.g. mean annual temperature, mean summer
temperature, the magnitude of diel thermal change, etc.) are most important to
species performance. Ultimately, these studies are intended to provide a robust
understanding of the linkages between thermal physiology, life-history
variation, and species distributions. Robust outreach efforts will make this
understanding useful to the large ecological monitoring community.