* 1456244
* I-Corps:  Innovation Corps Teams Program: Innovative Insulated Wall Panel Connector
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Clay Naito, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 02/29/2016
* USD 50,000.00

An insulated wall panel is a layer of insulating foam sandwiched between an
exterior and interior layer of concrete. Shear ties make a physical connection
between the exterior and interior layers of concrete. This physical connection
increases the strength of the wall panel without increasing the amount of
concrete present; however, the physical connection also allows heat to pass
directly from the exterior concrete layer to the interior concrete layer,
completely bypassing the insulating foam in a phenomenon known as thermal
bridging. To prevent thermal bridging, ties must be made of a non-conductive
material. Currently, ties made from non-conductive material lack the necessary
strength to economically improve the capacity of the insulated wall panel.
Additionally, these tie systems often suffer from fabrication difficulties
increasing the cost of labor and limiting the quality assurance provided by the
final product.

The proposed project will facilitate discovery of commercial potential of a
novel insulated wall panel connector that provides a blast and thermally
resistant envelope for buildings. The proposed effort will allow the team to
identify markets, consumers, and manufacturing methods. The effort will also
enable product refinement and prototype development of the original design
concept. The team envisions that the proof-of-concept demonstration will provide
a full-scale prototype of the revised connector. The prototype will be installed
in a table top size wall panel mock-up. Material options will be identified and
a manufacturing and supply plan for the connector will be assessed and
presented. The team will conduct a preliminary market assessment to examine the
size of the market and to determine a rough price point and potential margins.
The engineering principles will be illustrated with supporting experimental and
numerical test data. A sample design will illustrate how the connector can be
used in a standard wind load environment and in an extreme blast load
environment.