* 1456310
* Collaborative Research: Uci-Cansahcab Regional Intergration Project
* SBE,BCS
* 01/10/2014,05/31/2015
* Sheryl Luzzadder-Beach, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 24,365.00

The Ucí-Cansahcab Regional Integration Project explores the ways in which the
integration of several ancient settlements in the Northern Maya lowlands (what
is now the state of Yucatan, Mexico) transformed political, economic, social,
and ritual life. Integration took place at the beginning of the Classic period
(250-550 AD) when the ancient Maya built a stone causeway that linked the city
of Ucí with the town of Cansahcab, located 18km to the east. The causeway also
connected two other towns and a handful of hamlets in between Ucí and Cansahcab.
The rise of Izamal, the regional capital, also played a role in this
integration. In particular, a style of architecture using massive stones
originated at Izamal and spreads to all of the sites along the causeway. This
project seeks to gauge both the impact of regional integration on the people
living near the causeway as well as the ways in which these people actively
shaped the outcome of this integration. National Science Foundation Funding will
be used to excavate eight ruins of various size to detect changes that occurred
after the integration and to determine whether these changes affected all sites
in the vicinity of Ucí or only those sites linked to the causeways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An appreciation of the dynamics of power has prompted
archaeologists to recognize that people do not merely react to policies
emanating from central authorities. The dynamic histories and strategic
maneuverings of local communities help shape those policies and the terms of
integration. A fundamental area of archaeological inquiry has been to study the
impact of regional integration on local communities. This approach, sometimes
referred to as "bottom up", has been fruitful at multiple levels of political
complexity and the current research will add to this domain. However, following
the notion that all members of society, regardless of their position in the
field of power relations, play active rolls in the production of history, one
must also recognize that "impact" goes both ways. In other words, a "bottom-up"
approach to historical transformations must attend not only to how hinterland
communities were impacted by centralized authorities, but 1) how the strategies
of non-elites condition and circumscribe the exercise of centralized power; and,
2) how the extensive social diversity of actors grouped together in the unwieldy
category of "non-elite" results in divisions and movements that are themselves a
source of transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has multiple
broader impacts. These impacts collaboration with descendant communities and
training workers and archaeologists at various skill levels. Collaboration
involves working with residents of Ucí and other villages as well as migrant
communities in order to promote preservation of cultural heritage. As for
training, students at the University of Kentucky as well as the Universidad
Autónoma de Yucatan will gain opportunities to complete Masters theses, doctoral
dissertations and licentiatura theses with the mentoring of the PI and Mexican
collaborators.