* 1456868
* Collaborative Research: A New Twist on Muscle Contraction
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Kiisa Nishikawa, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 372,086.00

The sliding filament theory is widely accepted as a useful model of muscle
contraction in isolated preparations. However, the theory fails to account for
critically important characteristics of muscle function. Despite decades of
work, a predictive model of muscle force during natural movements remains
elusive. The researchers will test the hypothesis that important properties of
muscle can be explained by the winding filament hypothesis. The proposed work
has significant potential to inform our understanding of how neural activation
and applied forces together determine in vivo muscle force. Results from the
research will be integrated into graduate and/or undergraduate courses at
Denison University (RUI-eligible), Northwestern University, and Northern Arizona
University. In addition, the research team will leverage programs at Denison
University and Northern Arizona University for recruiting under-represented
participants in research. Results will be disseminated to broad audiences
through standard mechanisms of publication and diverse public media, as well as
participation in interdisciplinary conferences in the areas of engineering,
biomechanics, and physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use the
mdm mouse to test predictions of the winding filament hypothesis. The winding
hypothesis claims that, in addition to the thin filaments, titin is activated by
Ca2+, and that cross-bridges not only translate but also rotate the thin
filaments, storing elastic energy in PEVK titin during isometric force
development. Due to constraints of sarcomere geometry on titin activation and
winding, the hypothesis makes unique quantitative predictions about the effects
of stimulation and length changes on muscle force. By including different
muscles in the proposed studies, the researchers can determine whether naturally
occurring variation in titin structure and function contributes to activation-
and length-dependent muscle properties (e.g., doublet potentiation and force
depression/enhancement). The experiments will test whether titin activation and
winding, alone or in combination, can account for observed muscle forces by
comparing experimental results to model predictions.