* 1456963
* Regulation of Host Colonization Specificity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Mark Mandel, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 10/31/2017
* USD 636,428.00

Bacteria colonize and perform critical functions for their animal hosts. There
has been an increased understanding of the bacteria that are associated with
specific animal hosts, but the proceses and mechanisms by which specific animals
become colonized with characteristic beneficial bacteria and avoid colonization
by harmful (pathogenic) bacteria are not well-understood. This project uses a
simplified system in which an animal organ is colonized by only a single
bacterial species as a way to examine these processes and mechanisms. Molecular
genetic approaches will be used to identify bacterial genes and processes that
are critical to host colonization, and comparative approaches will be used to
determine how the gene circuits in different bacteria evolve to either keep the
same animal partner or allow the bacteria to switch and colonize a new animal
host. This work has the potential to impact studies of bacterial aggregation, a
process that occurs readily and has broad implications for the ability of
bacteria to perform beneficial or harmful functions in natural and man-made
environments. Climate change has been shown to influence bacterial-animal
associations, so a deeper understanding of the molecular basis to these
interactions will allow us to better prepare for changing environmental
conditions. Finally, the evolution of infectious diseases depends on pathogen
interactions with animal hosts, and therefore it is critical to discern
regulatory changes that influence microbe-host communication. Students will be
trained in modern genetics and genomics, and bioinformatics to address "big
data" questions. Outreach activities are focused on broadening the
representation of future STEM field leaders.

Microbial symbioses are prevalent in animals and are crucial to the health and
development of both partners. These relationships have evolved robust mechanisms
to ensure the faithful transmission of symbionts during each new host
generation. This project applies modern genomic and genetic methods to examine
how host specificity develops in a horizontally transmitted animal-microbe
symbiosis. The project focuses on the binary association between Vibrio fischeri
bacteria and the bobtail squid hosts. Preliminary data have revealed the
importance of biofilm formation (bacterial aggregation) during host
colonization, both in V. fischeri colonization of squid and in many bacterial
colonization systems. In the canonical squid symbiont ES114, the RscS histidine
kinase activates biofilm genes that are necessary for normal host colonization.
A comparative approach identified strains that do not use RscS for colonization,
and in the project molecular genetic approaches will be undertaken to identify
the signal transduction pathways regulating aggregation and colonization in
closely related symbiont strains. By taking an integrative approach that
encompasses natural populations, genomes, pathways, and genes, the project will
yield an understanding of the molecular mechanisms that maintain symbiont-host
fidelity and facilitate co-evolutionary dynamics in horizontally-transmitted
bacterial symbionts. A pilot workshop is proposed that integrates with the
research aims and trains undergraduate and graduate students in modern
bioinformatics techniques.