* 1456302
* Collaborative Research: Defining the Neurobiological Requirements for Vocal Learning in Birds.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Claudio Mello, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2019
* USD 445,876.00

Hummingbirds, songbirds and parrots learn their vocalizations from adults, just
like human infants learn to speak by imitating their parents' speech. This
capacity provides the basis for how humans acquire speech and language, yet how
the brain achieves this goal is unknown. Using an array of powerful techniques,
this collaborative project will examine the anatomical, electrical, and
molecular properties of brain circuits that control vocalizations in
hummingbirds and songbirds, comparing them with each other and with prior human
studies. Understanding how these different organisms evolved brain circuits to
accomplish similar goals will reveal insights into fundamental properties of
vocal learning systems. Traditional lab animals cannot be used as they lack
vocal learning; hence, the use of vocal learner birds is critical. The project
will provide training in multiple research techniques to high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, emphasizing underrepresented groups. It
will also promote broad dissemination of findings and outreach activities,
related to both scientific and conservation efforts. The project is also
integrated with an International Consortium (funded by the Brazilian Government)
for cataloguing and characterizing the diversity of tropical birds, including
integration of Museum collections, generation of genome sequences, and
examination of brain specimens relevant to the evolution of vocal learning.
These activities will enable interactions between US and Brazilian faculty and
students, while promoting training in molecular and histological methods through
site visits, field trips, and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vocal control
system of songbirds is critical for song production and learning, and is well
characterized anatomically, electrophysiologically, and molecularly. However,
knowledge of the analogous areas in other avian vocal learners is limited.
Recent phylogenomics efforts reveal that hummingbirds evolved vocal learning
independently of songbirds; thus, comparing their vocal control systems will
reveal convergently evolved features that may be fundamentally required for this
trait. The investigators will use tract-tracing to determine how vocal control
areas are connected in hummingbirds, in vitro electrophysiological recordings to
determine intrinsic neuronal properties of vocal areas in hummingbirds and
songbirds, and in situ hybridization to identify molecular markers of vocal
nuclei. Evidence of shared anatomical, physiological and molecular
specializations will point to convergent features representing possible
universal properties of vocal learning systems that may also be shared with
humans. Alternatively, differences would suggest that multiple circuit and
cellular/molecular architectures can subserve vocal learning. Outcomes will
provide novel clues as to evolutionary origins and constraints of vocal learning
and associated pathways, leading to insights into fundamental requirements of
vocal learning.