* 1456700
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Sound Source Localization Underlying an Ancestral Mode of Vertebrate Hearing
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Joseph Sisneros, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 590,554.00

The ability to locate the source of sounds enables animals to detect prey, avoid
predators and communicate with others and is thus basic to survival in many
species. While decades of behavioral, physiological and neuroanatomical research
have revealed the physical cues and neural mechanisms that terrestrial animals
use to localize sound, the mechanisms used by fish, the oldest living vertebrate
group, remain a mystery. Collectively, these experiments will investigate the
mechanisms of sound localization utilized by fish that likely formed the
evolutionary foundation for more recent modes of vertebrate hearing and sound
localization. Throughout the project, Drs. Sisneros and Forlano will train and
mentor both graduate and undergraduate students and give annual public lectures
regarding the supported research at the Friday Harbor Labs (FHL). As an integral
part of this research program, Drs. Sisneros and Forlano will host GK-12
teachers every summer at FHL where they will participate in field and laboratory
experiments. The researchers will also develop lesson plans, student projects
and an educational website with the teachers at their home institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation will take an integrated behavioral,
anatomical, and brain activational approach to determine whether fish are
fundamentally similar to other studied vertebrates, and use binaural information
(information from both ears) to localize sound, or are fundamentally different,
and achieve robust localization on the basis of monaural (single-ear)
information alone. The central hypothesis to be tested is that binaural
integration is essential for sound source localization in midshipman. To test
this hypothesis, the investigators will 1) determine which inner ear endorgans
are required for sound localization behavior by testing animals in an
established sound playback paradigm before and after systematic unilateral or
bilateral removal of each endorgan's otolith (saccule, lagena, utricle), 2)
characterize the ipsilateral and contralateral projections of inner ear
afferents from all three endorgans to known auditory processing regions in the
hindbrain by bulk labeling each endorgan separately or in double or triple
combination with different fluorescent-labeled dextran amine tracers, and 3)
characterize the brain activation patterns resulting from controlled auditory
directional stimulation in intact animals and in those that have undergone
systematic endorgan removal, using c-Fos as a marker for neural activation.
Duplicate digital files of all raw, processed and consolidated data will be
stored locally and in the cloud by both researchers and will be made publically
available within two years following publication.