* 1456253
* IOS Proposal: Effects of vision loss on astrocyte maturation and oligodendrocyte myelination via BDNF-associated mechanisms in the visual cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Michael Jarvinen, Emmanuel College
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 12/31/2019
* USD 266,003.00

The purpose of this project is to determine the role of two molecules, known as
BDNF and pro-BDNF, that are produced by two distinct populations of cells called
astrocytes and oligodendrocytes found in the vision processing area of the
brain. The researchers hypothesize that these molecules regulate the development
of the circuits that make vision possible. The expression patterns of the
regulatory molecules will be determined at different stages of development in
normal mice and in mice that show a progressive loss of vision during postnatal
development. The expectation is that there will be reduced expression of the
molecules in the sightless mice which, in turn, will prevent functional vision
circuits from developing. The work has potential to provide a fresh perspective
on how vision circuits are formed and organized during development.
Undergraduates at three primarily undergraduate liberal arts institutions will
receive training in molecular and cellular techniques and modern methods of cell
imaging. High-resolution images of fluorescent labeled cells will be archived in
an image data bank for use in teaching neuroscience classes for undergraduates
and workshops for local high school science students.

Normal mice and mice exhibiting vision loss at developmental time points when
vision exists, when it is deteriorating, or when it is lost will be used for the
proposed studies. The mice have been engineered to express fluorescent
biomarkers under the control of cell-specific promoters to enable identification
of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes in the brain. Fluorescence activated cell
sorting will be used to isolate astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its precursor (pro-BDNF) mRNA and protein will be
measured and visualized using quantitative RT-PCR, ELISA assays, and
immunohistochemistry. Image analysis will provide information on changes in
astrocyte and oligodendrocyte cell morphology that are predicted to be important
in establishing and maintaining vision circuit microenvironments. Data will be
made available to other researchers upon request.