* 1456281
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a robust multiplex protein test for cardiovascular disease research
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,06/30/2017
* John Dishinger, PhasiQ, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2017
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the $1 billion life science research
market that is served mainly by multiplex protein tests. The research proposed
here has tremendous potential as a tool for highly accurate and robust detection
of proteins that have been linked to cardiovascular disease. Additionally, the
development of this core technology can be used for research of numerous other
diseases. The product developed during this project has potential applications
in the pharmaceutical and contract research organization markets for drug
discovery, monitoring therapeutic efficacy, and assisting with clinical studies.
While this Phase II proposal includes the development and commercialization of a
DVT panel, the commercial product offering will cover a wider variety of
disease-related proteins for research applications (e.g. protein combinations in
which academic researchers, contract research organizations, or pharmaceutical
companies have interest).

The proposed project will result in a better, more robust tool for detection of
disease-related proteins in patient blood. The product will be able to measure
the amounts of multiple proteins at one time without a problem known as
?antibody crosstalk?, which hinders the quality of results when using other
technologies. Work on this project will involve developing a kit that includes
equipment and reagents for an end-user to work with and analyze blood samples
for proteins of interest, in this case those involved with cardiovascular
disease. A working prototype device was developed as part of Phase I funding,
and Phase II will improve upon the device (increased analysis time and
multiplexing) until useful for the analysis of clinical samples. Patient
samples, already collected, banked, and de-identified under IRB approval, will
be analyzed in a collaborative effort with researchers at the University of
Michigan. Results from Phase II support will include a useful multiplexed
protein biomarker immunoassay platform that has been validated using patient
blood samples.