* 1456048
* Emergent Technologies: New Opportunities to Advance Psychological Research and Science Education
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Scott Plous, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 10/31/2018
* USD 300,001.00

The Social Psychology Network (SPN) has become one of the most international and
heavily used online networks for research and teaching in the social sciences.
Most of its web resources, however, were designed before the widespread adoption
of smartphones, tablets, and other mobile computers, which are now the most
common devices used to access the Internet. To address this problem, the
proposed project will advance psychological research and education by
redesigning SPN so that its pages, interactive features, databases, and partner
sites work with mobile devices. In addition to advancing research and science
education through mobile technology, this project will also build on SPN's
18-year record of "giving psychology away," informing social issues, and
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups. For example, the
creation of mobile-friendly web pages will facilitate usage of the SPN
Mentorship Program, in which more than 600 volunteers with doctoral degrees
offer free career assistance to students from underrepresented groups. It will
also increase access to SPN partner sites such as the Stanford Prison Experiment
(PrisonExp.org), the Jigsaw Classroom (Jigsaw.org), and
UnderstandingPrejudice.org, each of which focuses on social issues such as
protecting human rights, preventing school violence, and reducing prejudice.

By refactoring SPN with a "mobile first" design approach, this project will
ensure that the Network is interoperable and responsive across a wide array of
computing devices, thereby making SPN more accessible and better equipped to
serve the field as new mobile technologies continue to claim the future of
social networking. This work will be completed in phases, beginning with the
recruitment of a mobile design specialist and a technical audit to review
elements including SPN's social media usage, search engine optimization, web
hosting, server configuration, and choice of programming tools. The redesign and
conversion of SPN sites will then begin with relatively small sites such as
PrisonExp.org and eInterview.org before developing a new mobile design and
programming for SocialPsychology.org. Next will come a redesign of SPN's system
of 10,000+ user profiles and member pages, followed by a conversion of other SPN
pages and features. In the end, this project will leave the Network well
positioned to harness the power of the mobile revolution to advance
psychological research and education.