* 1456787
* Characterization of the Secretome of P. Destructans, the Causative Agent of White-Nose Syndrome in Bats
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Richard Bennett, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 04/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

White-Nose Syndrome (WNS) is a devastating disease that has killed around 6
million bats in the US since its discovery in 2007. The disease has spread
across North America and has the potential to drive several native bat species
to extinction. In addition to ecological damage, the disease is predicted to
seriously impact the agricultural industry, as insectivorous bats are critical
for the control of insect pests. The cause of WNS is the fungus Pseudogymnoascus
destructans, which is highly invasive causing significant tissue destruction
particularly to the membranous wings of bats. Little else is known about the
biology of this fungal species or how it is able to cause disease in bats. This
project will focus on identification and characterization of protease enzymes,
which are catalysts in protein degradation, secreted by P. destructans that may
promote the invasion and destruction of bat tissue. In particular, the presence
of proteases will be evaluated as these represent important virulence factors in
several mammalian fungal pathogens. The blocking of protease activities may
therefore represent a therapeutic strategy for the prevention of WNS.

The approach used in this proposal will first define the proteins secreted by P.
destructans during laboratory culture, with a particular emphasis on identifying
secreted proteases. Cutting-edge approaches will be used for the identification
and subsequent characterization of proteases, including a multiplex substrate
profiling technique coupled with iceLogo analysis to reveal the cleavage
specificity of secreted proteases. Preliminary experiments using this approach
have led to the identification and partial characterization of a novel
subtilisin-like protease from the conditioned medium of P. destructans. This
activity has been named Destructin-1 as it is able to degrade collagen, the
major component of animal connective tissue. Additional proteases will be
identified in P. destructans and compared to those in non-infectious species to
identify potential virulence factors. To test if these proteases contribute to
disease in the bat, inhibitors of proteases will be defined and these inhibitors
tested in infection models to see if they block the progression of WNS. New
genetic tools will also be developed for this fungal species to enable analysis
by deletion of target genes. Together, these approaches will provide new
insights into the biology of the P. destructans fungus and the means by which it
causes disease in the mammalian host.