* 1456440
* Collaborative Research: Determining the Mechanisms by which Parental Testosterone Biases the Ratio of Male to Female Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2021
* Mary Mendonca, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 308,947.00

Female birds determine the sex of offspring because they are heterogametic, but
they also control the ratio of male to female offspring, the sex ratio, in
response to environmental variables. Recent work shows that testosterone (T)
treatment induces male-biased sex ratios in multiple species, and that it may do
so by influencing which sex chromosome is retained in the oocyte during meiosis
I (i.e. segregation distortion). The idea that a hormone can influence the
genetic material inherited by offspring has enormous potential not only for
understanding sex ratio adjustment in all vertebrate systems, but also when
considering the inheritance of other genetic traits that determine offspring
phenotype. The work will advance understanding of how the environment and
endocrine system work together to determine genetic inheritance, as well as the
cellular dynamics of meiosis. The researchers will also generate educational
modules for both high school students and teachers and collaborate on potential
applications of this work to poultry production. The research will also afford
research training opportunities to numerous undergraduate and graduate students
and continue their participation in programs geared towards involving under-
represented groups in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of previous data
support the hypothesis that T stimulates male-biased sex ratios through
segregation distortion of sex chromosomes during meiosis. To further analyze the
effects of maternal testosterone, studies are planned to: test for the presence
of androgen receptors on the germinal disc and follicle cells near the time of
meiotic segregation; test for changes in the expression of genes involved in
spindle fiber formation and chromosome movement in oocytes collected from
T-treated hens; and to determine whether T elevations at meiotic segregation are
necessary for sex ratio biases. Histologic, endocrine, and transcriptomic
analyses are planned in association with the studies. The research is expected
to reveal the intracellular pathway responsible for segregation distortion, to
identify key points of regulation, and to determine how the pathways respond to
changes in environmental and social conditions shown to influence offspring sex
ratios. Results from the studies will be published in peer-reviewed journals and
presented at regional and national scientific meetings.