* 1456385
* SBIR Phase II:  Low cost, scalable and selective electrochemical metallization process technology
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Val Dubin, NANO3D SYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,341,847.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to accelerate the mass-scale adoption
of 3D integrated circuits (IC) by decreasing the cost and increasing the
scalability of 3D through-silicon vias (TSV) interconnects with electrochemical,
low cost and selective metallization technology. After its qualification, 3D TSV
selective metallization technology will enable fabrication of high performance
3D microsystems at lower cost by replacing costly damascene interconnect
technology with selective electrochemical metallization technology for TSV metal
fill, bump and redistribution layer formation. The successful completion of this
project would have a significant societal impact by accelerating 3D IC wafer
technology adoption into state-of-art high performance digital devices such as
next generation of smart phones. This project will also have positive economic
impact by creating US semiconductor jobs and maintaining US technology
leadership over a wide range of electronic applications and consumer electronic
devices.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project advances a novel
three-dimensional through-silicon vias (TSV) selective metallization technology
to fabricate low cost and scalable 3D integrated circuits (IC). Physical and
economical limitations for two-dimensional scaling (so called "Moore?s Law")
prevent further increase of integration density to improve the performance of
IC. These challenges have stimulated the development of 3D TSV technology (so
called "More than Moore") in order to increase the speed and bandwidth of the
devices as well as to decrease the form factor and power consumption of
integrated microsystems. However, the mass adoption of 3D IC is limited by the
high cost of 3D TSV interconnects (due to the use of expensive vapor deposition
and chemical-mechanical damascene processes) and its poor scalability (due to
low conformality of physical and chemical vapor deposited films) to high aspect
ratios and smaller via sizes. Proprietary and patented 3D TSV selective
metallization technology developed during Phase I project will be further
optimized and qualified on production tools to address cost and scalability
issues of 3D TSV interconnects. Enabling low cost and scalable 3D ICs will allow
heterogeneous systems integration for next generation smart phones and other
consumer electronic devices.