* 1456965
* Parallel Encoding of Sequence and Structure in a Motor Memory Trace
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* James Johnson, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2020
* USD 520,621.00

The purpose of this project is to elucidate how serial order is coded by the
brain. If you were to read this sentence aloud, you would utter a precise,
ordered sequence of over 50 distinct vocal sounds in less than 10 seconds. How
does the brain store the individual sounds of speech and then coordinate the
production of these sounds in a meaningful order so quickly? A similar question
could be asked about the pianist performing a Mozart sonata, the songs of birds,
or the mating dances of insects. How the brain stores these elaborate sequences
of behavior remains unknown. Using the songbird zebra finch, a model organism
that learns meaningful sequences of vocal sounds like humans do, the
interdisciplinary research team will test the hypothesis that the brain encodes
and stores sequences of behavior through two separate mechanisms that operate in
parallel: one coding mechanism for the sequence of vocal sounds and one for the
vocal sounds themselves. Given the diversity of animal species that display
elaborate, meaningful sequences of behavior, the findings will influence
understanding across a broad array of organisms, including humans. The research
plan coordinates the activity of a faculty research team from four different
disciplines (Neuroanatomy, Neurophysiology, Mathematics, and Statistics) and
will provide students with a unique interdisciplinary training opportunity and
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observed in nearly all animal forms (and
exemplified by human speech) serial order in behavior consists of learning to
organize a set of elemental gestural units into a purposeful sequence of action.
Adult male zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) produce a highly quantifiable
example of serial order in behavior (birdsong). Moreover, a premotor cortical
region (HVC, proper name) is known to encode a consolidated premotor trace of
song. Although consisting of similar cell types, the medial and lateral portions
of HVC are hypothesized to encode the sequence (medial HVC) and syllables
(lateral HVC) of song in parallel. The research team will test whether these two
dimensions of song are encoded by physiological differences in 1) afferent input
to medial and lateral HVC, or 2) the intrinsic network properties of medial and
lateral HVC (or a combination of 1 and 2). However, parallel encoding of serial
order in behavior should be hierarchical, with traces for sequence in a
supervisory position over traces for elemental gestural units. The team will
also test whether efferent axons emanating from medial and lateral HVC interact
in a hierarchical fashion within vocal-motor cortex. Results will elucidate a
network architecture for serial order in behavior and provide a computational
platform to understand how learning new sequences shapes such memory
architectures.