* 1456597
* Collabortive Research: Water availability controls on above-belowground productivity: Herbivory versus plant response
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Osvaldo Sala, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2020
* USD 590,454.00

Ecosystems fix carbon from the atmosphere through photosynthesis, which is then
allocated to aboveground plant structures, such as leaves and branches, or to
belowground structures, such as roots. Our current understanding of the factors
that control belowground carbon allocation is significantly weaker than
aboveground allocation. Yet, in grasslands the amount of carbon that goes
belowground each year is much larger than the amount of carbon allocated
aboveground. Our rudimentary understanding of the controls of belowground carbon
allocation and the ratio of aboveground to belowground carbon is a significant
knowledge gap, as roots are a major input of organic material and nutrients into
soil. Predictions of future carbon storage in these ecosystems hinge on our
understanding of the effects of environmental availability on allocation of
carbon belowground. This study addresses the questions: How does precipitation
affect the above/belowground partitioning of carbon? During drought periods, are
above and belowground structures equally affected, or are roots affected less
than leaves and branches? Finally, is the effect of precipitation on carbon
allocation constant or does it vary from deserts to humid grasslands? This
project will install experiments in New Mexico, Colorado and Kansas to
understand the effect of precipitation on the partitioning of carbon above
versus belowground and the underlying mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal presents three novel hypotheses based on: (1) a plant-response
mechanism, suggesting decreased belowground allocation with increasing water
availability, and (2) a trophic-cascade mechanism, suggesting the opposite
pattern derived from the differential sensitivity of root feeders and their
predators to water availability. A final hypothesis (3) suggests that the
magnitude of plant responses decreases from arid to humid grasslands while the
magnitude of the trophic-cascade phenomenon increases. The trophic-cascade
mechanism may be constrained by the abundance of belowground predators in arid
grasslands, which is greater in humid ecosystems. The experimental design
includes complementary field and microcosm experiments located in three
different ecosystem types: Chihuahuan Desert Grassland, NM, Shortgrass Steppe,
CO, and Tallgrass Prairie, KS. The field experiment includes additions and
reductions of precipitation at each site. The microcosm experiment is based on
monoliths subjected to 4 soil fauna treatments x 5 water manipulations. Soil
fauna treatments consist of (1) soil devoid of fauna (just native bacteria and
fungi), (2) defaunated soil inoculated with nematode root feeders, (3)
defaunated soil inoculated with nematode root feeders and nematode predators,
and (4) control. Microcosm tubes will be located in each of the water
manipulation plots using individuals of the dominant grass species of each
ecosystem type. This project will train a post-doctoral fellow and graduate and
undergraduate students, including students from underrepresented groups.
Collaboration with the Asombro Institute for Science Education, a non-profit
organization that provides award-winning science education to more than 12,000
children and 4,500 adults annually in southern New Mexico and western Texas,
will include establishing a demonstration project of a soil-observation window
at the Chihuahuan Desert Nature Park. Partnerships with the "Ask A Biologist"
program will result in an article on the interactions between plants and
belowground organisms and how these interactions are modulated by water
availability. The project will contribute special events associated with the
effects of climate on belowground processes during a summer sustainability
program that engages local teachers and students, and the "Managing the Planet"
series aimed at the general public.