* 1456173
* SBIR Phase II:  Semantically Intelligent Knowledge Hub for Course Authoring
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Ramji Raghavan, Pragya Systems Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2019
* USD 1,350,121.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to develop a
system to dramatically simplify how course content is shared, discovered,
curated and managed in educational institutions. The vast majority of content in
educational institutions is in multiple silo-ed repositories. Hence, compliance
tracking, aligning curricula with competencies and course authoring are manual
and expensive processes. This project aims to unlock these silos and make it
simple to search, tag and curate courseware at topic-level across multiple
platforms. The technology also extracts student feedback and assessment
information and maps it against granular learning objectives to provide new
insights to track and improve learning outcomes. By unlocking courseware stuck
in silo-ed college systems, this project facilitates a cross-institutional
marketplace that enables any institution to share and/or monetize curated high
quality content, and conversely have access to curated course packs that may be
taught by adjunct faculty, a $2B market opportunity. Simplifying faculty access
to Open Educational Resources and curated learning content from other colleges
will help drive down student course-pack costs
significantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technical innovation in this project
is seamless extraction of learning content from multiple educational
repositories coupled with a syllabus-driven semantically intelligent search and
recommendation engine woven into the course curation process. Developing an
abstracted mechanism to interface with different types of learning management
systems and other repositories, and making it portable without requiring a
common content format is a significant innovation. Natural Language Processing
techniques combined with curated controlled vocabularies and taxonomies are
applied to simplify curation of a course, notably automatic topic identification
and instructional tagging. The curation data is leveraged in the semantic search
engine to improve recommendation of courseware during course authoring. The goal
of the adaptive recommendation engine is to improve discovery and usage of both
open educational resources and courseware developed in other colleges, without
requiring expensive professional services. Another goal of the project is to
extract student feedback seamlessly using IMS defined standards regardless of
which learning management system is used to deliver the content. The student
feedback, assessment data, grades and other information pulled from various
college systems are then correlated to provide rich analytics and visibility of
student outcomes and alignment of courseware with competencies.