* 1456796
* Uncovering the Molecular Mechanisms that Underlie Photoperiodic Control of Plant Growth
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Dmitri Nusinow, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Understanding the mechanisms underlying plant responses to changing
environmental conditions is critical to improving agriculture. Plant growth is
responsive to seasonal changes in day length, however, our understanding of
factors that participate in this photoperiodic control of growth is incomplete.
This proposal aims to investigate the function of a newly identified protein
that is a key regulator of plant growth in response to photoperiod. The
knowledge gained from this work will provide valuable insight into understanding
the mechanisms that tie together light sensing, day length measurement, and
growth under multiple conditions. This information will contribute to our
ability to better anticipate plant responses to the environment. This proposal
will also support the development and distribution of a low-cost, open-source
plant-imaging platform based on Raspberry-Pi microcomputer systems to high
schools as part of an effort to bring science into the local community. A
benefit from this Broader Impacts activity is the potential for the public to
develop innovative systems for continual, automated monitoring of plant growth.
This work will transform our ability to understand plant responses to seasonal
changes in the environment, contributing to the long-term goal of improving
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
understand the molecular mechanisms that couple light signaling with the
circadian clock to regulate growth under changing photoperiodic conditions. This
project will investigate the factors that modulate light signaling pathways in
association with the circadian clock to regulate growth in response to the
environment in a photoperiod-dependent manner. Using affinity purification and
mass spectrometry to identify circadian clock-associated components, a new
protein was identified that directly binds to both clock and light signaling
factors, named MASS SPEC IDENTIFIED MODULATING GROWTH FACTOR 1 (MMF1). MMF1 is a
conserved, plant-specific, nuclear-localized factor that regulates hypocotyl
elongation in a day-length specific manner. This study aims to determine the
mechanisms by which MMF1 modulates growth responses by combining physiology,
genetics, biochemistry, mass spectrometry, and expression analysis to gain
comprehensive understanding into the role of MMF1 in plants. Preliminary data,
based on mass spectrometry results, direct interaction assays, genetics,
hypocotyl elongation assays, and gene expression analysis, suggest a key role
for MMF1 in modulating growth in a day-length dependent manner. The aims of this
proposal are to 1) determine the role of MMF1 in the regulation of growth and
physiology in a light- and photoperiod-dependent manner, 2) identify the genetic
and biochemical bases underlying MMF1 modulation of light signaling pathways
under specific environmental conditions, and 3) determine the role of MMF1 in
regulating gene expression networks downstream of light signaling pathways. The
knowledge gained from this work will provide valuable insight into understanding
the mechanisms that couple light signaling, the circadian clock and growth under
multiple conditions. This information will contribute to the ability to better
anticipate plant responses to the environment and identify genetic targets to
manipulate for increased agricultural productivity. The proposed research will
provide scientific training and educational opportunities for students at the
secondary school, undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate levels through the
PI's participation in on-going science outreach and REU programs at the Danforth
Plant Science Center and an appointment at Washington University in St. Louis.
Also, an inexpensive time-lapse imaging system will be combined with educational
materials for distribution to local high schools to cultivate an interest in
plant responses to the environment. Through assembling, programming, and
incorporating these low-cost, open-source plant-imaging systems into science
projects within the classroom, local students will gain a unique opportunity to
participate in STEM activities. Moreover, working with the public has the
potential to develop innovative and distributive sensor systems for the non-
invasive monitoring of plant growth. Together, the proposed research will have a
significant impact on society through a better understanding of circadian clock
function in diverse species and increased engagement with the public through
participation in education and training programs.