* 1456528
* Collaborative Research: LTREB: Soil Warming and Forest Ecosystem Feedbacks to the Climate System
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2023
* Jerry Melillo, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2023
* USD 345,520.00

Soils store at least three times more carbon in soil organic matter (SOM) than
either the atmosphere or vegetation. The response of SOM to increasing
temperature is an important aspect of the interactions between ecosystems and
climate. If increasing temperatures cause soil carbon to be transferred to the
atmosphere, the result would be a self-reinforcing (positive) feedback to the
climate system, with warming leading to more warming. Despite the potential
importance of this feedback, there is currently an incomplete understanding of
the mechanisms that affect the temperature sensitivity of SOM. This project will
continue a long running soil warming experiment at Harvard Forest which is
currently in its third decade. The experiments use heated cables to warm the
soil in a mature eastern forest. To date, the results of this experiment have
shown dynamic responses of SOM to temperature over time. This project will
continue to study and monitor long-term soil responses to warming to advance the
scientific understanding of how temperature controls decomposition of SOM on a
decadal time scale. The results will improve the representation of soil
processes in the Earth system models that are used to project future
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ongoing field warming experiments in the deciduous
forest stands at Harvard Forest have imposed 5oC above ambient soil temperatures
at three replicated sites for 8, 11 and 23 years, which now correspond to three
distinct phases of CO2 emissions in the longest running experiment. There was an
initial increase in soil respiration in response to warming in the first decade,
followed by no response, and finally another period of higher soil respiration
in the heated plots in the last 8 years. The chronosequence of the three warming
experiments offers a unique opportunity to understand how increasing soil
temperatures affect soil biogeochemistry, plant-soil interactions, and microbial
community composition over time. The research has three major components: 1)
continuation of core measurements of carbon and nitrogen stocks and fluxes; 2)
short-term temperature manipulations combined with measurements of key
indicators of biogeochemical and microbial community changes; and 3) targeted
process-level measurements that enhance a mechanistic understanding of soil
responses to long-term warming. The project will measure the isotopic
composition of carbon and nitrogen, the chemical composition of SOM, and
microbial community composition along the chronosequence. The soil warming
experiments will continue to operate as an open facility for students and
researchers nationwide to study the long-term effects of warming on ecosystem
processes.