* 1456224
* SBIR Phase II:  A dual mass spectrometry and fluorescence microarray platform for proteomics
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Vladislav Bergo, Adeptrix Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2018
* USD 909,980.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to develop an analytical assay to
enable measurement of biological samples by mass spectrometry and fluorescence.
The assay will be based on a microarray platform, for applications in the areas
of targeted quantitative proteomics, enzymatic activity assays, and
combinatorial chemistry. Targeted quantitative proteomics measures changes in
the concentration of a specific protein biomarker across multiple samples, such
as cell lines, tissues, or biofluids. In the pharmaceutical industry, this
method is widely used to assess efficiency of a drug candidate compound as well
as its potential toxicity. Researchers are especially interested in the
multiplexed approaches to quantitative proteomics that could provide detailed
information on the state of various cellular biochemical networks. The
significance of this project is the newly developed capability to rapidly
separate, purify, and concentrate a large number of proteomic biomarkers for
multiplexed quantitative analysis by mass spectrometry. This will result in the
assay miniaturization to help lower the costs of the drug development process.
Outside of the pharmaceutical field, the technology can be utilized in the
clinical settings for performing minimally invasive diagnostics. It also can be
extended to basic biology research to study a wide range of important biological
interactions including antibody-antigen, drug candidate-drug target, enzyme-
substrate, receptor-ligand, and others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II
project proposes to develop a new analytical technology for life sciences termed
Bead-Assisted Mass Spectrometry (BAMS). BAMS is a microarray platform that
enables independent data acquisition by fluorescence and mass spectrometry. It
applies the method of image cytometry to rapidly screen thousands of microbeads
arrayed inside individual wells on a miniaturized microwell plate (picotiter
plate). It is the first technology to incorporate high throughput analysis by
mass spectrometry into bead-based bioassays, which in their current form are
measured primarily on flow cytometry instruments. The dual detection capability
is particularly important in proteomics where mass spectrometry can be applied
to distinguish protein isoforms and proteins with different patterns of post-
translational modifications such as phosphorylation. This project will utilize
mass spectrometry imaging in combination with two- and three-dimensional
fluorescence imaging, and will perform complementary analysis of bead arrays on
the MALDI TOF and ESI MS platforms to achieve greater sequence coverage. This
technology will provide researchers with far more options with respect to
designing custom multiplex bead assays than currently possible. In addition,
BAMS may be used to measure optically encoded beads, mass tag-encoded beads, and
even non-encoded beads such as combinatorial peptide bead libraries.