* 1456266
* SBIR Phase II:  Prototyping Reusable Dry Adhesives based on Scalable Fiber Spinning Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Barry Rosenbaum, Akron Ascent Innovations
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2019
* USD 1,445,385.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project presents novel
technology to fabricate dry, removable, reusable adhesives based on aligned
polymeric nanofibers using scalable electrospinning methodologies. This new
approach offers the potential advantages of significantly lower costs and easier
scale-up using nozzle-free nanofiber spinning processes. Dry reusable adhesives
as a replacement for messy liquid glues will improve product safety and reduce
environmental impact. Removable and reusable adhesive tapes and labels will also
eliminate waste and facilitate product recycling. The resulting products will
have strong shear adhesion and easy peel, leading to broad application with a
wide range of substrates like glass, metal, wall board, and plastics. Proof-of-
concept samples have confirmed market-driven value propositions. The Phase II
project will develop commercial products and applications for consumer and
industrial applications, for automotive assembly systems, for decorative wall
murals, and for medical device and health care uses. Fiber spinning and
collection techniques will be engineered to improve product performance, reduce
costs and improve scalability of the manufacturing
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Phase I project has confirmed proof-of-concept
dry adhesive samples with shear adhesion strengths exceeding 20 N/cm2 in dynamic
mode and 45 N/cm2 in dead weight mode. The resulting samples have low peel
strength and are reusable. In Phase II, the electrospinning process will be
optimized using novel polymer blend systems to achieve performance targets for
specific customer product development. The nozzleless electrospinning process
will be scaled to the pilot level for product testing and to provide the
engineering design basis for commercial manufacture. A continuous roll-to-roll
process to produce aligned nanofibers will break new ground in the
electrospinning industry. New applications in medical devices have been proposed
by strategic partners to capitalize on the self-adhesion properties of these
materials. Dry adhesive applicator systems will be developed to allow the
aligned adhesive nanofibers to conform to surface asperities. With the Phase I
success of proof-of-concept prototypes, the Phase II effort will move the
development of aligned nanofiber dry adhesives into the market introduction
phase in preparation for commercial manufacture and sales.