* 1456955
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Parsing the effects of host specificity and geography on plant-fungal symbioses under climate change
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Scott Collins, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2021
* USD 456,988.00

Climate models project higher temperatures, more variability in precipitation,
and more extreme weather events in the future. Under such changing environments,
foundation plant species, which promote stable conditions for other species and
support fundamental ecosystem processes, may benefit from microbial partners
that enhance plant survival during climate extremes. However, whether microbial
partners can help buffer ecosystems against climate change remains unknown. This
research investigates a widespread, but poorly known, group of fungi that
commonly grow in the roots of dominant forage grasses. The project determines
how the benefits of these fungi vary along gradients of drought and heat stress,
differ among grass species, and shift across geographic regions. This work has
high promise for identifying fungi that help plants survive and grow in
stressful climates. Together, this team will integrate research activities into
a new high school teacher training program that focuses on underserved
communities and a set of laboratory modules for middle school workshops. Results
will shed new light on the functions of microbial partners in maintaining
grassland and rangeland productivity, improving the ability to conserve, manage,
and restore these important areas in future
climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deeper insight into the biology of root
endophytes has the potential to transform understanding of how plants respond to
drought and heat in the same way that studies on mycorrhizal fungi overturned
paradigms about how plants acquire nutrients. This project tests whether root-
associated fungi benefit dominant grassland plant species, which may moderate
the loss of net primary production during droughts and heat waves. The work
addresses the following questions: (1) What is the relative importance of host
species identity versus geographic and climatic gradients in explaining
variation in symbiont abundance and composition? (2) How strongly do host
species identity and geographic origin influence the magnitude of symbiont
benefits across gradients of heat and drought stress? (3) Can symbiont-mediated
amelioration of stress be generalized from laboratory settings to predict
outcomes in the field? Activities include field surveys along latitudinal
gradients, next-generation high-throughput sequencing of root fungi, development
of a large fungal culture collection, multi-factor greenhouse trials that
manipulate drought and heat, and field tests that leverage existing, large,
cross-site rainfall experiments. Novel aspects of this project include
characterizing root-associated fungal composition along latitudinal gradients,
testing the hypothesis that symbioses become more beneficial to plants under
increased abiotic stress, and determining how endophytic root fungi affect plant
hosts under field conditions.