* 1456711
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of long service life vacuum insulation composites
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,03/31/2021
* SaravanKumar Shanmugavelayudam, MaxQ Research LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,364,575.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is focused on
establishing full-scale production parameters, quality control procedures,
operational testing and commercialization of cutting-edge compartmentalized
vacuum composites. The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in
cold chain shipping, storage, building insulation, automobiles, aerospace and
other advanced markets. The first application is in the cold chain shipping
industry, for packaging and storage of temperature sensitive materials. A new
generation of thin (less than 1"), light weight, highly insulated (R value
25-30), durable, and long service life boxes will meet a critical need in this
area. Temperature-sensitive products such as vaccines, blood, organs, and
diagnostic specimens are shipped using insulated containers, and the new
materials to be developed will permit longer shipping duration, higher impact
resistance, and re-usability. The cold chain shipping market includes the Red
Cross, blood banks, pharmacies, clinical trial shippers, diagnostic centers,
life science material providers and whole sale distributors. The annual United
States market potential in life sciences packaging is estimated at $291 million.
The resulting materials also have significant potential for uses in permanent
and temporary structures, and in a variety of transportation applications.

Successful completion of the Phase I work has resulted in cost-effective (an
order of magnitude lower expected cost), stronger (ten times the impact
resistance of Styrofoam), lightweight, thin (less than 1"), highly-insulating (R
16-22), compartmentalized vacuum composite materials. An exclusive machining
capability was also demonstrated, whereby vacuum composites can be cut and sized
on-site without degradation in thermal performance, an issue which affects
current vacuum insulation panels (VIPs). Optimization of the developed
composites to achieve targeted insulation rating, cost, and service life
characteristics will be conducted during Phase II. Thermal performance,
mechanical characteristics and operational performance will be evaluated for
their application in cold chain shipping and in building/structural insulation.
The team will also validate boxes fabricated using these materials in cold chain
shipping to verify safe transportation of blood products, organs, and/or
pharmaceuticals. Based on the Phase II work, it is anticipated that these
materials will be poised to replace petroleum-based foam materials and vacuum
insulation panels as a high-performance and economical solution in these
markets.