* 1456316
* OPUS-A Synthesis of Anthurium and Philodendron (Araceae) for Neotropical America
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Thomas Croat, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2019
* USD 105,135.00

The American tropical regions, the Neotropics, have high rates of plant
speciation. In some plant families such as the Araceae, the aroid or
Philodendron family, this has led to unusually high rates of species richness
and local rarity. Thus the presence of Araceae species is a major indicator of
the value of proposed conservation parks and natural reserves throughout the
tropics. This project will provide detailed taxonomic descriptions of an
estimated 2700 species of Anthurium and Philodendron, the two largest genera in
the Araceae, this constitutes about 45% of the entire family. The family is
preeminent in horticulture where the family rates first in potted plant sales
and is renowned for indoor landscaping due to the resilient growth in low light
conditions. Since plants are easily brought into cultivation and are highly
ornamental, growers all over the world will benefit from the taxonomic revision,
which includes morphological and ecological descriptions, of the Araceae. The
availability of so many species also insures that the family will remain an
important tool in teaching biology, especially owing to the many interesting and
unique features the plants exhibit such as the production of heat and a wide
array of flower types and pollination systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to synthesize in a comprehensive, systematic-phylogenetic manner
the 47 years of research at the Missouri Botanical Garden on Neotropical
Anthurium and Philodendron. The work entails includes floristic accounts of most
areas in the Neotropics, nine major revisions, 200 publications, over 2400
taxonomic novelties, and many unpublished systematic and floristic treatments.
Herbarium collections will be used to identify new and to refine existing
species definitions in Araceae. The taxonomic data for all species will be
entered into the Lucid program, a user friendly multi-entry computerized plant
identification key. The key's database will store morphological and ecological
trait information which is used to help people identify plant specimens and the
data can be used in analyses. The Lucid keys will be available online to the
plant sciences, horticultural community and the general public worldwide on at
least two websites and will enable users to make determinations of these
horticulturally important groups. This precise information coupled with images
of all species will be assembled on the website of the Missouri Botanical Garden
as a part of Tropicos, currently one of the most heavily used plant databases in
the world. At the same time floristic and revisionary accounts of most of the
Neotropical Araceae will be made available online on the Missouri Botanical
Garden's website. An important aspect of the project will be the training of 20
botanists from Latin America who are interested in Araceae and who will learn a
variety of new approaches to aroid taxonomy including how to construct Lucid
keys and other tools that will enable them to continue research with Araceae and
to be more efficient in conducting research.