* 1456017
* 13th Annual Symposium of the NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellows
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Miguel Morales, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 09/30/2015
* USD 23,584.00

This award will provide support for attendees and invited speakers for the
thirteenth annual symposium of the NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowships (AAPF) program, to be held in conjunction with the winter meeting of
the American Astronomical Society (AAS) in January, 2015, in Seattle,
Washington. The purpose of the AAPF program is to integrate research and
educational activities at the postdoctoral level to better prepare fellows for a
scientific career. The annual symposium provides a venue for fellows to discuss
their research and teaching or outreach projects while increasing their exposure
within the astronomy and astrophysics community. The symposium represents a key
component of the AAPF program and acts as a mechanism to facilitate knowledge
transfer from experiences that the fellows have obtained in the course of their
activities to a broad audience.

As with previous symposia in this series, the AAPF symposium for 2015 will
promote interactions among astronomers with very different interests and
backgrounds. By creating a forum in which discussions can occur across the
standard boundaries defined by sub-discipline, there is great opportunity for
new insights and the ability to develop new interdisciplinary collaborations.
The symposium will also provide a venue for discussing other issues that are
important to early career astronomers. In addition, the symposium will (1)
provide a forum for discussing the combination of research and teaching, (2)
facilitate collaborations between AAPF fellows on both research and education,
and (3) provide exposure for the fellows and the fellowship program within the
astronomical community.