* 1456104
* SBIR Phase II:  Manufacturing of Red Blood Cell Membrane-Coated Nanoparticles for detoxification
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Che-Ming Hu, Arytha Biosciences, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 766,717.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is enabling the large-scale manufacturing of a
red blood cell membrane coated nanoparticle platform, which was previously
demonstrated to be capable of absorbing and neutralizing a wide array of
hemolytic pathogenic factors, such as bacterial toxins, animal venoms, and auto-
reactive immunoglobulin. Comprised entirely of biocompatible and biodegradable
materials and coated by cell membranes derived from natural red blood cells, the
nanoparticles are able to circulate for an extended period of time in the
circulation. Their biomimetic exterior allows them to serve as a decoy to
scavenge virulence factors that attack cell membranes. The nanoformulation may
be applied against multiple pressing and unmet medical needs, including animal
envenoming, autoimmune hemolytic diseases, and bacterial infections. Successful
development of the manufacturing process also has broader impact in the field of
nanofabrication and nanomedicine development.

The proposed project will enable the red blood cell membrane-coated
nanoparticles to be manufactured efficiently and reliably at a large scale
toward clinical translation. To ensure that the manufactured nanoformulations
will have the optimal size, uniformity, biological activity, and performance,
advanced fluidics, filtration, microscopy, and particle tracking techniques will
be applied for precision nanoparticle preparation and characterization.
Specifically, the proposed research activity will focus on the synthesis of
uniform polymeric nanoparticles with consistent physicochemical properties,
derivation of purified and undisrupted red blood cell membranes, and reliable
cell membrane coating over the nanoparticle substrates. The resulting
nanoparticles will be thoroughly examined to iteratively improve the preparation
process. Optimized manufacturing protocol will be developed for large-scale
production of high quality nanoformulations following good manufacturing
practices (GMP). The project will facilitate the bench-to-bedside transition of
the novel biomimetic nanoparticle platform, which has significant implications
in addressing the many major diseases involving protein toxins.