* 1456232
* Filling a critical gap in the sampling of Amazonia plant diversity: Floristic inventory of the Tapajos National Forest and Amazonia National Park
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Benjamin Torke, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 10/31/2020
* USD 307,588.00

The basin of the Tapajos River in the Brazilian Amazon Rain Forest is a region
of exceptionally high biodiversity and pressing ecosystem threats, including
some of the highest deforestation rates in the Amazon. The plant communities of
the region are very poorly known, and many large areas within the basin have
been little studied by botanists. This paucity of botanical information about
the region impedes critical research on the past, present, and future of
Amazonian plant diversity. This project will compile inventories of the plants
of two protected areas in the region that are critical for the study and
management of biodiversity. The primary goal is to produce an interactive open-
access, web-based conspectus guide to the plants of the two areas. Project data
will be shared with the global research community and Brazilian governmental
agencies so that the plant resources and natural ecosystems contained within the
two areas might be more effectively studied, protected, and managed. Beyond its
basic scientific value, the project will advance scientific collaboration
between the US and Brazil by sponsoring inter-institutional research travel by
project personnel and by providing training opportunities for American and
Brazilian students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce comprehensive
inventories of the vascular plants of Tapajos National Forest and Amazonia
National Park. These will be the first such inventories for any comparably sized
areas in southeast Amazonia. The project will combine a synthesis of existing
data with intensive collecting of herbarium specimens and tissue samples for
DNA-based studies. General collecting and plot-based inventory approaches will
be implemented to maximize species recovery. Identification of specimens will
rely on traditional morphologically based approaches, as well as DNA barcoding.
The two inventories will constitute critical datasets for comparison with
previously documented Amazonian floras. Project data will be useful for testing
hypotheses about the distribution of Amazonian plant diversity and will
contribute toward efforts to model projected floristic change. It is highly
probable that the research will extend the known limits of plant distributions
and will result in the discovery of significant new taxonomic diversity. A web-
based conspectus flora will be supported by state-of-the-art informatics
technologies and will make project data and other resources broadly available
for diverse areas of research that require the accurate identification of plant
species. Project data will also be shared with a wide range of international
biodiversity data portals and related applications.