* 1456724
* Developing Theory to Understand Variation in Behavioral Responses to Human-induced Rapid Environmental Change
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2020
* Andrew Sih, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick Abbot
* 04/30/2020
* USD 505,000.00

Almost all living organisms (including humans) are now living in a world altered
by environmental change including climate change, habitat change, and exposure
to exotic species (e.g., novel predators or diseases). Some species are coping
poorly with environmental change and declining in numbers, while others are
thriving (e.g., invasive or urbanized pests). The relative ability of organisms
to respond well behaviorally to novel conditions associated with environmental
change often has critical effects on their success in the modern world. A better
understanding of variation in behavioral responses to environmental change will
be useful for enhancing the recovery of declining species, for more efficiently
controlling pest species, and for anticipating ecological problems before new
changes unfold. This project develops new theory to explain observed patterns
and generate new predictions on the variation in behavioral response to human-
induced rapid environmental change (HIREC). It thus has potential to
substantially advance our scientific understanding of one the most important
ecological issues of our time.

The project brings together a team of behavioral/evolutionary ecology modelers
to develop theory to better understand variation in behavioral responses to
environmental change. To explain both adaptive and maladaptive responses to
novel situations, the modeling team will employ novel extensions of signal
detection theory, bet hedging (generalist-specialist) theory, adaptive
plasticity theory, and theory on adaptive learning. The team will also integrate
these modeling approaches in fresh ways to generate novel insights for both
basic behavioral ecology and for understanding responses to environmental
change. Finally, the modelers will collaborate with empiricists to review
relevant empirical literature and to write conceptual overview papers on
behavioral responses to environmental change. The project offers abundant
opportunities for training a new generation of young scientists on the interface
between math and biology. The project will also include workshops that will
involve not just the team and mentees, but also dozens of other empiricists and
applied scientists. The project will create a new website that will feature: 1)
summaries of the models, predictions, and implications, with 2) advice to
empiricists on which models to apply to specific scenarios, and 3) computer code
including user-friendly models suitable for use in undergraduate courses.
Finally, the project will seek to collaboratively develop classroom modules for
potential implementation as part of Next Generation Science Standards that have
been adopted in much of the United States.