* 1456070
* SBIR Phase II:  Preventing surgical wound infections following high-risk abdominal surgery
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Jonathan Coe, Prescient Surgical
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,390,216.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project aligns with a major shift in healthcare to
reduce hospital acquired infections. At a cost of over $1.5B and 600,000 extra
hospital days in the US alone, surgical wound infection in high-risk abdominal
surgery patients is a major healthcare burden. In addition, providers and
hospitals face greater scrutiny of their wound infection rates today, and the
sweeping changes of healthcare reform have incentivized these critical
stakeholders to invest in preventative solutions. However, currently available
solutions are insufficient, and existing surgical device companies have not
developed a compelling pipeline of products to address this unmet need. The
proposed technology enjoys a competitive advantage in that it operates in a
relatively open competitive landscape, and its unique mechanism of action
provides a comprehensive wound protection strategy. Thus, this technology has
the potential to make a significant worldwide impact on wound infection, both
from a healthcare quality and commercialization standpoint. The initial market
for this technology is in colorectal surgery, with ample expansion opportunities
into other abdominal surgical markets totaling over $1
billion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to develop
and commercialize a novel technology designed to prevent one of the most
frequent, morbid, and costly hospital-acquired infections: surgical wound
infection. The technology is an innovative surgical tool that provides a
comprehensive anti-contamination strategy for the wound that is also user-
friendly for the surgeon. This device has the potential to be a transformative
innovation in the quality of surgical care, particularly in the 3.5 million
patients undergoing high-risk abdominal-gastrointestinal (GI) surgery in whom
wound infections are the most common. The technology also allows surgeons to
experiment with a variety of approaches to identify ?best practices? for
intraoperative wound care. This Phase II project proposes three main objectives.
First, the company will refine the scientific understanding of the local and
systemic therapeutic of the anti-contamination therapy through numerical
modeling and pre-clinical testing in a porcine model in order to provide
clinical use recommendations. Second, the company will design and develop a
product sized for laparoscopic surgeries in order to support a broad-based
commercialization effort. Third, the company with develop scaled manufacturing
capability to support commercial release of the CleanCision product platform.