* 1456204
* SBIR Phase II:  Cost Competitive High Temperature Film Capacitors with Three-Phase Nanocomposites
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Nanyan Zhang, PolyK Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2017
* USD 659,559.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project would be commercialization of a new high temperature
energy storage technology that can enable the broad adoption of advanced high-
efficient power management systems in renewable energy sections. This project
will develop cost-competitive advanced electrostatic capacitors that are
critical components in many pulsed power and power electronics. These advanced
capacitors will be able to minimize the capacitor size, weight and reduce the
material and maintenance cost of power inverters in hybrid and plug-in electric
vehicles, smart grid, oil/gas/geothermal down-hole drilling and exploration,
wind turbine generators, grid-tied photovoltaic, and many other energy and
military systems. The success of this project will facilitate the broad adoption
of advanced energy efficient switch technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical objectives of this Phase II research project are to develop and
commercialize advanced film capacitors with high energy density, high power
density, and high thermal stability. Current dc bus capacitors in many medium
and high power systems are dominated by polypropylene (PP) film capacitors which
were developed more than 60 years ago and they have low thermal stability. This
project will develop prototype capacitors using proprietary three-component
nanodielectric compositions combining high thermal stability, high dielectric
constant, low dielectric loss, as well as low cost. The success of this project
is built upon our integrated and interdisciplinary approach that combines
integrated computational material engineering (ICME/EDV), nanodielectric
material with balanced thermal, electrical, and mechanical performance,
inexpensive film production, and advanced capacitor design.