* 1456341
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Tissue Engineered Trachea
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Jed Johnson, Nanofiber Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2017
* USD 690,634.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is focused on developing a customizable tissue
engineered tracheal implant for tracheal transplantation and reconstruction
surgery. Current surgical solutions for these patients are limited by problems
with the availability of suitable cadaveric tissue, as well as with
unsatisfactory long-term survival of the engrafted tissues due to issues with
both revascularization and immune rejection. The combination of an inert
biomaterial scaffold and autologous cells avoids any concerns with graft
rejection, while allowing for the reliable production of tracheal grafts.
Nanofiber Solutions expects this new device will enable as many as 6,500 life-
saving procedures annually. A successful Phase 2 project will demonstrate long-
term performance of the nanofiber tracheal implant and the mechanisms of action
in a large animal model as well as a humanitarian device exemption (HDE)
application with the FDA to initiate a clinical trial. This trachea implant
product addresses a $600 million dollar opportunity. Other tissue engineered
products based on this technology platform address billions of dollars more in
market opportunity.

The proposed project is focused on developing a customizable tissue engineered
tracheal implant for tracheal transplantation and reconstruction surgery. The
trachea has challenging mechanical and biological requirements, and despite many
attempts there currently is no fully functional artificial trachea. The fully
synthetic tracheal scaffold is seeded with autologous stem cells harvested from
the patient?s bone marrow. To prepare for an FDA submission and initial human
clinical trials, we will accomplish three technical objectives in this Phase II
work: 1) Optimize the use of a closed system, disposable seeding chamber to
allow uniform cell seeding throughout the scaffold, 2) Develop a commercial
manufacturing process for the production and placement of support ribs on the
tracheal graft, and 3) Elucidate mechanisms of tracheal regeneration in vivo of
intraoperatively seeded tracheal implants.