* 1456778
* The Genetic Architecture of Maternal Supression of Symbionts
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Seth Bordenstein, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 04/30/2020
* USD 957,522.00

At the turn of the 20th century, biologists asserted that babies develop within
a sterile womb and acquire their initial bacteria from the environment. While
this paradigm is under preliminary reconsideration today in light of new
technologies and analyses, comparative studies of animals have long held that
maternal provisioning of bacteria to offspring is widespread, spanning the base
of the animal kingdom to vertebrates. Moreover, such bacteria are not simply
innocuous passengers. They impart vital consequences to animal health and
disease, and they have their own microbial interests, namely their propagation
from mother to the next generation. In this context, there is a biological
conundrum between host and maternally transmitted bacteria. High loads of
bacteria can lead to pathogenesis in the animal offspring while low
concentrations can lead to loss of the bacteria. Balancing these opposing
outcomes in the middle is one possible way to reconcile the extremes. Thus, the
critical biological question is how are the concentrations of maternally
transmitted bacteria regulated? Using a preeminent animal-microbe model, the
investigators will genetically test the hypotheses that (i) animal hosts express
multiple (rather than single) genes to control the concentrations of maternally
transmitted bacteria (ii) when these genes are disrupted from their normal
functions, the bacterial densities transmitted to the offspring will increase
and (iii) these genes control the bacteria by preventing them from entering the
developing offspring and repressing their replication. This project will be the
first study to deploy a unique genetic analysis that characterizes the animal
genes that keep bacterial densities in check. The Principal Investigator will
direct a one-week workshop for pre-service teachers (college students working
towards a degree in education) based on the premise that the earlier that
teachers participate in "discovery science", the more likely they will feel
comfortable using it in the classrooms. The researchers will also partner with
the School for Science and Math at Vanderbilt to develop a Community Engaged
Research Project in which Nashville high school students transfer experiential
learning from the research lab back to their classrooms to engage in the process
of cooperative and peer-to-peer learning for science- and technology-related
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of animal species harbor
maternally-transmitted bacteria, yet little is known about the genetic and
molecular mechanisms that the animal and bacteria use to achieve maternal
transmission. For symbionts transmitted via the germ-line, bacterial density can
critically influence transmission efficiency and penetrance of symbiotic traits
induced by the symbiont. This research begins the first forward-genetic
investigation of host genes that regulate densities of Wolbachia pipientis. The
genus Wolbachia is a model endosymbiont because it occurs in more animal species
than any other bacterium on the planet, and it can range from a beneficial
symbiont in filarial nematodes, a parasitic manipulator of arthropod
reproduction, to the main inflammatory agent of human filarial diseases.
However, despite infection's prevalence, few host-Wolbachia interactions have
been identified that control their densities. As a model host with genetic
tools, the Nasonia parasitoid wasp genus is comprised of several closely related
species that harbor unique strains of maternally-transmitted Wolbachia in their
reproductive tissues. Transfer of these Wolbachia strains between the
interfertile Nasonia species can result in dramatic changes in infection titers
and tissue tropism. Specifically, the wVitA strain maintains a low infection
density in its natural host, Nasonia vitripennis, but has a wider tissue tropism
and stable infection density 100-fold higher in the naive host, Nasonia
giraulti. Quantitative trait loci analyses specify that the regulation of the
low wVitA density maps to three N. vitripennis chromosomal regions. This host
regulation acts dominantly through a maternal effect - the mother determines the
densities of her offspring. Thus, the central hypothesis of this research
project is that multiple genes involved in host innate immunity and/or oogenesis
act maternally to regulate Wolbachia densities in offspring. The goal of this
project is to utilize an unprecedented interspecific difference in Wolbachia
titers to identify the numbers and types of host genes that regulate Wolbachia
densities, their additive and epistatic interactions, and their effects on
Wolbachia localization and proliferation during oogenesis.