* 1456207
* SBIR Phase II:  Multilayer Ceramic Electrolyte Membrane (ML-CEM) for a sodium metal-chloride electrochemical cell
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Monika Jansohn, Na4B, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/28/2017
* USD 749,290.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project will be to stabilize and support a more robust and
diverse power grid. The goal is to countervail today's stress on the grid,
caused by rapidly growing electric power demand and the integration of renewable
power sources. In this project, a distributed energy storage system will be
developed that is robust, scalable, deployable, and price competitive. The
storage system will help to improve the power quality, avoid widespread power
outages, integrate renewable energy, and improve the utilization of existing
grid assets. This storage system will allow utilities and system operators to
reduce investments into the existing grid while simultaneously improving the
service for their customers. The grid-scaled distributed energy storage market
is an emerging market that is projected to growly rapidly in the coming years
according to numerous studies. Among all the different storage technologies,
batteries have the scalability, calendar life, cycle life, response time and low
maintenance costs most suitable to the needs of distributed, power-grid-
integrated energy storage.

The technical objectives of this Phase II research project are to produce a
significantly improved version of the existing sodium metal chloride battery and
demonstrate a 4 kWh battery system. Sodium batteries were identified by Sandia
National Laboratory as providing the highest technical and economic development
potential for grid-scaled distributed energy storage. The main barriers to their
wide-spread implementation are their considerably high production cost, their
high operating temperature, and their long charge/discharge time. Na4B has
developed a new electrolyte to vastly improve the ion transport and to overcome
the technical limitations inherent in the existing technology. The electrolyte
design, developed in this project, shows superior ion conductivity and is a
basis for a prismatic sodium metal chloride electrochemical cell. These
achievements allow for the production of a new generation of sodium batteries
with greatly improved performance, at a much lower cost.