* 1456352
* SBIR Phase II:  4D scanner for image guided interventions
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2020
* Cristian Atria, nView medical Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,615,512.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the significant
improvement of&lt;br/&gt;surgical accuracy, which will dramatically reduce
surgical errors, improve outcomes and&lt;br/&gt;reduce healthcare costs. In
spine surgery alone, there are more than 500,000&lt;br/&gt;procedures every year
in the US utilizing implants such as screws. In 4% to 11% of&lt;br/&gt;these
surgeries, the implant placement is inaccurate. For the patient this translates
into&lt;br/&gt;longer recoveries - from days to weeks - and in many cases into a
second revision&lt;br/&gt;surgery. The patient is non-productive, unable to
carry out their daily routines for weeks,&lt;br/&gt;while the healthcare system
has to absorb the costs of the longer recovery as well as&lt;br/&gt;the revision
surgeries. For both the healthcare and economic systems these
are&lt;br/&gt;avoidable costs. The medical imaging technology being developed in
this project has&lt;br/&gt;the potential to eliminate surgical inaccuracies
across the $2.4B market of image&lt;br/&gt;guidance, improving clinical
applications that range from orthopedic surgery to minimally&lt;br/&gt;invasive
vascular interventions, to cancer diagnosis and
treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 2 project will demonstrate a&lt;br/&gt;novel imaging modality, which
provides near-real-time 3D live imaging - 4D - during&lt;br/&gt;surgery. This
novel system will provide surgical imaging at a lower x-ray dose
than&lt;br/&gt;fluoroscopy (current standard), with a geometry that allows
concurrent imaging with&lt;br/&gt;surgery. This 4D technology has the potential
to significantly reduce surgical&lt;br/&gt;inaccuracies, improve outcomes and
reduce costs. Phase 1 successfully demonstrated&lt;br/&gt;the feasibility of the
reconstruction algorithm used by the proposed imaging modality
by&lt;br/&gt;showing its potential of higher surgical accuracy in a single
spinal screw insertion. This&lt;br/&gt;Phase 2 project will I) prove the
robustness of the reconstruction algorithm across a&lt;br/&gt;variety of use-
cases, II) demonstrate the clinical usability of the 4D scanner, and
III)&lt;br/&gt;confirm the clinical utility of the scanner. The clinical
usability will be studied with an&lt;br/&gt;ergonomic model in a surgical
setting. The clinical utility will be proven by building a&lt;br/&gt;system
prototype and performing image quality and x-ray dose comparisons
versus&lt;br/&gt;fluoroscopy and 3D in a realistic surgical setting. Preliminary
results show that these&lt;br/&gt;objectives are achievable. This research is
readying the technology for clinical research,&lt;br/&gt;regulatory clearance
and commercialization.