* 1456361
* Mechanisms of Selenate-Specific Transport and Selenium Hyperaccumulation and Tolerance in Stanleya pinnata - Hypothesized Key Genes SpSultr1;2 and SpAPS2
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2020
* Elizabeth Pilon-Smits, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2020
* USD 539,858.00

Some plants have the fascinating property that they hyperaccumulate a particular
toxic element to levels that are 100-1000 fold higher than surrounding
vegetation. Prince's plume (Stanleya pinnata), from the mustard family, is such
a plant. This native to the Western USA can hyperaccumulate selenium up to 0.5%
of its dry weight. Selenium is a micronutrient for many life forms including
humans, but toxic at high levels. It is very similar to sulfur, and most life
forms cannot discriminate between the two elements. This hyperaccumulator,
however, has the unique capacity to distinguish selenium from sulfur, and
preferentially accumulates selenate. Hyperaccumulators also distinguish
themselves by accumulating organic forms of selenium (in amino acids for
example) where non-hyperaccumulator relatives accumulate inorganic selenium.
This capacity likely explains their selenium tolerance. Questions addressed in
this project are: Has S. pinnata evolved a selenate-specific transporter? That
would be a first for any organism. In what ways is such a transporter different
that would provide insights about its evolution? And which genes underlie the
capacity to produce organic selenium? Based on experiments so far, a candidate
selenate transporter has been identified, as well as a possible key gene for the
accumulation of organic selenium. This and other genes will be investigated in
this project by expressing them in both yeast and in the model plant species
Arabidopsis: a nonaccumulator from the mustard family. The results from this
project are expected to provide better insight into mechanisms of selenium
hyperaccumulation: selenate/sulfate discrimination as well as enhanced selenium
uptake, assimilation and tolerance. Also, the genes from the hyperaccumulator
may be used to breed plants with superior capacity to clean up selenium-polluted
land or water (phytoremediation) and that can also serve as selenium-fortified
crops with higher nutritional value. From a broader perspective, this project
may serve as an evolutionary model to study plant adaptation to extreme soil
conditions, and as a biochemical model to study mechanisms by which specificity
of transporters and enzymes is controlled. These mechanisms are at the basis of
metabolism and membrane transport.

In a transcriptome sequencing study using selenium (Se) hyperaccumulator
Stanleya pinnata and non-accumulator Stanleya elata, two genes stood out because
their transcript levels were much higher in the hyperaccumulator: a high
affinity sulfate/selenate transporter homologous to Arabidopsis thaliana
Sultr1;2 (44x higher) and an ATP sulfurylase homologous to AtAPS2, a key enzyme
of sulfur/selenium assimilation (479x higher). These findings led to the
hypotheses that (I) S. pinnata (Sp) Sultr1;2 is responsible for selenium
hyperaccumulation and selenate-specific uptake in S. pinnata, and (II) SpAPS2 is
key to the selenate assimilation into organic forms, and thus Se tolerance. The
research objectives of this project are: (1) To determine whether the elevated
expression levels of SpSultr1;2 and SpAPS2 are associated with elevated uptake
rates of selenate and/or sulfate and elevated levels of ATP sulfurylase
activity; (2) To analyze the intracellular location of the SpSULTR1;2 and SpAPS2
proteins, as well as their tissue-specific expression patterns; (3) To
functionally analyze the sulfate and selenate transport properties of the S.
pinnata and S. elata SULTR1;2 transporters in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae);
(4) To determine the physiological effects of expression of S. pinnata and S.
elata Sultr1;2 and APS2 in Arabidopsis thaliana. Parameters that will be
measured include uptake kinetics of selenate and sulfate (alone and in
combination), concentration, forms and locations of selenium accumulated (using
ICP-OES, LC-MS, XAS), and selenium tolerance. In yeast, structure-function
studies will also be carried out, to study the importance of selected aminoacids
for selenate specificity.