* 1456730
* Linking ecological variation to parasite transmission via host movement, behavior and social networks
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Andrew Sih, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2020
* USD 780,058.00

Social interactions, social networks, and individual behavior are highly likely
to influence infectious disease spread in humans and other social organisms, but
the extent to which disease transmission is affected by these factors remains
poorly known. This project capitalizes on a readily manipulated host-parasite
interaction to elucidate these effects and therefore has significant societal
benefits. The recent outbreak of Ebola and the continued emergence of new
infectious diseases underscore the importance of understanding how disease
transmission is affected by behavior and social networks. Established contacts
with diverse agencies and non-governmental organizations will allow the
investigators to share their results to inform the fields of both human and
wildlife health. A series of national and international workshops will allow the
investigators to disseminate their novel experimental and modeling methods. A
code-free, graphical simulation platform is under development that will allow
students at all levels to investigate how individual behavior, movement,
interspecific interactions, and resource availability affect disease spread.
This platform will be taught to individuals with no computer coding experience
through workshops, and simpler versions of this platform will be developed for
use in secondary school classes. Postdoctoral researchers, graduate students,
and undergraduate students will be trained in rigorous field and modeling
research, with clear plans to recruit students from under-served groups. The
research leverages a strong international collaboration between US and
Australian researchers, and is jointly supported by NSF's International Science
and Engineering Office.

The project takes advantage of a well-studied lizard-tick system to examine how
spatial and temporal variation in the ecological and social environments
interact with individual differences in host behavioral type to influence
individual host movements, host social networks and parasite transmission. While
these conceptual links are individually simplistic, each link and their
interactions present complexities that require new experimental and modeling
approaches. Field research will use habitat surveys to quantify the location of
lizard resources and refuges and will track all lizards in a study site to
document their movements, space-use, social interactions, and their behavioral
tendencies. Sampling will also quantify the number of ticks carried by each
lizard. These studies will be complemented by a unique experiment that adds
genetically distinct ticks to free-ranging lizards. The experiment will quantify
individual differences among lizard hosts in parasite resistance, the relative
ability of individuals with different behavioral tendencies to serve as conduits
for spreading experimentally-released parasites, and the extent to which
increased parasite loads alter host behavior, movement patterns and social
interactions. Empirical results will be integrated in Bayesian statistical
models and individual-based simulation models to test the role of behavioral
mechanisms in explaining parasite loads and transmission. The models will then
be used to examine how environmental changes such as shifts in land use regimes
or climate alterations will influence host-parasite dynamics.