* 1456978
* Collaborative Research: Algal photosynthetic priming and photolysis as stimulators of ecosystem-level detrital processing by microbial heterotrophs
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Steven Francoeur, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2019
* USD 111,594.00

Freshwater wetlands provide many valuable ecosystem services, including the
provision of food and habitat for wildlife, improvement of water quality, flood
protection, and defense of lake shorelines from erosion. These attributes make
wetlands a significant environmental, recreational, and economic resource for
our nation. In freshwater wetlands, tall plants emerging from the water, such as
cattails, often account for a large fraction of the plant matter produced. These
plants exhibit prolific rates of growth and absorb large amounts of nutrient
contaminants, improving water quality in the process. Most of this plant matter
is not directly consumed by animals, but instead dies and is decomposed by
microorganisms (bacteria and fungi). During decomposition, nutrients trapped
within plant tissues may be released via the activity of bacterial and fungal
decomposers. Bacteria and fungi growing on decaying plants also serve as a key
food resource for many invertebrate animals, and form a link in the flow of
energy and nutrients up the food chain (to fish and waterfowl, for example) in
wetland habitats. As a consequence, the productivity, nutrient uptake, and
decomposition of emergent plants will profoundly affect nearly all aspects of
wetland function. This research project will measure the importance of bacteria
and fungi in wetland plant decay, and investigate how their potential
interactions with algae affect rates of plant matter decomposition and nutrient
cycling. Microorganisms are key players in the circulation of nutrients on
Earth. This circulation, often referred to as biogeochemical cycling, includes
all of the biological, geological and chemical factors that are involved.
Understanding the ecology of microorganisms is essential for us to meet the
major challenges facing human society, such as conservation and management of
natural ecosystems and mitigation of climate change. In addition to training a
postdoctoral scholar, this research will train undergraduate and graduate
students through a collaborative, multifaceted effort to understand a key
ecosystem process, decomposition. Through these efforts researchers will also
participate in a series of existing university programs and coordinated outreach
activities aimed at recruiting underrepresented groups into the sciences and
strengthening science education at the elementary through university levels.

The overarching goal of this project is to understand the nature of metabolic
interactions among algae, bacteria, and fungi in decomposing plant litter, and
to quantify how these interactions influence plant litter decomposition and
carbon cycling in wetlands. Photolysis of dissolved and particulate organic
matter is widely accepted as an important abiotic decomposition process in
aquatic ecosystems. In contrast, enhanced decomposition via algal stimulation of
litter-associated heterotrophic microbes has only recently been considered.
Prior research by this team has documented rapid metabolic responses of
heterotrophic microbes to algal photosynthesis in natural decaying plant litter,
thus establishing the potential for algal "priming effects" on microbial-
mediated litter decomposition, yet, the relative importance of algal priming and
photolysis in facilitating litter decomposition in aquatic ecosystems remains
unknown. This project will involve a series of field and laboratory experiments
in marsh ecosystems, investigating three key questions centered on
photostimulation of litter decomposition: 1) What is the relative importance of
algal photosynthetic priming vs. photolysis in facilitating microbial-mediated
organic matter decomposition? 2) What is the influence of photolysis and
autotroph-heterotroph interactions on ecosystem-scale carbon cycling" 3) What
are the mechanisms mediating autotroph-heterotroph interactions in decaying
plant litter?