* 1456004
* Integration of Salient Multimodal Social Signals and Internal Physiological State
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Karen Maruska, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Colin Saldanha
* 07/31/2021
* USD 405,745.00

Animals perceive their surroundings through many senses simultaneously, which
allows them to make appropriate behavioral decisions in different contexts. Most
previous research on the link between sensory perception and behavior
expression, however, has focused solely on individual sensory systems. This
project, performed at Louisiana State University, uses an integrative approach
at multiple levels of biological organization to further our understanding of
how the brain processes multimodal (visual and acoustic) sensory information,
and how it links this perception to behavioral outputs in reproductive contexts.
Experiments will be performed in an African cichlid fish, in which brightly-
colored dominant males perform visually-conspicuous courtship displays combined
with sounds to attract females for spawning. How this multimodal information is
used by receptive females remains unexplored. Results of this work will advance
our current understanding of the function and evolution of multimodal signaling
and perception that is crucial for all species survival and persistence in a
changing world. This project will also provide research and training
opportunities for women and underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students
in an EPSCoR jurisdiction, science web-resources for the public and other
research scientists, and curriculum development for undergraduate courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to identify and characterize
the neural substrates mediating reproductive behavioral decisions based on
reception of salient multimodal signals. Capitalizing on previous sensory
research in an established African cichlid fish model, Astatotilapia burtoni,
this work combines behavioral, cellular, and molecular analyses to advance our
understanding of how multimodal (visual and acoustic) signals are represented in
the brain of a receiver. Further, it will examine how perception of this salient
information is influenced by an animal's reproductive state. Immediate early
gene expression will be used as a proxy for neural activation to determine where
in the female brain multimodal signals from courting males are processed, and to
test whether female reproductive state influences neural activation patterns.
Complementary experiments will determine the role of the subpallial forebrain as
an integration center for socially-salient multimodal signals and reproductive
state. This work combines in vivo electrophysiology and gene expression analyses
to test the hypothesis that the ventral telencephalon plays a role in visual-
acoustic processing during courtship. Analysis of multimodal responses using
these two different techniques in the same brain regions will generate novel
measures of both transcriptional and physiological activation to the same
contextual information. Results of this work will transform previously outlined
behavioral classification schemes of multimodal communication theory and will be
used as a framework to advance the field, while simultaneously providing
outreach and training opportunities for students from K-12 through college.