* 1456314
* International Council for Exploration of the Sea:   Travel Support for Academic Participants, 2014-2017
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Andrew Solow, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 10/31/2018
* USD 331,667.00

It is important for the United States (U.S.) to maintain a leadership role in
marine science, in accord with the Presidential Executive Order on ocean
stewardship, the U.S. government?s Ocean Research Priorities Plan, and the goals
of the U.S. Commission on Ocean Policy. in International Council for the
Exploration of the Sea (ICES)is strongly engaged in research related to climate
change, biodiversity, and assessment of ocean resources and is building its
portfolio in the human dimensions of marine research and management. The new
strategic plan of ICES emphasizes science for sustainability, and its five
Steering Groups focus on science to support ecosystem-based management,
providing many opportunities for U.S. scientists to engage in collaborative
international research. New initiatives directed to research in regional seas
(e.g., the northwest Atlantic off the U.S and Canadian coasts), in the Arctic,
and for sustainable aquaculture are examples of the new opportunities. NSF
funding will insure that U.S. academic science can exercise both leadership
potential in ICES and the ability to recruit young scientists into ICES
activities. Funds also will help to insure that the academic community is well
represented, balancing the strong input of U.S. governmental science, primarily
through NOAA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support is provided for U.S. academic
scientists to participate ICES activities. ICES is the leading intergovernmental
organization conducting and coordinating marine science in the North Atlantic
region. The recently evolved structure of ICES, with its emphasis on science to
support sustainable, ecosystem-based management, and its continued reliance on
the historical twin pillars of scientific inquiry and scientific advice, will
assure that ICES remains at the forefront of marine science. Scientists from the
United States of America (one of 20 signatory nations) have traditionally taken
leadership roles in ICES science initiatives, which have in turn invigorated
scientific inquiry in the USA. This proposal supports travel by U.S. academic
scientists to promote participation in the ICES Annual Science Conference, its
Working Groups and Workshops, Symposia, Theme Sessions, and Training Programs.
Funds will be provided to worthy applicants, especially young and early-career
scientists. The recent restructuring of ICES and its increased emphasis on
science in the western Atlantic Ocean, climate science, Arctic research, and
science to support ecosystem-based management have further increased the value
of ICES to U.S. marine science interests.