* 1456376
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultrasonic 3D Rangefinding for Mobile Gesture Recognition
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Richard Przybyla, Chirp Microsystems
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,470,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes the
development of an ultralow-power ultrasonic three-dimensional (3D) rangefinder
system for mobile gesture recognition. The proposed 3D rangefinder uses an array
of tiny piezoelectric ultrasound transducers which are built on a silicon wafer
using microfabrication techniques. Custom electronics are used to control the
transducers and the system emits sound into the air and receives echoes from
objects in front of the transducer array. The proposed ultrasonic 3D rangefinder
has the potential to be small and low-power enough to be left on continuously,
giving devices such as smartphones, tablets, and wearable electronic devices a
way to sense physical objects in the surrounding environment. Based on the
smartphone market alone, the potential market size for this device is over one
billion units per year. Mobile contextual awareness will enable 3D interaction
with smartphones and tablets, facilitating rich user interfaces for applications
such as gaming and hands-free control in automobiles. Looking beyond the
smartphone and tablet market, the proposed rangefinder will feature size and
power advantages that will permit integration into centimeter-sized devices
which are too small to support a touchscreen.

During Phase II, the major technical goals of this project are to transfer the
ultrasound transducer manufacturing from a university laboratory to a commercial
production facility, to develop a custom integrated circuit for signal
processing, and to develop engineering prototypes. In Phase I, micromachined
ultrasound transducers having a novel structure designed to improve
manufacturability were developed and a demonstration prototype was built using
signal processing algorithms running on a personal computer. In Phase II, the
ultrasound transducers will be manufactured in a commercial facility for the
first time and signal processing algorithms will be realized on a custom mixed-
signal integrated circuit. A prototype package for the transducer and integrated
circuit chips will be developed and detailed acoustic testing of the packaged
prototypes will be conducted.