* 1456988
* Diurnal and Circadian Regulation of Protein Synthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Albrecht von Arnim, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 03/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Protein synthesis is a fundamental activity of all cells and organisms, which
consumes a substantial fraction of energy and metabolites. The growth of plants,
in particular, is usually limited by the supply of nitrogen, and hence boosted
by nitrogen fertilization. Most of the nitrogen needed by plants is needed for
protein synthesis. The energy for protein synthesis is ultimately provided by
sunlight, which is only available during the day. For these reasons, it is
important to understand how protein synthesis is regulated over the day night
cycle. This project will investigate how light stimuli and the internal
circadian clock of the plant work together to ensure that the appropriate
proteins are produced both during the day and at night. The project will also
elaborate the cellular signal response mechanisms that allow plants to sense
nutrient signals and regulate translation over the diurnal cycle. This work, to
be performed in the reference species thale cress, will have implications for
plant growth and development, and thus agricultural productivity, as well as the
adaptation of plants to their natural environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to decipher how the alternation of day and night regulates protein
synthesis (translation). Recent genome-wide studies from this and other
laboratories have revealed that the translation of mRNA into protein is
controlled jointly by the circadian clock and by light-dark transitions. The
stage is now set to tackle two major scientific questions. First, how are
environmental changes in the light-energy landscape integrated with the
circadian clock to drive cycles of translation? This objective will be pursued
by manipulating the light and nutrient environment in the context of the time of
day and seasonal cues and by measuring the efficiency of mRNA ribosome loading.
Mutant strains with defects in the clock and in light and nutrient sensing will
be examined for alterations in the patterns of ribosome loading using gene-
specific and genome-wide assays. Second, how do conserved eukaryotic regulatory
pathways affect this form of translational control? Existing data have
implicated the TOR kinase and GCN2 kinase pathways in translational control, but
the precise contribution of these cellular signaling pathways to protein
synthesis remain to be defined. Using genomics, molecular genetics, and
computational systems-biology approaches, this research will enlighten the
fundamental basis of an important constraint to plant growth, the regulation of
protein synthesis by nutrient supply in a diurnal environment. This research
will also develop the scientific workforce in an area of critical need. Among
other training activities, the project will recruit middle or high school
teachers from East Tennessee to create lesson plans and curricular materials
that will familiarize underserved students with norms of science such as model-
based inquiry and computational thinking.