* 1456844
* Deciphering the Physiological Interaction between the Mosquito Immune and Circulatory Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Julian Hillyer, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 543,999.00

Mosquitoes fight infection by mounting powerful immune responses that are
mediated by cells called hemocytes. Within the body cavity, or hemocoel,
hemocytes either circulate with the hemolymph (insect blood) or exist as sessile
cells (attached to tissues). Earlier experiments revealed that during the course
of an infection, pathogens accumulate on the surface of the heart of adult
mosquitoes. Examination of the pericardium then showed that a small population
of sessile hemocytes exists in the regions that flank the valves of the heart
(the periostial regions), and that these hemocytes readily phagocytose
pathogens. Infection induces the recruitment of additional hemocytes to the
periostial regions, and these hemocytes rapidly kill pathogens via phagocytosis,
melanization and lysis. Currently there is a paucity of data on the effect of
hemolymph circulation on immune responses, and on the role sessile hemocytes
play in controlling infection. Thus, significant gaps exist in understanding the
spatial and temporal dynamics of pathogen resistance in the insect hemocoel.
This research will explore the biology of a newly discovered immune tissue in
mosquitoes (periostial hemocytes) that fundamentally relies on the mechanics of
the heart for pathogen killing. More specifically, this project will investigate
the molecular, spatial, and temporal bases of infection-induced hemocyte
aggregation on the surface of the insect heart. The project will yield critical
insight into the anti-pathogen responses of insects, and will integrate this
information into a broad conceptual framework on insect immunity, physiology,
and development. Furthermore, this research will be carried out in mosquitoes, a
socially and ecologically important insect group because of their role as pests
and pathogen transmitters. Thus, data arising from this project could contribute
to the development of novel pest and disease control strategies. In addition,
the principal investigator will partner with Gower Elementary School
(Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools) to introduce elementary school students
to insect biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has four primary objectives
that collectively aim to decipher the physiological interaction between the
mosquito immune and circulatory systems. Objective 1 will employ molecular and
imaging methodologies to determine the pathways that drive the infection-induced
migration of hemocytes to the surface of the heart. Objective 2 will rely on
molecular and biochemical approaches to test whether during the course of an
infection hemocyte-produced factors such as nitric oxide modulate cardiac
physiology. Objective 3 will determine whether the interaction between the
immune and circulatory systems is conserved during mosquito development.
Specifically, because the general body plan as well as the flow of hemolymph are
markedly different in the adult and larval life stages, objective 3 will employ
organismal and imaging approaches to assess whether the immune and circulatory
systems of larvae also interact during the course of an infection. If they do,
the nature of that interaction will be defined. Finally, objective 4 will assess
whether periostial hemocyte aggregation is a general feature by quantitatively
measuring the occurrence of this response in a wide variety of insect species.
It is expected that this research will uncover fundamental physiological
interactions between the immune system and the circulatory system of insects.