* 1456279
* SBIR Phase II:  Enzyme-based Magnetic Catalysts for Active Pharmaceutical Intermediates (APIs) Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Stephane Corgie, ZYMtronix Catalytic Systems Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,087,654.00

The broader commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation Research
Phase II project is the commercial development of novel materials and processes
for the immobilization of enzymes. The project is targeting enzymes as catalysts
to be used in the manufacturing of active pharmaceutical intermediates (API).
The use of enzyme for the production of pharmaceuticals has the potential to
reduce cost, complexity and improve efficiency in making these products. The
green, cost-efficient and scalable oxidative immobilized enzymes will benefit
manufacturers by improving their production efficiencies and economics as well
as minimizing adverse environmental impact. The technology could make benign
oxidative enzymes commercially competitive replacing expensive precious metal
catalysts, toxic, or other hazardous chemicals used in the production processes
for APIs. The industrial applications for this technology could be broad well
beyond the pharmaceutical arena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives
of this Phase II research project are to (1) develop oxidative enzyme constructs
and biocatalytic schemes for the production of high-value commercial active
pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), (2) develop and produce magnetic macroporous
scaffolds, and (3) improve operation of commercial reactors for continuous flow
manufacturing or retrofit existing production processes using these magnetic
catalysts with immobilized enzymes. This project enables immobilization to
become a part of the selection process: enzymes can be selected for their true
potential in their immobilized form by engineering enzyme immobilization with
three levels of innovation: entrap commercially-available or third-party
engineered enzymes into magnetic nanoclusters; create high-surface area
scaffolds that stabilize the magnetic nanocluster assemblies, providing cost and
process advantages of maintaining the nanocluster assemblies in suspension
magnetically. This project is focusing on a high-potential, well-described and
commercially available enzyme from the oxidoreductase family that will be used
the synthesis of drug intermediates by enzyme-producers and enzyme-end users in
the pharmaceutical sector.