* 1456571
* The Role of Diagnostic vs. Non-Diagnostic Facial Features in Eyewitness Identification
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2015,01/31/2018
* John Wixted, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 184,963.00

The problem of innocent suspects being mistakenly convicted of a crime they did
not commit and the parallel problem of guilty suspects being mistakenly released
into society are attributable in no small part to the fallibility of eyewitness
memory. A great deal of eyewitness memory research has focused on reducing false
identifications of innocent suspects (thereby reducing the chances that they
will be wrongly convicted). However, methods that reduce that unfortunate error
often have the effect of increasing the complementary error, namely, the error
of failing to identify guilty suspects. That tradeoff might be considered
acceptable, but a better approach would involve reducing both errors
simultaneously. To date, very little research has been conducted with that goal
in mind, but it is the goal of the research proposed here. In particular, this
research asks what can be done to enhance eyewitness discriminability (i.e., the
ability to tell the difference between innocent and guilty suspects). To answer
this question, the research is guided by a new theory of eyewitness
identification: the diagnostic feature-detection hypothesis. Enhancing the
discriminability of eyewitness memory procedures has significant broader impacts
because it would decrease misidentifications of the innocent while at the same
time increasing identifications of the guilty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will focus on three widely used eyewitness identification procedures: the
traditional simultaneous lineup (in which 6 faces are shown to the witness
simultaneously), the newer sequential lineup (in which the 6 faces are shown to
the witness one at a time), and the showup procedure (in which only one face is
shown to a witness for a yes/no decision). Virtually all police departments make
use of the showup procedure (because it is often the only possibility in a fast-
moving investigation), and nearly 30% of police departments have switched from
the simultaneous lineup procedure to the sequential procedure. However, contrary
to what was previously believed, recent work has found that both the showup and
the sequential lineup are inferior to the simultaneous procedure (i.e., the
simultaneous procedure can reduce false identifications of innocent suspects
while at the same time increasing correct identifications of guilty suspects
compared to the other two procedure). Given the common and likely continued use
of the showup procedure and sequential lineup, this research proposes a series
of experiments to investigate simple and convenient ways to enhance the
diagnostic accuracy of these eyewitness identification procedures.