* 1456555
* Linking Cell Shape and Asymmetric Division in Ciona Notochord Tapering
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2020
* Michael Veeman, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 04/30/2020
* USD 675,000.00

Cell, organ, and body shapes vary in the context of natural selection.
Identification of the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying these
differences is important for understanding how changes in the shapes of cells
affect the emergence of new shapes in organisms and their component parts. Dr.
Veeman?s research program defines the cell and molecular behaviors controlling
tapering in an organ that is thinner at its end(s) than at its middle, and he
has chosen the notochord (a rod shaped axial structure) in Ciona (a sea squirt)
as his experimental system. Ciona provides an excellent model for studying these
processes, because it has a distinctively tapered shape and consists of only 40
cells that can easily be visualized in their entirety. Ciona notochord tapering
involves asymmetric cell division, meaning that cells divide to give daughter
cells of unequal size. It is generally thought that positioning of the cell
division plane is specified by molecular cues, but the novel idea that is tested
here is that a cellular cue (the shape of the mother cell) can also control
asymmetric division. The experiments work toward a quantitative understanding of
how subtle local changes in distinct cell behaviors can lead to major effects on
organ and body shape (and thus to evolvability). In addition to his research,
Dr. Veeman is actively involved in training and outreach. He will also engage
the public through exhibitions of images from local biologists that inspire
scientific storytelling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The invertebrate chordate Ciona
is an emerging model for the systems biology of embryonic morphogenesis and has
distinct advantages for understanding how local changes in cell shape and
behavior affect the emergence of shape at the level of entire organs and body
axes. The Ciona notochord cells form a long tapered rod running the length of
the larval tail. Many animal organs, limbs, appendages and body axes are tapered
for important biomechanical reasons, but the mechanisms controlling taper are
largely unknown. One key element of Ciona notochord taper is the tendency of
cells closer to the ends of the notochord to be progressively smaller in volume
than cells in the middle. The proposed experiments address the cellular and
molecular mechanisms establishing this taper. A central hypothesis is that many
of the asymmetric divisions in the notochord may not involve a specific
molecular cue displacing the mitotic spindle, but instead may reflect ubiquitous
spindle centering mechanisms acting in asymmetrically shaped cells. Wedge-shaped
and other asymmetrically shaped cells are common in developing embryos, but the
implications of cell shape for spindle positioning and cytokinesis are not
currently understood. The research team proposes both descriptive and functional
experiments to test this important relationship. Aim 1 tests whether asymmetric
cell division is the only mechanism at work in controlling notochord cell
volume, or whether lineage-specific changes in volume may also be important. Aim
2 tests potential mechanisms of asymmetric division in the notochord, including
the PAR and LGN/NUMA pathways, and also tests a novel hypothesis directly
connecting asymmetric division to cell shape. Aim 3 tests whether several
pathways involved in notochord morphogenesis have specific roles in the cell
behaviors giving rise to taper.