* 1456396
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel approach to the oral delivery of biologically active peptide analogs
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2017
* Scott Shandler, Longevity Biotech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2017
* USD 885,508.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is very significant. Current peptide-based
drugs constitute important tools in human healthcare, and development of new
peptide-based drugs represents a growing proportion of the pharmaceutical
research effort. Current peptide drugs addressing widespread diseases such as
type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and osteoporosis have sales above $1 billion. These drugs
must be delivered by injection. This SBIR aims for new drugs with comparable
heath benefits that can be taken in pill form, because the convenience of oral
delivery, relative to injection, would rapidly capture most of the market. The
high stability engendered by our design strategy should enable drug development
for diseases that currently cannot be treated. Thus, the commercial potential of
this project is high. Orally delivered replacements for injectable drugs would
have a substantial broader impact because they would enhance patient compliance.
Inadequate treatment of T2DM for example, leads to adverse health consequences
that degrade productivity and quality of life for patients. Increased compliance
resulting from a general ability to deliver peptide drugs in pill form would
vastly improve outcomes for patients, including the specific patients
populations targeted by our current programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The proposed project is motivated by fundamental questions about the way drug
molecules are processed in the human body. Drug candidates cannot address a
human disease unless they reach the appropriate sites within the body and then
persist in those sites. The proposed research focuses on a particular class of
bioactive compounds called "peptides." Peptides can act in powerful and
favorable ways within the body, with high specificity of action (which minimizes
"side effects"), but they are subject to very rapid destruction after
administration. This weakness of peptides requires that they be injected
regularly, but peptide drugs would be much more useful if they could be taken
orally. This SBIR Phase I project examines unique peptide-like molecules that
are designed to retain the favorable pharmaceutical action of peptides
themselves but to resist degradation mechanisms within the body that rapidly
destroy peptides. The stomach is the most destructive site for peptides, and
this project aims to generate peptide-like molecules that are sufficiently
robust to survive the stomach and reach the small intestine, where they can be
absorbed. Achieving these molecular design goals would have high intellectual
merit in addition to advancing drug design.