* 1456826
* RUI/SG: Phylogenetic Relationships of Archaic "Ungulates" and Their Implications for the Timing  and Rate of Divergence of Placental Mammal Clades
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Luke Holbrook, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 12/31/2020
* USD 179,279.00

"Condylarths" are a collection of different families of fossil mammals that
lived during the first 20 million years or so after the extinction of the
dinosaurs. Different kinds of condylarths have been considered to be ancestors
or close relatives of certain early lineages of mammals, especially the various
groups of hoofed mammals. Recent studies using DNA from living mammals have
given us a better understanding of how the different lineages of living mammals
evolved, but they have also made the relationships of the condylarths less
clear. This research aims to clarify how condylarths are related to other
mammals, particularly those lineages that have survived to the present. Because
they lived during a time when the various lineages of living mammals appeared in
the fossil record, understanding the evolutionary relationships of condylarths
to living mammals will help us better understand the origins of different mammal
lineages. This will help resolve a longstanding issue as to whether most mammal
lineages diversified after the dinosaurs went extinct or well before the
dinosaur extinction (as some DNA studies of mammals have proposed). As a result,
it will help us understand the reasons why mammals diversified into so many
forms that we see today, including our own species.

This study will focus specifically on four topics: 1) the phylogenetic
affinities of condylarth taxa to extant mammalian lineages; 2) whether any
condylarth families form natural (monophyletic) groups; 3) whether ungulates
(hoofed mammals) are a natural group; and 4) how condylarth evolution affects
the interpretation of divergence times for various mammal lineages. Data from
the skeletal anatomy of condylarths will be combined with morphological and
molecular data for a broad range of extant and extinct placental mammals.
Parsimony, likelihood, and Bayesian methods will be used to evaluate the
phylogenetic positions of condylarths, and several new approaches and methods
will be used to estimate divergence times. The results will assess the
phylogenetic position and taxonomy of condylarth taxa, re-evaluate the
significance of condylarths for the origins of placental mammal lineages, and
re-evaluate divergence times of extant placental lineages based on condylarth
phylogeny.