* 1456737
* Mechanism of Female Fate Determination and Maintenance in Zebrafish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Bruce Draper, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2020
* USD 645,999.00

The zebrafish has been an important model organism for biomedical research for
over 30 years. Surprisingly, it is still not known how zebrafish determine which
gender they will become. In humans, gender is determined by the specific
chromosomes that are inherited from the parents, were XY individual are male and
XX individuals are female. However, in zebrafish no such specific chromosomes
have been identified. Recent studies from several labs, including the Draper
lab, have found that oocytes, the precursor to eggs, are required for female
development and for maintenance of the female fate. Zebrafish that cannot
produce oocytes develop and males, and adult female fish that lose their oocytes
revert to males. These studies have concluded that oocytes produce a signal that
functions to promote and maintain female development. The Draper lab has
identified two candidate oocyte-produced signaling molecules and they have
strong preliminary data that indicates that one functions to initiate female
development, while the other functions to maintain female development in adults.
With this award they will further determine how these signals regulate the
choice between male and female development. Completion of these studies will
provide fundamental knowledge about how zebrafish gender is determined, which
will be important for other scientist working with zebrafish, but will also
provide insights into this process in other fish species. Finally, understanding
how these signals influence gender in zebrafish may lead to the identification
of previously unknown pathways by which environmental pollutants can affect
gender ratios and function in wild fish populations. This is of major importance
as fish are a vital food source for much of the world's population and wild fish
stocks are under intense and increasing pressures that are due to over-fishing,
pollution and habitat destruction. In addition to these benefits, this study
will also provide mentorship and meaningful scientific research experience to
underrepresented and/or disadvantaged graduate, undergraduate and high school
students. The zebrafish is an ideal model organism for introducing students to
cutting edge biological research.

The zebrafish is a major model organism that is used by hundreds of labs around
the world. Yet, the mechanism of zebrafish gender determination remains unknown.
Several recent studies have determined that no single genetic locus is
responsible for gender determination, and that the ability to produce oocytes is
a prerequisite for female determination. While zebrafish do not switch gender as
adults, the Draper lab has recently discovered that maintenance of the adult
female phenotype is an active process that requires continuous signaling from
oocytes to the somatic gonad. Together these studies suggest that an oocyte-
derived signal(s) influences the fate of the somatic gonad, which in turn
regulates the overt phenotype of the animal through production of hormones.
Several key questions remain to be resolved: 1) what is the nature of the
oocyte-derived signal? 2) What is the function of the oocyte-derived signal? 3)
Is there a mechanistic link between female primary determination and maintenance
of the adult female phenotype? The working hypothesis is that the oocyte signal
promotes estrogen production by the somatic gonad, and that a threshold level of
estrogen is required for female primary determination and maintenance of the
adult phenotype. Absent this, the somatic gonad defaults to a male developmental
program, resulting in male primary determination in larvae, or female-to-male
reversal in adults. These predictions will be tested in three aims using a
combination of gene knockout and transgenic technologies: Specific Aim 1 will
test if estrogen production by the somatic gonad (specifically by granulosa
cells) is necessary and sufficient to promote female primary determination and
maintenance of the adult female phenotype. Specific Aim 2 will determine whether
canonical Wnt signaling is necessary and sufficient for female primary
determination. Specific Aim 3 will test the necessity of the oocyte-expressed
cell-signaling molecule Bmp15 to promote granulosa cell development, estrogen
production, and maintenance of female determination. It is anticipated that
these studies will have significant impact on our understanding of the mechanism
that allows 2% of teleost species to revert as adults. In addition, they should
lead to methods that allow the regulation of gender ratios in zebrafish and
perhaps other fish species. Finally, knowing the detailed mechanism of the germ
cell-somatic gonad signaling circuitry in zebrafish may identify previously
unknown pathways by which environmental pollutants can affect gender ratios and
function in wild fish populations.