* 1456022
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: The Cultural Politics and Bioethics of Reproductive Surgery in Mexico, 1800-1940
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Elizabeth O'Brien, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 17,790.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research
project is in the history of science; it focuses on reproductive surgery in
Mexico with a particular emphasis on the politics of cesarean sections and
sterilizing operations. The project explores religious, state, and scientific
debates and their relations to the development of clinical operations. It will
address how reproductive surgeries acquire racial and religious concerns, and
under what circumstances these concerns shift or persist. It will draw on a
range of archival sources, including hospital registers, medical records, prison
reports, newspaper articles, and letters from doctors, midwives, patients, and
medical students. It will link a range of themes and actors to investigate the
factors that influenced clinical decisions and how they affected the lives
patients. The investigator (the Co-PI) will also develop a historical database
of information about public client demographics, surgical technologies, and
patient complaints regarding reproductive surgeries in Mexico. She will develop
this data in coordination with the Mexican Secretary of Health's project on
maternal healthcare, and she will make the information available to lawmakers,
international NGOs, and advocacy groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is based in the
approach to the history science that gives priority to long-term historical
structures over events. The historical range begins in the late colonial period.
Doing so will allow the investigator to fully establish and explore the key
theme: State, Church, and popular conflicts over defining and managing bodies
and souls in birth (and in death). The project will utilize documents that
illuminate the connections between surgical technologies, childbirth, and
religious and spiritual worldviews. Doing so will facilitate an analysis of two
important themes: the social construction of race in medical practice, and the
role of religion in both shaping and reacting to scientific ideologies. The
project aims to develop and to engage with original historical and philosophical
frameworks for analyzing reproductive surgeries; as a result, it has the
potential to modify how historians think about the global history of obstetrics.