* 1456545
* Collaborative Research: How does an intracellular symbiont manipulate host cell biology?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Irene Newton, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 07/31/2018
* USD 414,000.00

Wolbachia pipientis is a bacterium that infects a large number of insects,
including important human disease vectors such as mosquitos. This bacterium is
maternally transmitted and is known to cause a variety of effects in the insect
host including manipulation of reproduction and suppression of virus
replication. Because Wolbachia is capable of suppressing virus replication in
insect hosts, it is being used to decrease the spread of human diseases (so-
called "pathogen blocking"). It is critical, therefore, to better understand how
Wolbachia infects hosts and alters host cell biology. Although Wolbachia infect
upwards of 40% of insects on the planet, there is surprisingly little known
about the exact mechanism used by the bacterium to manipulate its host. This is
largely due to the fact that Wolbachia occurs inside host cells and cannot be
genetically manipulated presently. This project will use a novel approach in
this system to identify proteins used by the bacterium to alter host cell
biology. By identifying and characterizing these proteins, much will be learned
about the basic biology of Wolbachia and the host cell components utilized
during infection. Results will also lead to comparative analyses in other
symbiotic systems. Undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in
science will be trained with project-based research related to this project on
Wolbachia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching scientific goal of
this project is to identify the mechanisms by which an extraordinarily
widespread bacterium interacts with its host. Wolbachia pipientis is an
intracellular alpha-proteobacterium that forms symbioses with an extremely broad
array of invertebrates, including isopods, nematodes, and insects. Wolbachia is
currently of interest with regards to vector control because mosquitoes
harboring the bacterium are unable to transmit important human diseases. Because
Wolbachia are not currently culturable or genetically tractable, little is known
about the molecular basis of interaction with eukaryotic hosts. Wolbachia
encodes a type IV secretion system and is thought to secrete proteins (termed
"effectors") into the eukaryotic cell to alter the biology of its insect hosts.
This project will use a powerful method to identify and study the biochemical
function of probable effectors in Wolbachia. The investigators will identify
candidate effectors through genomics and bioinformatics. They will use a yeast
genetic screen and a secretion assay in a heterologous system to further
identify and characterize these candidates. Finally, the researchers will
investigate the biochemical function and cellular effects of these proteins in
the Drosophila host. These results will be the first comprehensive analysis of
Wolbachia secreted substrates and will lead to significant advances in the
Wolbachia field and comparative work in other symbiotic strains (such as those
infecting filarial nemotodes).