* 1456511
* LTREB Renewal: Ecosystem Structure and Function in Palouse Grasslands
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2023
* Gary Belovsky, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2023
* USD 487,276.00

Grasshopper abundance in the western United States varies dramatically across
years and locations. Grasshoppers can have high numbers at one site and low
numbers at a nearby site in the same year, while in the next year the numbers at
the sites may be reversed. This can create economic hardship for livestock
producers that depend on reliable forecasts of both weather and pests. Possible
reasons for the large variation in grasshoppers include weather patterns, plant
quantity and nutritional quality, and predation. Understanding grasshopper
dynamics cannot be advanced by studies of only one possible reason or at a just
one site over a few years, but requires long-term studies across a number of
sites. This project will involve a number of graduate students and provide
outreach to Federal, State and Tribal agencies, non-governmental organizations
and civic groups. The project will also be woven into an established summer
field ecology program run by the University of Notre Dame. This program provides
10-week field research experiences to undergraduates and specifically recruits
Native American and non-Native students in order to help to promote cultural
exchange. The program has been successful in that all of the participating
Native American students have completed undergraduate degrees and a number are
now working for Tribal natural resource agencies.

While weather cannot be experimentally altered, results from different years and
sites will be compared to help disentangle the effects of food and predation on
grasshopper populations over a range of weather conditions. Grasshoppers will
also be experimentally studied by keeping some populations in large field cages
at different sites where plant quality and quantity and predation are
manipulated relative to natural levels in any given year. Grasshopper
populations can reduce plant production directly through consumption and
indirectly through their effects on the cycling of nutrients needed by plants.
Results of long term studies thus far indicate that populations at some sites
are more frequently controlled by one or the other mechanism, but populations
across all sites are not controlled by the same mechanism in any year. This
project will add to that long term record in order to answer why one mechanism
operates only in some years at certain sites, and also to reveal long-term
trends due to climate changes. And while the numbers of larger plant-eating
animals, such as bison, elk, deer, or rabbits, may not vary as much as
grasshoppers do, they also may be controlled by availability of food at some
times and places, or by predation at others. Therefore, the grasshopper system
is a model useful for addressing this question more generally.