* 1456939
* Collaborative Research: From the Slab to the Surface: Origin, Storage, Ascent, and Eruption of Volatile-Bearing Magmas
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Erik Hauri, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 05/31/2022
* USD 212,081.00

On any given day, approximately 15-30 volcanoes worldwide are either in eruption
or show strong signs of unrest (e.g., anomalously high rates of seismic
activity, ground deformation, or gas emissions). Volcanic activity, including
high-altitude eruptions of ash or emission of large volumes of gas, poses a
significant hazard to people and property in the United States and worldwide.
This is particularly true in Alaska, with over 10,000 passengers a day flying
over 35 historically active volcanoes on North America/Asia flight routes.
Although significant progress has been made in recent decades in understanding
the physical processes occurring in the upper portions of the Earth's crust that
lead directly to volcanic activity and associated unrest, there is a fundamental
lack of understanding of how these shallow crustal processes link to and are
controlled by the large-scale crustal tectonics and deep mantle melting that are
ultimately responsible for arc volcanism. Specifically, although it is well
understood that the amount of water and other volatiles dissolved in a magma
plays a key role in its generation, ascent, and eruption, it is unclear why some
arc volcanoes erupt 'wetter' magmas than others. Identifying large scale
controls on magma volatile contents is thus critical for accurate forecasting of
the frequency, volume, and explosivity of volcanic eruptions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, we propose an integrated geochemical-geophysical
study of the Unimak-Cleveland corridor of the Aleutian volcanic arc, which
encompasses six volcanoes that have erupted in the past 25 years with a wide
range of magmatic water contents. This relatively small corridor also exhibits a
range of deep and upper-crustal seismicity, apparent magma storage depths, and
depths to the subducting tectonic plate. Our goal is to link two normally
disconnected big-picture problems: 1) the deep origin of magmas and volatiles,
and 2) the formation and eruption of crustal magma reservoirs, which we propose
to do by establishing the depth(s) of crustal magma reservoirs and pre-eruptive
volatile contents throughout the corridor. The integrated study components
include analysis of volcano- seismic events and magmatic volatile analysis.
Existing seismic data catalogs contain ~ 14,000 events, and some samples of
volcanic eruption products are already in hand. The existence of two actively
erupting volcanoes in the corridor further motivates collection of simultaneous
seismic, gas (in collaboration with the USGS Alaska Volcano Observatory) and
tephra samples during eruption, that reflect active evolution of the magmatic
system.