* 1456404
* SBIR Phase II:  A Multi-Modality Sensing Approach for the Objective Assessment of Agitation and Sedation
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Behnood Gholami, Autonomous Healthcare Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2019
* USD 925,978.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project involves advancements in the state-of-the-art
in biomedical technology, improvement of the quality of care for intensive care
unit (ICU) patients, and a reduction in healthcare costs. The proposed agitation
and sedation system will assist in realizing an improved distribution of ICU
workload by allowing the medical staff to focus on patients with increased
agitation and in need of immediate attention. It is expected that this
technology will also improve the quality of care in military ICUs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses on the development of a
multi-modality agitation and sedation assessment system for patients in ICUs.
The primary consequence of oversedation is the prolongation of mechanical
ventilation and ICU stay. Prolonged ventilation is expensive and is associated
with known risks, such as inadvertent extubation, laryngo-tracheal trauma, and,
most significantly, ventilator-associated pneumonia. Alternatively, agitated
patients can do physical harm to themselves by dislodging vital life support and
monitoring devices with excessive musculoskeletal activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undersedation and oversedation result in excessive
economic burden on the healthcare system. The annual cost of oversedation in the
US is $400 million, whereas reducing mechanical ventilation in oversedated
patients by just one day can result in an annual savings of $4 billion in the US
alone. Current clinical practice in patient critical care requires the nursing
staff to assess the patient?s agitation and sedation state and provide sedatives
to ameliorate the patient?s agitation. This process relies on subjective
assessments and can be influenced by personal bias. This project proposes to use
machine learning algorithms to integrate data from multiple sensing modalities
to objectively identify cases of undersedation and oversedation in ICU patients.