* 1456140
* Investigate the Molecular Basis of Crosstalk between the Circadian Clock and Innate Immunity in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* C. Robertson McClung, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2020
* USD 842,684.00

Pathogen-induced diseases lead to tremendous economic loss worldwide. The use of
chemicals and pesticides to control plant diseases risks collateral damage to
the environment and human health. Therefore it is important to understand how
plants fight against pathogens and subsequently to use such information to
control plant resistance to devastating diseases. Upon frequent challenges
imposed by pathogens, plants activate different defense responses at different
times of a day, a process recently shown to be controlled by the endogenous
biological timekeeper called the circadian clock. The circadian clock integrates
temporal information with environmental stimuli (such as pathogen infections) to
regulate many biological processes, including plant defense responses. The
investigators previously demonstrated that changes in plant defense status could
affect clock activity. However how defense responses and clock activity are co-
regulated in plants remains unclear. This project seeks insights into the
mechanisms that coordinate the circadian clock with defense responses.
Importantly, this project provides excellent training opportunities to students,
especially women, underrepresented minority students and K-12 science teachers.
Students and postdocs involved in this project will be broadly trained in
biology and bioinformatics so as to be better prepared for future careers in
science. Research experiences will also be provided to K-12 teachers from low
performing public schools in the Baltimore area. Science teachers are the key to
making connections between knowledge acquired in the classroom and research
conducted in the laboratory. The research experience that will be provided will
enable them to design a more effective science curriculum for their
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this collaborative project is to
understand the interplay between the controls of innate immunity and the
circadian clock in Arabidopsis. Specifically the project seeks to identify and
characterize genes that control defense and/or clock activities and elucidate
how these genes act together to orchestrate disease resistance, growth, and
development of Arabidopsis. To address this goal, a team of experts in plant
defense, circadian clock, and systems biology fields will employ traditional
molecular, genetic and biochemical approaches as well as computational modeling
to implement the proposed activities. Information obtained from this study will
enhance our fundamental knowledge about disease resistance, growth and
development of plants. Genes identified from this study can be used as molecular
tools to genetically manipulate disease resistance traits in economically
important crop plants. Such plants will reduce our dependency on chemicals and
pesticides, thus protecting the environment and human health and supporting
sustainable agriculture.