* 1456673
* Plasticity of Renewable Epithelia in the Mammalian Small Intestine
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Ronaldo Ferraris, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 569,986.00

For most cells, the signals regulating gene expression typically arise from
internal cues. Intestinal epithelial cells however are uniquely exposed to
digested food and need to respond to changes in diet or nutrient availability.
This award will support innovative experimental approaches to investigate the
adaptive characteristics of intestinal epithelial cells, thereby dramatically
expanding our understanding of mammalian epithelial biology and intestinal
regulation. The principal investigator will integrate this research program with
educational activities involving graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, as
well as inner city students recruited via previously established links with
their high schools and colleges. Results from the studies will be distributed
through peer-reviewed journal publications, and through presentations at
regional and national scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the
broadly representative response of the fructose transporter GLUT5 to dietary
levels of its substrate as experimental model, the first aim tests the
hypothesis that intestinal stem cells (ISCs) and their progenies have different
capacities to adapt to dietary cues. It will determine whether ISCs as well as
fully differentiated absorptive and secretory cells perceive and respond to
fructose, whether the response is reversible, and whether molecular information
arising from transient exposure of ISCs to fructose can be memorized and
transmitted to differentiating progenies. The second aim will test the
hypothesis that fructose metabolism regulates GLUT5 expression via the cellular
energy sensor AMP kinase and assess the contribution of nutrient metabolism to
the adaptive response of fructose-responsive cells. Because nutrients regulate
their own transporters, this study on GLUT5 regulation provides a broad
understanding of how transporters in various intestinal cell types respond to
changes in luminal concentrations of their substrates.