* 1456181
* Wrestling with pathogens: host SUMOylation and bacterial interference in the plant immune system
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Walter Gassmann, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Brad Day
* 07/31/2019
* USD 998,000.00

A fundamental "engineering" problem in signal processing consists of integrating
trigger threshold and dynamic range into a beneficial balance between
sensitivity and specificity. A good example is the immune system, which
organisms need to carefully control so that it can be rapidly activated when
faced with a threatening pathogen, but kept in check to prevent damaging side
effects. In plants, one of the strongest immune responses is triggered when
intracellular immune receptors detect the presence of intruding pathogen
proteins deployed by the pathogen to manipulate the host cell, a process called
effector-triggered immunity. This project aims to uncover principles by which
living organisms calibrate the complex signaling modules that regulate the
specificity and intensity of immune responses. On a practical level, detailed
knowledge of the plant immune response may lead to crop plants with improved
durability of innate pathogen resistance in the long term, with significant
benefits to sustainable agricultural and biomass production and the environment.
This project's broader impacts also include the training of undergraduate and
graduate students and of a post-doctoral researcher. In addition, the project
will support students in a campus-wide program called Freshman Research in Plant
Sciences (FRIPS), and will further develop connections to middle and high school
teachers in Sedalia, MO, through classroom visits and the organization of
research modules at MU for teachers in the summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus is on an immune regulator in the plant Arabidopsis thaliana called SRFR1.
Current understanding of SRFR1 protein function suggests that SRFR1 is an immune
adaptor protein that temporally and spatially regulates the presence and
stability of protein complexes to fine-tune immune outputs. In this project, the
mechanisms that regulate SRFR1 protein-protein interactions will be
investigated. Specifically, the indication that SRFR1 binds SUMO, a small
protein that is attached to other proteins to regulate their location in the
cell, suggests a mechanism for regulating SRFR1 interactions with other proteins
by SUMOylation. This will be tested using a combination of genetics, cell
biology and proteomics to establish whether and when SUMOylation of SRFR1 client
proteins occurs, and whether this determines the cellular location of protein
complexes. In addition, the project will investigate if pathogens interfere with
this process.