* 1456524
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Behavioral Innovation in Brood Parasitic Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Mark Hauber, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 01/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

Songbirds are well-known for their complex vocalizations that, much like
language in humans, are typically learned from their parents. But how do young
that naturally lack contact with parents recognize members of their own species?
Here, the researchers investigate the genomic, neurobiological and behavioral
mechanisms of species recognition employed by avian brood parasites, birds whose
eggs are laid into nests of strangers and whose chicks are raised by the foster
species. By identifying the password--a species-specific vocalization that
attracts and initiates the neural mechanisms by which young brood parasites
identify individuals of their own species--the researchers will be able to
understand how young that naturally lack contact with parents recognize members
of their own species. This work will contribute broadly to scientific progress
in the fields of learning and memory, behavioral plasticity and behavioral
evolution. This research program involves training of students and young
scientists, including a postdoctoral fellow and a diverse group of students,
including many underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students in
integrative behavioral, neurobiological, and genomics research techniques. The
participants will deliver public seminars and exhibits at Sylvan Heights Bird
Park in North Carolina and at several non-profit organizations in New York
City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The suite of behavioral innovations underlying social
parasitism, including avian brood parasitism, must include mechanisms to
recognize conspecifics without prior exposure during early development. This
project will tap into the developmental knowledge already gathered from parental
songbirds, including the zebra finch model system, and focus the ontogenetic
study on a closely-related, but obligate parasitic finch, the pin-tailed whydah.
The aim is to test the general hypothesis that differences in neural
architecture or processing between parasitic and parental birds reflect
evolutionary tinkering, whereby novel traits arise by modification of existing
networks and structures. Through experimentally manipulated exposure of juvenile
parasites to songs, the prediction will be tested that conspecific recognition
relies on hearing a salient species-specific character, termed the password.
Detailed quantitative patterns of transcriptional change following password
exposure, and throughout developmental landmarks, will be collected to identify
neurogenomic signatures associated with the timing and induction of conspecific
recognition and to more broadly define the molecular basis of experience-
dependent or developmentally driven neuroplasticity. Critical acoustic and
behavioral components of these data will be collected during a newly developed
field course in Puerto Rico. Acoustic and video data will be made freely
available through DataOne, a public data repository, and genomic data will be
deposited into the National Institutes of Health's NCBI short read archive.