* 1456303
* SBIR Phase II:  Made in USA-Profitably: An Integrated Design Tool for Eliminating Assembly
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Kerr-Jia Lu, FlexSys Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2017
* USD 749,933.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in revolutionizing the current mechanical
system design practice across multiple industry sectors. Rather than using
multiple rigid parts to create a mechanical system, our compliant design method,
inspired by designs in nature, exploits material elasticity to create one-piece
compliant systems or joint-less mechanisms. Our compliant design software will
provide designers with a powerful tool to create products with dramatic
reductions in part count, thereby reducing manufacturing cost ( at times
eliminating assembly operations altogether), enhancing reliability and precision
in ways that could not be achieved through conventional design methods. By
replacing assembly-intensive products with compliant designs that have
substantially lower assembly burden, manufacturing in the U.S. could be more
competitive. For example, our compliant wiper has 75% fewer parts, weighs 50%
less, and costs 60% less to manufacture in Detroit compared to conventional
multi-piece wiper that is made in China. Thus, technically skilled machine
operators producing one-piece designs would create value locally, without the
burden of shipping costs and delays, to tip business equation away from
offshoring. Thus, broad adoption of compliant design as enabled by our software
will lead to more "Made-in-USA"
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to develop a framework for Integrated Computer Aided Engineering software
for compliant designs. While commercially available design software can assist
users in evaluating conventional mechanisms with rigid links and joints, there
is no readily available software tool on the market to create (synthesize) and
optimize the design of compliant mechanical solutions. Compliant design
synthesis algorithms seen in existing research literature often require
specialized knowledge that "non-足expert" users might not have, and the
algorithms are often not robust enough to consistently create feasible designs.
In Phase I, we laid the theoretical and the computational foundation needed to
develop a unified compliant design framework. Starting with functional design
specifications such as desired motion output(s), and input actuator(s), the
algorithms will (a) determine an optimum topology (i.e., how material should be
distributed within a prescribed 2D or 3D space), and (b) optimize the size,
shape and geometry to meet performance requirements such as fatigue life (stress
constraints), manufacturing constraints and dynamic response. In the proposed
Phase II effort, we will refine the user-足interface and extend the
functionalities to integrate all key elements into a field-足ready commercial
package that enables both expert and non-足expert designers to create compliant
design solutions.