* 1456985
* Circadian Clock Control of Seasonal Migration
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Christine Merlin, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2019
* USD 550,683.00

Life on earth is subjected to daily and seasonal variations in the timing of
sunrise and sunset. To adapt to this rhythmic environment, animals, plants and
microbes have evolved circadian clocks that orchestrate daily rhythms of
physiology and behavior on a 24-hour basis. Although the role of circadian
clocks in driving daily biological rhythms is relatively well known, their role
in seasonal responses due to changes in day-length remain unclear. The proposed
research aims to understand how animal circadian clocks in the brain regulate
seasonal rhythms in behavior and physiology. The objective of this project is to
determine the molecular mechanisms through which brain clocks regulate seasonal
rhythms in the iconic long-distance migration of the North Eastern American
monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus). The studies will address a fundamental
question in chronobiology and will advance our understanding of the molecular
mechanisms underlying photoperiodic responses and migratory behavior. This could
have broader implications for the conservation of endangered migratory species,
and for understanding their adaptive potential to climate change. Through this
project, graduate and undergraduate students will be mentored in biological
clocks research and molecular genetics. Outreach activities will be conducted
with local grade and high schools to introduce students to citizen science by
participating in the generation of data on monarch migration patterns and the
restoration of their habitat through monarch tagging programs and the creation
of new Monarch Waystations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the
proposed research is to uncover the molecular mechanisms underlying clock-
controlled seasonal rhythms in long-distance migration of the monarch butterfly.
A fundamental understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which seasonal
rhythms and photoperiodic responses in animals are regulated by the circadian
clock has been hampered by the lack of genomic and genetic tools in non-model
species (hamster, sheep, bird) that display robust photoperiodic responses, and
the lack of robust photoperiodic responses in genetically tractable animals
(fly, mouse). This project will take advantage of powerful molecular, genomic
and genetic tools available in the monarch to (i) examine the role of circadian
clocks and clock genes in the photoperiodic induction of the migratory
behavioral and physiological switch, (ii), identify clock-output genes
underlying the migratory switch, and (iii) disrupt candidate genes in vivo to
define their impact on migratory behavior and physiology. These experiments will
yield unprecedented insight into the molecular bases of insect photoperiodic
responses and the genetic program underlying migratory behavior.