* 1456372
* SBIR Phase II:  A computational and experimental platform for the automated design of organisms used in the production of biochemicals
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Alexandre Zanghellini, ARZEDA Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,260,814.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a platform to rapidly design
synthetic organisms to produce biochemicals, which will replace environmentally
harmful, ecologically inefficient industrial chemical processes. The technology
developed in this proposal will provide a competitive edge in the rapid
engineering of synthetic organisms to produce biochemicals by fermentation that
are currently produced from oil (reducing our CO2 emissions) or extracted from
natural species (reducing our taxing load on existing ecosystems). This
technology also has the potential to be used for the manufacture of drugs, and
to engineer novel organisms to improve crop production and therefore help
address the mounting challenges of providing food to a growing world population
without tapping too much in Earth's resources. Commercially, the chemicals that
will be enabled by application of the technology developed during the Phase I
program open up billion dollar markets that are currently inaccessible to the
chemical industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to
develop a platform that combines computational enzyme design with systems
biology to create a fully integrated system for the design and testing of novel
cell factories for the production of bulk and fine chemicals. During the Phase I
project, the company, in collaboration with the University of Washington, has
successfully developed a high-performance software code to rapidly design novel
metabolic pathways to produce any target chemical from central metabolism. In
Phase II, the company will further advance the concept by (1) developing a high-
performance pathway prioritization module to estimate each designed pathway
yield and impact on organism metabolism in the context of whole-genome models
and (2) use the software platform to design libraries of pathways for the
production of a variety of specialty chemical targets that are commercially
valuable and not known to be produced by fermentation at scale. Then, (3) using
an experimental screening setup, the DNA for all the proposed pathways will be
assembled screened at high-throughput for detectable production of the target
chemicals.