* 1456071
* SBIR Phase II:  Large-scale, high-throughput optimization of gene expression in industrial yeast for improved small molecule production
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Andrew Conley, Lygos Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2020
* USD 1,425,979.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is development of a microbial technology for
the conversion of low-value sugars into high-value chemicals. Most industrial
chemicals produced today are derived from petroleum and other nonrenewable raw
materials. The long-term growth and sustainability of the chemical industry
benefits from development of new routes to existing chemicals using renewable
raw materials. Furthermore, due to higher infrastructure costs and stricter
environmental requirements, many chemicals that were once produced in the United
States are now produced abroad. This contributes to the U.S. trade deficit. This
Phase II proposal aims to develop a fermentation technology where domestically
grown agricultural materials (for example, corn and waste agricultural residues)
are converted into high-value chemicals. The optimized fermentation process is
estimated to be cost-competitive with the incumbent petrochemical route when
scaled. If successful, this proposal will facilitate growth of a domestic bio-
chemical manufacturing industry, targeting the $30 billion organic acids
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop
large-scale, high-throughput techniques to optimize gene expression in
industrial yeast. A significant problem within the field of industrial
biotechnology is the ability to engineer and optimize the fermentation
performance of non-academic or model microbes. Most molecular metabolic
engineering tools are developed for use in two model prokaryotic and eukaryotic
microbes, E. coli and S. cerevisiae, and are not suitable for use with
industrially relevant microbes. Without these tools it is costly and slow to
commercialize new fermentation technologies. The goal of this Phase II project
is to develop and implement a set of molecular biology tools designed for acid-
tolerant yeast, and working to apply them toward improving small molecule
production. Specifically, the molecular biology tools are useful for tuning (up-
or down-regulation) user-defined gene transcription and translation. Engineered
microbes harboring the desired genetic modification(s) are assayed for improved
small molecule production from sugar in small scale fermentations. Successful
genetic modifications are those that result in more efficient small molecule
product formation from sugar, and ideally decreased biomass formation from
sugar, providing a lower production cost in a scaled, commercial process.