* 1456053
* Phosphatase Control of Collective Cell Migration during Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Jocelyn McDonald, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2020
* USD 615,000.00

Cells move and migrate to new locations in the bodies of developing animals, an
important step for the correct formation and function of organs. The proposed
research uses a simple genetic model, the fruit fly, to investigate how cells
move as organized groups within the animal. The overall goal of these studies is
to identify fundamental mechanisms that keep cells together during cell
movement, a poorly understood process. Results from these studies are expected
to shed light on the way that cells migrate to populate tissues and organs
during animal development. A major impact of the proposed project is the
training of students and encouragement of underrepresented groups to pursue
scientific-intensive careers. Because of the ease of use and available genetic
tools, these studies with the fruit fly model are ideally suited for the
training of students. The McDonald lab has a history of training undergraduate
and graduate students from diverse backgrounds, and will continue to do so in
the proposed studies. The investigator will specifically recruit female and
underrepresented minority undergraduate students from three local institutions
that currently offer limited research opportunities. The project also includes
several outreach efforts, based on the proposed research, to a local grade
school and high school comprised mainly of underrepresented minorities. These
activities together will introduce students to research in genetics and animal
cell and developmental biology and encourage them to pursue scientific and
technical careers.

Throughout development cells frequently move in groups to form, shape and
remodel tissues and organs. Such "collectively" migrating cells adhere strongly
to one another but also coordinate movement of the whole group as a single unit.
Despite their crucial importance to development, how cells migrate collectively
rather than individually remains poorly characterized. Drosophila border cells
represent a genetically accessible model for the discovery of fundamental
regulatory pathways that underlie collective cell movement. Dynamic cycles of
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation regulate the cellular signaling pathways
and physical/cytoskeletal dynamics involved in individual and collective cell
migration. While the functions of protein kinases are well established, much
less is known about the roles of protein phosphatases. Novel preliminary data
indicate that protein phosphatase activity is an unanticipated controller of
collective cohesion and migration of border cells. Border cells in which
phosphatase activity is inhibited round up, break off from the main group and
are unable to complete their migration. The central hypothesis of this proposal
is that distinct phosphatase complexes maintain a collective mode of migration
through dynamic regulation of identifiable substrates. The proposed project
combines genetic, live imaging, cell biology and biochemical approaches to
determine which phosphatase complexes regulate collective border cell migration.
Moreover, these studies will identify phosphatase target proteins responsible
for the collective cohesion and migration of border cells. As common mechanisms
underlie different collective cell migration processes, the proposed studies
utilizing the powerful border cell model will uncover new cellular and molecular
pathways regulated by protein phosphatases. Together, this will critically
advance knowledge of how organs form and are remodeled by collectives during
development of multicellular organisms.