* 1456411
* SBIR Phase II:  Amorphous Metal Nonlinear Resistor Applications for Liquid Crystal Display Backplanes
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Sean Muir, Amorphyx Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2017
* USD 915,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to simplifying the display backplane
manufacturing process and thereby deliver cost savings to a display industry
annually losing billions of dollars. The technology being developed as part of
this Phase II project has the potential to outperform current thin film
transistor (TFT) backplane technologies in key Liquid Crystal Display (LCD)
performance areas such as power consumption, image brightness and quality, and
color richness. The vision of this project is to redefine the cost,
manufacturability and performance of displays through the use of advanced
materials and novel electronics. Beyond dramatic economic implications for the
LCD industry, the amorphous metal and metal oxide-based technologies developed
through this project will enable a technically and economically viable path to
roll-to-roll production of flexible glass displays. Enabling a roll-to-roll
"flex" factory could reintroduce display manufacturing to the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project challenges conventional display industry practice by eliminating
semiconductor content and relying on quantum tunneling conduction enabled by
innovative materials to control the LCD backplane. The relatively simple
tunneling devices developed as part of this project contrast with the industry's
focus on increasingly complex semiconductors and manufacturing processes to meet
the performance demands of UHD TV while reducing cost. The use of these
structurally less complex tunneling devices in the LCD backplane has been
enabled through the use of amorphous metal thin-films. The objective of this
Phase II project is to develop a prototype display incorporating amorphous metal
thin-film based tunneling devices and to evaluate its performance in terms of
gray-scale control, power consumption, and maximum refresh rate. It is
anticipated that amorphous metal tunneling devices can outperform current TFT
technologies in these three areas by enabling 12-bit gray-scale accuracy,
increasing the sub-pixel aperture ratio, and eliminating the need for
semiconductor materials. The results from this prototype will confirm the
technology's core value proposition, amorphous metal thin-film devices improve
UHD performance while reducing manufacturing cost and increasing factory
capacity.