* 1456298
* Social experience: effects on auditory filtering through a serotonergic mechanism
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* Laura Hurley, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 05/31/2021
* USD 627,353.00

In addition to its well-known roles in regulating mood and appetite, the
chemical serotonin plays an important role in the response of the brain to
social interaction. Despite this, very little is known about its role in a
crucial type of social behavior, communication. In their past work, the
researchers have shown that serotonin modifies auditory responses to
communication calls in mice, and that social partners trigger these increases in
serotonin in the auditory system. In other regions of the brain, the
serotonergic system itself is heavily influenced by past social experience. With
this rationale, the researchers hypothesize that social experience changes the
role of the serotonergic system in auditory processing. They will test this idea
by measuring how housing mice individually or in social groups affects the way
that the serotonergic system interacts with the auditory system. This work will
explore a process fundamental to communication: how sensory systems adapt to
features of the social environment like social history, with implications for
how animals respond to their social partners. The work will also serve as a
springboard for a local K-12 outreach program in which undergraduates present
interactive lessons on themes of communication and sensory
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The social experience hypothesis will be tested in
male and female mice, which are increasingly studied models of vocal
communication. Mice also demonstrate highly conserved serotonergic function in
auditory regions compared with other vertebrates. The specific objectives of the
proposed work are to examine the effect of group versus individual housing on
three features of serotonin-auditory interactions in the inferior colliculus
(IC), a mammalian auditory midbrain nucleus. 1) The first of these is the
anatomy of the serotonergic system within the IC. This will be accomplished by
measuring the density of immunohistochemically labeled serotonergic fibers. 2) A
second feature is the transient serotonergic response to social interactions.
This will be measured locally in the IC of behaving animals using carbon fiber
voltammetry. 3) A final feature is the serotonergic regulation of the activation
of the c-fos transcriptional pathway by social interaction, which will be
explored by inducing systemic release or depletion of serotonin. These studies
will provide a framework of how social experience creates plasticity in
auditory-serotonin interactions at multiple levels of organization, generating
testable hypotheses on the downstream consequences of such plasticity for neural
encoding and perception.