* 1456675
* Oxidation of KCNB1 Channels in Aging CNS
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Federico Sesti, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 06/30/2019
* USD 750,000.00

The brain encodes information in the form of electrical impulses called action
potentials that are continuously exchanged between neurons. As brains age, the
transmission of Action Potentials becomes less efficient. It is not understood
why this occurs, but one possibility is that over time, neurons accumulate
highly toxic molecules known as reactive oxygen species (ROS). There is support
for the idea that ROS oxidize potassium channel proteins whose function is to
permit movement of potassium ions through the membranes of neurons. Potassium
ion movements are involved in the propagation of action potentials by neurons.
This project will directly test the hypothesis that oxidation of potassium
channels by ROS leads to cognitive impairment by hindering the transmission of
Action Potentials. The PI will integrate research activities and outcomes into
formal lectures on the neuroscience of aging. The project will provide research
training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, underrepresented and summer
students. The Principal Investigator will present a series of lectures to middle
and high school students as part of the Science, Medicine and Related Topics
(SMART) program, whose mission is to advance the understanding and appreciation
of science among underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The KCNB1
potassium channel is abundantly expressed in the brain and is susceptible to
oxidation by ROS. When a cysteine residue is replaced with an alanine (C73A),
oxidation is abolished. Based on this observation, a transgenic mouse expressing
the non-oxidable KCNB1 variant (C73A) has been constructed. The effects of ROS
on KCNB1 channels and the impact of this process on cognitive function will be
determined by studying cognitive function in aging C73A mice. Behavioral tests
will be performed to see whether the lack of oxidation of KCNB1 improves the
ability of mice to learn and remember new tasks. Changes in behavior will be
correlated with changes in the electrical activity of the brain which will be
recorded using state of the art electrophysiological techniques. Further, it
will be determined whether the naturally occurring antioxidant, hydrogen
sulfide, which is synthesized by neurons, can prevent oxidation of KCNB1
channels. It is expected that aging mice that harbor the C73A variant will
exhibit less cognitive impairment and more normal electrical activity in cortex
and hippocampus, two regions of the brain that are most affected by the activity
of KCNB1.