* 1456375
* Collaborative Research: Chance or necessity? Adaptive vs. non adaptive evolution in plant-frugivore interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Jeffrey Riffell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/29/2020
* USD 549,999.00

This project will investigate the joint evolution of the olfactory ability and
behavioral preferences of fruit-eating bats and the scents of the fruits that
they eat. Plants have evolved an outstanding diversity of fruit characteristics
to signal ripeness and, in turn, fruit-eaters have evolved specialized sensory
abilities that allow them to locate ripe fruits. If and how bats have shaped the
evolution of fruits traits, and how bat sensory abilities have evolved to detect
fruit signals, however, remains poorly understood. Because the ecological
interactions between fruiting plants and fruit-eating bats are crucial to the
maintenance and regeneration of tropical ecosystems worldwide, this work will
have important implications in the management of tropical forests. Results from
this project will be incorporated into an exhibit at the Burke Museum of Natural
History and Culture and traveling study kits for elementary school students in
Seattle and Costa Rica. The project will also provide training for a diverse
group of undergraduates, graduate students, one postdoctoral researcher, and a
Costa Rican graduate student.

The project will focus on a relatively unexplored yet crucial aspect of plant-
animal mutualisms: volatile chemical communication between plants and vertebrate
frugivores. It will integrate advanced tools from analytical chemistry,
molecular genetics, and behavioral ecology to collect unprecedented data on
diet, fruit volatile molecules, bat olfactory genes and behavioral preferences
for two ecologically important groups of tropical plants and animals (Piper
plants and Carollia bats). This work will test whether mutualism has imposed
selective pressures on plant and frugivore traits, or if their diversity is best
explained by phylogeny. Novel comparative and experimental approaches will link
the patterns of diversity in: (1) mutualism strength, (2) fruit scent chemical
composition, (3) bat olfactory receptor subgenomes, and (4) bat scent
preferences. By relating plant chemical signals to the olfactory subgenome and
behavioral responses of frugivores, this research will jumpstart the integration
of genomic and behavioral applications in evolutionary ecology, and enable
future research on the functional chemical ecology of complex systems.