* 1456904
* Defense amplification and priming in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Jean Greenberg, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2021
* USD 922,151.00

Plants develop with a high degree of plasticity: their growth and ability to
resist different stresses depends on their history and the current environment.
Ubiquitous components of the environment are microbes, some of which promote
plant health (stimulate growth and immunity) and others of which cause disease.
Unlike humans, plants lack specialized circulating cells that provide immunity.
Instead, plants use a chemical-based immune system. Specifically, natural
chemical signals that plants produce confer protection against disease-causing
microbes. Upon infection, some of these signals are transported throughout the
plant to provide immunity. This project investigates how plant chemical signals
and the cellular machinery needed for responding to them confer protection to
plants against harmful microbes. Students will work in teams and be trained in
experimental methods and data interpretation. The findings from this project
could lead to commercialization of these natural immune-modulating chemicals for
plant protection. The project will expose diverse high school and community
members to emerging concepts in signaling and scientific research in general
through workshops, lab work and community events. The Principal Investigator
will develop a mentoring workshop to help other faculty recruit retain and train
under-represented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant diseases reduce
crop yield and quality. This project will elucidate mechanisms of defense
priming and signal amplification that are essential for effective whole plant
immunity and identify bioactive metabolites that can be commercialized for plant
protection. Postdoctoral scholars will be trained in the interpretation and
utilization of the latest molecular, cellular, proteomic approaches as well as
techniques for metabolite analysis and will also learn mentoring skills. Aim 1
discerns how a key aminotransferase's different metabolite products control
immune receptor levels and signaling outputs, respectively. The molecular basis
for receptor regulation and how ligand-stimulated signaling steps are amplified
will be examined. Aim 2 focuses on AZI1 and EARLI1, proteins that traffic
between the site of priming signal generation and other sites. Their sites of
action, targeting/trafficking mechanism and regulation by posttranslational
modification and protein-protein interactions during establishment of systemic
immunity will be elucidated. Aim 3, performed by undergraduate and high school
students, will assess the roles of new systemic immunity protein candidates.