* 1456408
* SBIR Phase II:  Radiation-Hardened Integrated Circuits Using Standard Process Flows, and Electronic Design Automation Tool Implementation
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Emily Donnelly, APOGEE SEMICONDUCTOR, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 892,560.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to develop and commercialize radiation-
tolerant integrated circuit (IC) technology for producing radiation-
tolerant/hardened (rad-hard) ICs capable of being manufactured using leading-
edge commercial IC processing instead of expensive specialized processes which
use older, less efficient lithography nodes. The direct customers for the
technology, to be delivered in the form of Electronic Design Automation (EDA)
tools and support services, will be semiconductor integrated device
manufacturers and semiconductor foundries. In the CT scanner industry, improved
radiation-tolerance of the electronics will allow key components to be placed
directly in the X-ray path, improving signal quality, and resulting in better
images at reduced X-ray dose levels to patients. Reducing X-ray exposure from CT
scans is a medical priority, as it has been estimated that 0.4% of current
cancer incidents result from high X-ray doses from CT scans. Application of the
patent-pending technology in radiation-hard ICs for a wide range of other
commercial radiation-environment markets will follow, including commercial
satellites, nuclear-power electronics, nondestructive testing, and medical
electronics sterilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will provide integrated circuit (IC) designers
access to leading-edge IC technology and advanced lithography nodes in
developing ICs for radiation-tolerant applications, and is based on patent-
pending transistor-level design and layout innovations and their implementation
in EDA tools. In Phase I, proof-of-concept was established; transistor
structures evaluated for X-ray and gamma radiation tolerance improved by a
factor of 7 for 1.8V transistors, and by well over a factor of 10 for 5V
transistors, with the use of the technology. The research objective of Phase II
is to provide ready access to the benefits of the technology to IC designers by
incorporating the methodologies for transistor-level design and layout
improvements into industry-standard EDA tools. A number of technical challenges
will be addressed in Phase II, including optimizing the tools for producing
area-efficient and cost-efficient transistor layouts, and assuring seamless
integration with existing design flows. A beta version of an EDA tool kit will
be developed in Phase II; the anticipated result will be a tool that can be used
by initial customers in producing rad-hard ICs used in CT scan electronics and
other applications.