* 1456487
* Role of the Two-Component Pathway in Mediating Ethylene Signal Transduction
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* George Schaller, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

The plant hormone ethylene plays important and wide-ranging roles throughout
plant growth and development, including regulation of seed germination, seedling
growth, leaf and petal abscission, fruit ripening, organ senescence, and
pathogen responses. How a single hormone mediates such a diverse array of
processes and how these processes are integrated with other signaling pathways
remain fundamental questions in plant biology. This project will explore a gene
expression mechanism by which ethylene regulates such processes, thereby
providing novel insights into ethylene signaling and regulation as well as
avenues by which to modify ethylene responses in agriculturally important
plants. A summer art-and-science course titled "Secrets of the Green World" will
be developed in conjunction with this project, where students will employ
scientific tools, engage in scientific thought, and be involved in a creative
process that integrates science with art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The established
pathway for ethylene signal transduction culminates in transcriptional
regulation by the EIN3 family of transcription factors (TFs). Evidence indicates
that the ethylene receptors may also signal through a two-component pathway,
employing the type-B ARR family of TFs, to control a subset of the ethylene
responses. This project presents an integrated set of experiments to determine
how the type-B ARRs function in concert with the EIN3 family of TFs, building
toward a systems level understanding of the ethylene transcriptional response.
The first objective of this project is to characterize the role of physical
interaction between type-B ARRs and EIN3 in transcriptional regulation.
Mechanistic studies will be pursued to elucidate the basis for the interaction
and how this interaction affects ethylene-dependent gene regulation. The second
objective is to determine the suite of genes co-regulated by type-B ARRs and
EIN3. ChIP-Seq and RNA-Seq based approaches will be used to identify the co-
regulated targets, and systems-based approaches used to predict physiological
roles for testing. The third objective is to characterize transcriptional cross-
talk between the ethylene and cytokinin signaling pathways, since employment of
two-component signaling elements by the ethylene pathway is predicted to affect
signaling through the cytokinin pathway. Models for how TF cooperativity and
sequestration regulate cross-talk between these phytohormone signaling pathways
will be tested using transcriptomic and genetic approaches.