* 1456425
* Evolution of multiple competitors;  experimental evolution using a natural protozoan community.
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2021
* Thomas Miller, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2021
* USD 582,958.00

This study will test a long-standing concept in ecology that if two species
utilize very similar resources, either one or both will evolve to use different
resources, or one will be driven locally extinct. This concept is foundational
to our understanding of how biological communities are organized. Using microbes
found in the water-filled leaves of pitcher plants, this project will test this
principle and its predictions about how species interactions evolve. A novel
experimental approach will be used that compares the evolution of multiple
species occurring in communities of increasing species diversity. Much of
community ecology assumes that each species has its own ideal ecological role,
called the niche, and that evolution can lead species to change their niche to
limit resource competition from other species. Darwin's finches provide a good
example, where these bird species evolved to be more different when together on
islands, as compared to when they were alone. However, predictions about the
evolution of the niche become more difficult in complex communities where many
species may evolve at the same time. In addition to conducting greenhouse
experiments involving pitcher plant microbial communities, the PIs will train
undergraduate and graduate students as well as develop educational activities
that target Florida science standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
address long-standing hypotheses that competition leads to niche partitioning
and character displacement. The evolutionary patterns of protozoa species will
be quantified in 1-, 2, and 4-species communities, using pitcher plants grown in
the greenhouse. This design can be used to ask if species evolve differently in
communities of increasing complexity. The theory of niche partitioning, which is
thought to lead to coexistence, will be supported if species co-evolve to have
reduced competitive interactions, while niche convergence would be supported if
increased competitive interactions evolve in multispecies systems. Specific
traits such as cell size and other physical characteristics associated with
feeding in the protozoa will also be quantified. Next-generation DNA sequencing
will be used to quantifying how the protozoa evolving in different combinations
affect the underlying bacterial community.