* 1456520
* Theory and application of medium-term successional dynamics in secondary tropical forest
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2023
* Elizabeth Braker, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 05/31/2023
* USD 416,493.00

There is a growing need to restore extensive areas of degraded habitat in
tropical areas to forest in order to conserve biodiversity, mitigate the impacts
of climate change (through carbon sequestration), reduce erosion and loss of
topsoil, and provide for human livelihoods, yet little is known about how well
tropical forest restoration strategies work beyond the first few years of
establishment. This long-term experiment aims to address two key questions about
tropical forest recovery. First, the research compares natural forest recovery
to two different forest restoration approaches (a low and high intensity
approach) to assess how the degree of human intervention affects the rate of
tropical forest recovery. Second, the study evaluates the importance of the
proximity of restored sites to remnant forest patches, which can serve as a
source for colonizing plants and animals. Results of this study will provide
critical guidance to land managers and policy makers on how to most effectively
invest limited resources to improve the outcomes of the millions of hectares of
tropical forest restoration being undertaken globally. The study will provide
training for graduate and undergraduate students, and new inquiry-based learning
program will actively engage high school students in the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a decade ago, 13 experimental sites were established
over a 100 square kilometer area in southern Costa Rica, each site with a range
of surrounding forest cover. Each site has three experimental treatments: 1. no
tree planting and natural recovery; 2. planting tree islands of three sizes (low
intensity); and 3. planting the entire plot with trees (high intensity).
Researchers will collect data on metrics to assess the next phase of forest
succession, including measuring soil nutrients, local microclimate, seed
dispersal, tree growth, and the establishment and survival of forest seedlings.
In addition, plots will be used by collaborating scientists to study other
facets of forest recovery such as insect community dynamics, and bird and bat
behavior. The data will be used to address several questions about mid-stage
forest recovery and how the pattern of recovery can change over time including:
the effect of restoration interventions on within- and across-site biodiversity;
the degree to which manipulations of initial conditions result in convergent or
divergent successional trajectories from reference forest; and the relative
importance of local- versus landscape-scale processes on forest recovery.