* 1456023
* Collaborative Proposal to Examine the Function and
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Samuel Bouyain, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2020
* USD 819,999.00

A fundamental problem in biology is how the proper size of an organism is
achieved. The size of tissues and organs is a consequence of both cell size and
number and is controlled by both extrinsic signals, such as insulin peptides,
and intrinsic cell signals that measure nutritional and environmental inputs.
This research program will exploit a genetic model organism to understand how
cell division is balanced by cell growth by the action of a gene named Tribbles.
Tribbles is found in all animals, and in humans it has been connected to cancer
and Type 2 diabetes, but its functions are poorly understood. It has been shown
that Tribbles blocks: (1) cell division by binding the protein Cdc25, a key
trigger of division, and (2) insulin-stimulated cell growth by binding the
protein Akt kinase. This research program will shed light on the functions of
Tribbles that regulate animal size during development, and will have
implications for scientists studying the role of Tribbles in human disease. The
research program will also support ongoing efforts to train students in
molecular and cell biological approaches to dissect conserved developmental
mechanisms in a model organism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies of the
conserved role of Trbl in cell growth and proliferation will offer insight into
the genetic basis of animal diversity, the mechanism of evolution, the effect of
environmental conditions on a developmental program, and the underlying causes
of developmental aberrations and metabolic disease. Body sizes vary impressively
between closely related animal species, and species-specific adaptations, such
as the mammalian forelimb and specialized head segments among insects, show
incredible size scaling. Size is subject to intense evolutionary selection
pressure with consequences for mate selection, predation and tolerance to
environmental changes, moreover animals adjust size to both nutrient
availability and a host of environmental cues including temperature and O2
levels. The mechanisms coordinating this developmental plasticity are
incompletely understood, and include integration of cues from hormonal signals,
growth factors and insulin-like peptides to ensure that energy expended on
growth matches energy intake. The kinase Tribbles (Trbl) binds and blocks a
number of key targets that regulate cell growth, division and differentiation,
notably cdc25 phosphatase to inhibit cell proliferation and Akt kinase to
inhibit insulin-stimulated cell growth and metabolism. The notion that Trbl is
an conserved adaptor protein that regulates both cell proliferation (by binding
and degrading Cdc25) and cell size (by binding and inhibiting Akt) in response
to diet will be tested in three aims: (1) to explore the role of Trbl in cell
growth during normal and dietary stress; (2) to perform a structure/function
analysis of Trbl, focused on its conserved features; and (3) to conduct a screen
for proteins that physically interact with Trbl by (a) yeast two hybrid screens
and (b) co-immuno-pulldown using Trbl-specific antisera.