* 1456847
* WiFiUS: Ubiquitous Video over Dynamic Spectrum
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Mung Chiang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 12/31/2017
* USD 270,000.00

Mobile phones and tablets are the most widely-used wireless communication
devices nowadays. Video already represents the majority of mobile traffic and is
expected to grow significantly in the coming years. Network operators are
already facing shortage of bandwidth to support such a huge amount of traffic,
despite the availability of newer cellular communication technologies. A
solution to increase the availability and the efficiency of wireless
communication technologies is given by cognitive radio networks (CRNs). Enabled
by adaptive communication protocols, CRNs have the capability to sense a wide
range of the spectrum and the agility to make use of the available resources
dynamically. Accordingly, they can reclaim unused spectrum (i.e., whitespace)
for wireless communications while avoiding interferences with between licensed
and unlicensed users. However, video delivery over CRNs presents several
challenges related to the highly-varying nature of the channel, the presence of
misbehaving users, and the dynamic availability of heterogeneous
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses such challenges and makes
CRNs suitable as a platform to provide ubiquitous wireless video. The research
takes a flexible approach that is applicable to diverse regulations across
national boundaries and specifically targets mobile devices. It helps create a
cognitive phone, i.e., a smartphone with cognitive radio capabilities, to bridge
the gap between the technologies behind CRNs and real applications. The project
builds on two major research thrusts. First, it adopts spectrum crowd-sensing as
a means to model the availability of whitespace at multiple scales and support
long-lived communications. Such an approach enables novel solutions to
accurately characterize the channel and enforce the policies established by the
communication authorities. Second, it leverages adaptive mechanisms as
foundations to efficiently deliver video streams to end users. These mechanisms
are implemented through streaming protocols and components in the network
infrastructure that provide video content with a target quality of experience.
The project also integrates synergistic activities between the United States and
Finland in education, industry collaboration, and entrepreneurship.