* 1456538
* Collaborative Research: Beta-catenin Regulation during Asymmetric Stem Cell Divisions
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Kristi Neufeld, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 03/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Understanding how a single-celled zygote (the fertilized egg) develops into a
multicellular animal with diverse, interconnected and properly-specified tissues
is core to our understanding of how animals, including humans, actually work.
One of the great discovery tools in developmental biology is the small nematode,
Caenorhabditis elegans. Taking advantage of the available genetic tools in this
organism, the large international community of C. elegans biologists, has made
great strides in explaining the cellular and developmental mechanisms that
govern how all animals function. For instance, it is now known that the same
cell communication pathways control the development of diverse species,
including C. elegans, and mammals like mice and humans. This collaborative
project investigates the role of one of these conserved pathways in C. elegans
development, focusing on asymmetric stem cell divisions. It will extend these
studies to the most well-established mammalian example of a stem cell
population, intestinal stem cells. In this way, it will determine the extent to
which existing models of control of C. elegans stem cell divisions are conserved
in mammals. Thus the research will provide a strong framework to address common
problems that stem cells in these distantly-related animals encounter. The
project will broaden the impact of these studies by 1) increasing public
engagement and science literacy through hands-on workshops geared toward the
general public, 2) recruiting the next generation of STEM scientists by bringing
8th graders from rural Iowa communities with large Hispanic populations to
campus for a day of career simulations and 3) retaining current STEM
undergraduates by extending undergraduate research opportunities, including to
disadvantaged and underrepresented groups.

Asymmetric cell division (ACD) drives cell fate specification in animals from
mammals to nematodes. Stem cells in these organisms use ACD to generate a
differentiated daughter and a new stem cell. Wnt signaling is a conserved
regulator of ACD and cell fate through its control of the transcriptional
activator beta-catenin. The goal of this project is to elucidate the mechanisms
of beta-catenin regulation during asymmetric stem cell divisions by analyzing
regulation of the C. elegans beta-catenin, SYS-1, and to begin testing the
resulting mechanisms in mammals. C. elegans is well-suited for these analyses
because of its genetic and molecular tools, in vivo ACD imaging, the separation
of the signaling and adhesion functions of beta-catenin into distinct genes and
because of recent findings that SYS-1 is negatively regulated by homologs of the
beta-catenin destruction complex: Axin, APC and CK1alpha. The mammalian
intestinal crypt, arguably the best-known example of Wnt-controlled stem cell
maintenance, will be used to test conservation of SYS 1 regulatory mechanisms
and will also inform the worm models. This project will determine the mechanism
by which Axin localizes the destruction complex, and the extent to which
destruction complex regulation of beta-catenin in the nucleus is conserved. The
results of these studies are predicted to provide broadly important insight into
developmental cell fate specification and the role of Wnt pathway-induced ACD in
tissue homeostasis.