* 1456793
* WiFiUS: Collaborative Research: Sequential Inference and Learning for Agile Spectrum Use
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Harold Vincent Poor, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 02/28/2018
* USD 135,000.00

A key imperative to expanding future wireless services is to overcome the
spectral crunch. At present, static allocation and rigid regulation lead to
underutilization of available spectral resources. Flexible spectrum use aims at
exploiting under-utilized spectrum. Available spectrum opportunities may be non-
contiguous, scattered over a large bandwidth, and are available locally and for
a limited period of time due to the highly dynamic nature of wireless
transmissions. This fuels the need to understand how to discover, assess and
utilize the time-frequency-location varying spectral resources efficiently and
with minimal delay. Moreover, it is critical to access identified idle spectrum
in an agile manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design sequential
inference and learning algorithms for agile spectrum access when the state of
the spectrum varies rapidly. The key advantage of sequential algorithms, as
compared to block-wise algorithms, is that they typically lead to significantly
reduced decision delays. The overarching goal of this project is to design
sequential inference and learning algorithms for agile spectrum utilization. In
particular, this project will employ advanced sequential inference and learning
methods for the following three interconnected yet increasingly sophisticated
and demanding tasks: 1) to employ sequential reinforcement learning and
sequential inference algorithms to design sensing policies for rapid spectrum
opportunities discovery; 2) to design sequential algorithms for fast and
accurate spectrum quality assessment; and 3) to build, maintain and exploit an
interference map of the area where our network operates and represent it as a
spatial potential field. The proposed research is expected to make substantial
contributions to both applications and theory. On the application level, the
proposed research has the potential to substantially improve spectral efficiency
by introducing novel tools from sequential analysis, machine learning and
statistical inference for the design of spectrum discovery, assessment and
exploitation policies. On the theoretical level, the proposed project will
advance the state of the art in sequential analysis and contribute new
approaches to the general methodological base for optimal stopping, control and
machine learning problems. Furthermore, new methods and theory of modeling and
exploiting knowledge of interference using spatial potential fields, sequential
statistics and advanced propagation modeling will be developed.