* 1456054
* Examining the macroevolutionary trajectories in Amoebozoa, a major lineage of eukaryotes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Alexander Kudryavtsev, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 04/30/2020
* USD 832,259.00

Our current view of the eukaryotic Tree of Life suggests that life can be
divided up into several major groups, including the Amoebozoa, the branch
closest to our own major group, the Obazoa. The Amoebozoa is composed primarily
of organisms that have single, amoeboid cells as part of their life cycles. Such
cells are dynamic, changing shape as they move with transient extensions of the
cell called pseudopodia. These cells are also used for engulfing prey. Amoebae
are often thought to be simple because of their apparent lack of obvious
characteristics. Consequently many biologists have the impression that these
simple looking organisms are 'primitive' and assume that they are very similar
to the first eukaryotes. Preliminary data suggest that there is more complexity
and diversity in Amoebozoa than is generally acknowledged. This project is
designed to find the relationships among amoebozoans and to develop ideas on how
these various amoebae originated from an ancestor whose characteristics were
reduced. Given that Amoebozoa is the closest lineage to our own, their ancestry
and evolution is important to better understand how all eukaryotes
evolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research challenges the idea that amoebae are
primitively simple. It uses synthetic studies that employ a whole life cycle
approach using gene expression profiling and morphological data to address the
patterns of broad scale evolution in this highly diverse major eukaryotic
lineage. Although amoebozoans occur in nearly every environment, surprisingly
little is known about their evolution. This is complicated by the fact that
Amoebozoa is under represented in genomic-level databases, and although some
recent progress has been made, much more is needed. This project will first
develop a robust phylogenetic tree of Amoebozoa under a phylogenomic framework
using RNAseq data from taxa broadly sampled across the breadth of the amoebozoan
diversity. Additionally, for taxa that display complex life cycles researchers
will examine gene expression profiles of various life stages using single cell
RNA sequencing techniques. These data will identify commonalties among higher-
level amoebozoan groups and by mapping character trait evolution on the tree of
Amoebozoa, it will uncover the macroevolutionary trajectories of Amoebozoa.
Moreover, this project will examine gene transfer events, gene innovations, gene
family expansions and gene losses in Amoebozoa. This represents a unique
opportunity to examine the evolution trajectory in which many of the taxa
observed today evolved from complex ancestors to more 'simple' terminal taxa.
The project will train undergraduate and graduate student training from
underrepresented groups in genomics, phylogenetics and Amoebozoa biology.