* 1456013
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Learning attitude verb meanings
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Jeffrey Lidz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2016
* USD 18,112.00

Having strong linguistic ability is crucial for becoming a productive member of
society. However, there remain many unanswered questions regarding how young
children, who start out with no language whatsoever, learn this complex and
crucial ability. The answer to these questions not only has educational
ramifications but may also provide important insights into the root causes of
such matters as the increased prevalence of cognitive-linguistic disorders and
socioeconomic-status-based differences in learning outcomes. The issues examined
in this dissertation project relate to how young children learn the meanings of
verbs: Verbs constitute the core of a language's sentences, so understanding how
verbs are learned is key to understanding how children learn language more
generally. Some verbs are harder for children to learn than others. For
instance, action verbs like "run" and "hit" are learned earlier than mental
verbs like "believe" and "want". One reason "believe" and "want" might be
learned later is that, whereas we can see and hear running and hitting events,
we can't see or hear thinking and wanting. Children nevertheless learn these
verbs, so a route other than the senses must exist. This research investigates
what that route is using methods from linguistic theory, cognitive science, and
computer science to examine one promising proposal: that children use the
sentence contexts a verb occurs in to infer its meaning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine theories of how children
leverage the fact that similarity in sentence context seems to correspond to
similarity in verb meaning. To answer this question, this research will exploit
experimental methods for measuring the effect of contextual information on verb
learning. The investigators will measure these effects on performance in
artificial grammar learning experiments using Mechanical Turk for data
collection. The researchers will incorporate the findings from these experiments
into a computational model of the cognitive processes that allow children to
learn words. This second step is useful both scientifically and practically. On
the one hand, it will result in a deeper understanding of the mental processes
that underlie language learning. On the other, it will provide a model of
cognitive development that will help predict the effect that differences in the
language spoken to children--for instance, those conditioned by socioeconomic
status--have on language learning outcomes.