* 1456109
* Functional Evolution of the FRUITFULL Gene Lineage in the Tomato Family (Solanaceae)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Patricia Springer, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 06/30/2021
* USD 667,655.00

Because plants are rooted in the ground, they must have ways for their offspring
to move away from home, to colonize new areas. Seeds are usually produced in one
of two types of vessels to facilitate this process. A dry pod splits open at
maturity to release the seeds, so they can be carried on the wind or, if they
have hooks, they can stick to an animal. In contrast, a fleshy fruit such as an
apple or cucumber will be eaten by an animal, which will then disperse the
seeds. Fleshy fruits provide an important source of nutrition to all animals,
including humans; a large part of the human diet and economy is based on fruits
such as tomatoes, peppers, melons, squash, or avocados. Many different groups of
flowering plants underwent an evolutionary shift from producing a dry pod to a
fleshy fruit, with important ecological and economic consequences. The long-term
goal of this project is to understand the genetic mechanisms that determine if a
plant will produce a dry pod or an edible, fleshy fruit. The work focuses on the
nightshade family, which includes pod-producing species such as desert tobacco
and petunia, as well as fleshy-fruit-producing species such as tomato, eggplant,
and pepper. These experiments look at the role of a group of genes that appears
to have undergone a change in function associated with the origin of fleshy
fruit. The results may identify specific genes or changes in genes that allow a
species to make an edible, nutritious fruit, which could contribute to crop
improvement or development. This project also will form the basis of two
botanical garden exhibits on fruit structure and diversity in the nightshade
family, and will provide training for high school students and undergraduates
from under-represented minorities, as well as for a graduate student and a post-
doctoral researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MADS-box transcription factor
FRUITFULL (FUL) plays a key role in the development of the Arabidopsis fruit by
determining the patterns of cell differentiation that are required for the fruit
to elongate and split open normally to release the seeds. FUL orthologs have
also been shown to be required for proper ripening in some fleshy fruits,
showing a conserved function in fruit development, but with a substantially
different outcome. Fruits in the nightshade family (Solanaceae) are ancestrally
dry and dehiscent, but there was a shift to fleshy fruit with the origin of the
Solanoideae clade. The FUL gene clade has undergone duplications leading to four
copies in some species, and the first part of this project will generate a gene
tree using a combination of transcriptome and targeted PCR approaches to
identify when duplications occurred. The data will also be used to determine
whether different paralogous clades have undergone different modes of evolution
(neutral, purifying, etc), which will be correlated with the functional data
collected in the second part. The second part uses CRISPR technology to compare
the function of the four FUL paralogs in desert tobacco and tomato to determine
how the function of each paralog changed during Solanaceae evolution. Double and
quadruple mutants will also be evaluated and transcriptomes generated to
determine the effect of downregulation on downstream targets in both dry and
fleshy fruit development. The focus will be on early stages of development,
prior to ripening and dehiscence, when defining characteristics such as pericarp
thickness and cell type identity are specified. The data will contribute to our
understanding of the mechanisms required to produce a fleshy fruit, and will
elucidate the processes underlying a key evolutionary phenomenon, the shift from
dry to fleshy fruit production. All data will be publicly available upon
publication through GenBank, Sol Genomics Network, and the Dryad repository.
Mutant lines and seed will be available upon request from the investigators.