* 1456927
* Collaborative Research: Interactive Effects of Exogenous and Endogenous Spatial Heterogeneity on Plant Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Antonio Golubski, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 02/29/2020
* USD 57,293.00

The spatial heterogeneity of the physical environment within a given area may be
the primary determinant of the coexistence of multiple species and consequent
species diversity therein. However, organisms themselves can contribute to
species coexistence through their own processes of variable reproduction and
dispersal, through interactions such as competition, and through ways that
different organisms modify their environment locally and increase heterogeneity.
The balance of the roles of the external environment and the organisms
themselves in determining coexistence and diversity of species is a largely open
question in ecology. This project will use a novel field experiment to examine
this question for a grassland system in Kansas. The experiment will manipulate
environmental heterogeneity using soil mixtures and will introduce differences
in the effects of organisms by planting different mixtures of species in
different ways. A computer simulation model will complement the experiment to
explore the details of various processes. This work will contribute to knowledge
on the maintenance of species diversity in plant communities, which is valuable
in managing natural and modified (in this case, rangeland) plant communities to
maintain ecosystem services. The project also contributes to the development of
the next generation of scientists through training of graduate and undergraduate
students and a well-developed connection to a local high school that involves
students in the research.

This research will examine the strengths of exogenous and endogenous spatial
heterogeneity in mediating species coexistence and diversity in grassland
communities. The exogenous spatial heterogeneity is taken here as the spatial
heterogeneity in soils, and the endogenous heterogeneity is taken as the
conditions created by spatial heterogeneity in response to dispersal limitation,
demographic stochasticity, competitive interactions, and organism-environment
feedbacks resulting in endogenous spatial structuring of populations and
communities independent of underlying environment gradients. A novel experiment
will compare mixed and unmixed soils in a block design. Seeds will be sown to
vary species aggregation pattern and species pools (by functional and
phylogenetic diversity). A smaller set of experiments will focus on plant-soil
feedbacks. The experiments will be complemented by the development of a
simulation model that can mimic the experimental design. The simulation will
allow additional scales of heterogeneity to be considered. By combining
experiments with models, the work will close a gap between theory and empirical
work. The research will be extended to education through an associate scientist
program involving a local high school students who will participate directly in
data gathering and analysis. Graduate students will participate in training
undergraduates and the high school students. The work will contribute to
conservation through an understanding of the effects of plant community
simplification.