* 1456154
* SBIR Phase II:  Representation and Deep Learning for Free Text Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Stephen Gallant, Textician, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2019
* USD 943,539.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project derives from an enhanced capability for
automated processing of free text and other structured data. Motivation for this
approach comes from neural networks and, in turn, it has applications to neural
modeling and our understanding of how the brain processes information. In the
software industry, commercial innovation continues to revolve around automated
processing of web pages, which plays a key role in creating many new companies.
Therefore, the ability to automate decision-making from free text is increasing
in importance. A better way to represent text for use with machine learning will
open new capabilities wherever the structure of sentences must be taken into
account. This has the potential to lead to new startup ventures, thereby
resulting in new products and services. A successful project will result in
platform technology that can provide a substantial competitive edge to companies
that take advantage of it, provide new and better capabilities for consumers,
and help advance the nation's lead in technological
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project seeks to further develop new ways to process textual material
so that computers can better learn applications related to natural language.
Applications include sentiment analysis (assigning either positive or negative
views to a body of text), summarization of documents, and classification of
documents using multiple labels from a fixed set of many classes. The project
will further develop new techniques to improve performance, and prototype
components for transforming text and applying computerized learning methods. The
new techniques represent words simultaneously with document structure using a
single high-dimensional vector (for example, a list of 1,000 numbers). The
project is aimed at improving computational capabilities involving documents,
web pages, and other text as well as providing new techniques that can be
applied to automated translation, better computer understanding of images, and
genomic information.