* 1456966
* Turnover of Proteins as a Controller of Soil Nitrogen Cycling
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ryan Mueller, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Plant productivity in natural and managed ecosystems is often limited by
nitrogen (N), which plants obtain from the soil mainly as ammonium or nitrate -
both of which are inorganic forms of N. Yet, more than 95% of the N in soil
exists in organic forms, primarily enzymes and other proteins that originated
from decaying plant material or from the microorganisms that decompose it. This
research will study protein breakdown in forest soil, which is the major
bottleneck in converting organic N into forms available to plants. Proteins are
broken down by enzymes (proteases) that are produced and released into the soil
environment by bacteria and fungi. Interactions between proteins and soil-
mineral and organic components can affect the activity of microbial proteases.
This research will directly measure microbial and soil controls on protein
degradation and thus provide a deeper understanding of the bottleneck in the
supply of N to plants and other environmental fates of N. This research has the
potential to be transformative in that it will reveal a core mechanism coupling
carbon (C) and N cycling. Understanding how proteases de-polymerize and recycle
organic N is needed to more accurately model how limited natural nitrogen
availability affects interactions between C & N cycles. Research will be
conveyed to groups underrepresented in science through four activities that
extend beyond the laboratory: (1) the annual HJA Day at the Andrews Long-Term
Ecological Research (LTER) site, which reaches large numbers of the general
public; (2) assist in a short-course in soil science that is taught each summer
for middle and high school teachers; (3) provide a K-12 teacher with research
experience; and (4) design curriculum and teach a short-course in environmental
proteomics for graduate students.

Organic N turnover has long been recognized as key controller of N availability
in soil ecosystems, but the processes that break down macromolecular N compounds
into assimilable N-monomers have received little attention. The proposed
research will examine the turnover of organic N, particularly proteins, which
make up the greatest fraction of soil organic N. A new conceptual approach
towards the soil N cycle is proposed that recognizes "matrix" and "microbial"
controls on the bioavailability of organic N: Interacting chemical and physical
processes associated with the soil matrix control the accessibility of
proteinaceous N to a diverse complement of proteases produced by a complex
microbial community in response to environmental stimuli. This model will be
explored through two objectives: (1) determining the fate of two 15N-labeled
'substrate' proteins with distinct physicochemical characteristics in soils
across a gradient of resource availability, mineralogy, and microbial ecology,
with special emphasis on the relative importance of protein-mineral and protein-
organic matter interactions as contributors to matrix regulation; (2)
determining the relative contributions of different microbial groups to protease
activity in soils that vary in N availability, and the control of protease
activity by C versus N limitation as a means of exploring the microbial
regulation of protein turnover. Research questions associated with these
objectives will be addressed using soils of well-characterized, long-standing
experiments in temperate forests. 15N-labeled proteins will be used to determine
their turnover rates and the fate of the C and N in the proteins. This will be
coupled with characterization of proteases and measurements of their activities.
A manipulative experiment will be done to determine the relative contribution to
protease activity by bacteria and fungi. These data will provide insight into
the control mechanisms functioning in our conceptual model of organic N
turnover. Collectively, data generated in Objectives 1 and 2 will allow us to
identify the mechanistic functions that the soil matrix and microbial community
exert on the fate of protein N as it is degraded in soils. It will reveal how
the activities of microbial proteases vary among soil ecosystems and
characterize them by their catalytic types. Knowing the properties and behavior
of proteases is essential to reconcile how they access the different forms of
soil-associated proteins, and thus constitutes a fundamental prerequisite for
successful future studies. To this end, the proposed research will generate
quantitative information of N transformation and retention in soil, which is
also critical to the management of soil productivity and environmental health.
The data and functional relationships generated by the proposed research are
eventually intended to be coupled to N cycling models that separate the activity
of microbial functional groups or enzymes. The outcomes of this research will
include a more quantitative understanding of the role of microbial proteases in
organic N cycling in terrestrial ecosystems and of the sources and diversity of
proteases.