* 1456634
* SG: Development of Improved Methods of Biogeography and Ancestry Identification
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Tatiana Tatarinova, Children's Hospital Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 11/30/2017
* USD 149,994.00

The ability to identify the geographic origin of an individual using genomic
data poses a great challenge due to its complexity and potential
misinterpretations. Knowledge of this origin and recent ancestry are essential
for research in multiple fields such as anthropology, sociology, forensics,
personalized medicine and epidemiology, in which ancestry is an important
variable. It also requires understanding that all species, including humans, are
mixed to certain degrees and that these mixture patterns can unlock the history
and origin of their ancestors. As the proportion of mixed-ancestry individuals
increases worldwide, there is a need to better infer their biogeography. Current
methods are less than 50% accurate for European populations and highly
inaccurate for non-Europeans. This project aims to address this shortage and to
develop novel, accurate and efficient tools to study individuals of mixed
origin. They will have vast implications for practitioners trying to match cases
and controls in disease studies, geneticists studying biodiversity and origins
of humans, animals, and plants, as well as many people seeking answers about
their past. This work will also contribute to advancement in agricultural
genomics by providing selection tools for plant and animal breeders.

Recently published first-generation Geographic Population Structure (GPS1)
algorithm, developed by the PIs, provided biogeographical predictions that
placed 83% of worldwide non-admixed individuals in their correct country of
origin. This proposal builds on the success of the GPS1 algorithm to develop new
tools for predicting biogeography in mixed individuals. The current aims are:
(1) Development of the next phase of GPS algorithms, which will be capable of
predicting the countries of origin of an individual's parents, grandparents or a
more complex mixture with high accuracy; (2) Development of a tool to infer
local ancestry along the genome; (3) Development of a GPS pipeline to infer the
biogeographic origin of plants and animals. Modern computational approaches,
such as genetic algorithms, simulated annealing, and others will be used to
achieve optimal accuracy and computational efficiency. All algorithms will be
implemented in the platform-independent languages R and Matlab and use the mpiR
R package and parallel computing toolbox, respectively, to enable parallel
processing. This project is supported by the Evolutionary Processes and
Biological Anthropology programs at NSF.