* 1456917
* To Elucidate N-acylethanolamine Metabolic Pathway And Its Role In Mediating Dehydration Stress Tolerance In Physcomitrella Patens
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Aruna Kilaru, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2021
* USD 679,993.00

Disturbance in the natural growth habitat causes stress responses in plants that
enable them to resist, tolerate or adapt to these changes. Such stress responses
often involve activation of a network of metabolic signals. The main objective
of this project is to study the metabolism and role of a unique lipid metabolite
called anandamide in the development of dehydration tolerance in moss plants.
Anandamide typically occurs in mammals, and has not been reported in higher
plants, despite its occurrence in mosses. In mammals, this compound is involved
in neuronal signaling, raising the possibility that it also acts as a signal in
mosses. Moss plants are naturally tolerant to many stresses and this study is
expected to determine if the unique lipids present in mosses, but absent in
higher plants, play a role in the greater dehydration tolerance shown by mosses.
The findings from this study will reveal novel functional and evolutionary
insights into lipid-mediated biological responses that may be widely applicable
in plants. Such insights may lead to development of strategies to generate
stress tolerant crop plants in the future, helping to maintain food production
during droughts and on marginal lands. The project also offers much needed
research opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students and a research
associate at East Tennessee State University, which is a primarily undergraduate
institution that attracts many regional, first-generation students from the
Appalachian region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;N-acylethanolamines (NAEs) are a class
of fatty acid derivatives that are widely distributed among eukaryotes. Among
the various types of NAEs, anandamide is known to bind to cannabinoid receptors
and acts as a neuromodulator for a variety of physiological processes in
mammals. Recently, anandamide, a 20-carbon, polyunsaturated omega-6 fatty acid
ethanolamide (NAE 20:4) was identified in moss plants but not in higher plants.
This discovery has opened the possibility that NAEs in early land plants may
play a unique role that is akin to that in animals and beyond what is known in
flowering plants. The presence of unconventional lipids in bryophytes has long
been considered crucial for their successful transition from water to land
because lipids may have imparted them with natural ability to resist high
temperatures and tolerate osmotic and salt stresses and dehydration. Therefore,
it is hypothesized that mosses may have evolutionarily retained unique NAE
metabolites, such as anandamide, and mechanisms by which they mediate stress
tolerance. To address this premise, three main objectives will be pursued, using
Physcomitrella patens: 1) Biochemically and molecularly characterize the NAE
metabolic pathway, 2) Determine NAE metabolite profiles and their effects on
development, and 3) Elucidate the physiological role of NAEs in abscisic acid-
mediated dehydration tolerance. Studies will take advantage of discoveries made
in other eukaryotic systems, including the enzymes that regulate NAE metabolic
pathway and lipid-profiling techniques. Long-term goals of the project are to
elucidate the mechanisms by which mosses maintain tolerance to abiotic stress,
which perhaps may have been altered or lost in vascular plants, and reveal novel
functional and evolutionary insights into lipid-mediated biological responses in
plants.