* 1456655
* The Adaptive Potential of Maternal Stress as a Driver of Variation in Offspring Fitness in a Free-living Animal
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Tracy Langkilde, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 05/31/2019
* USD 618,535.00

This project addresses a question of fundamental importance to both the
biological and medical fields; how does the stress a mother experiences impact
her offspring? Specifically, this project examines how maternal stress alters
the morphology, behavior and physiology of offspring, and how these changes
ultimately affect offspring survival - in both highly stressful and benign
environments. The scientists challenge the widely held belief that maternal
stress negatively affects offspring. They propose that maternal stress prepares
offspring for high stress conditions. This project tests, in lizards, whether
offspring of stressed mothers will survive better in high stress environments
(containing predatory, invasive fire ants), worse in low stress environments and
if lizards that come from stressful environments are better able to deal with
stress. By testing the consequences of exposure to novel predatory ants, this
project addresses the global issue of the impacts of environmental change. The
results work will inform the prediction and management of the imported red fire
ant, which currently threatens the survival of many vertebrates in the southern
USA. This work will leverage the strong community interest in these invasive
fire ants to engage students and the community in science. The investigators
will partner with the Girl Scouts of Southern Alabama and Park Forest Middle
School in Pennsylvania to develop science related education tools involving both
the local community and school-aged students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maternal
stress is a driving factor affecting offspring phenotypes and is traditionally
viewed as 'costly' to organismal fitness. This project tests the hypothesis that
predator-induced maternal stress adaptively prepares offspring for the high-risk
environment experienced by the mother. It examines whether offspring from
stressed mothers survive better in high-risk environments and the potential
mechanisms (morphology, physiology, and behavior) that may affect survival
differences. The investigators will use a combination of laboratory
manipulations, and natural and semi-captive field experiments using free-living
fence lizards (prey) and fire ants (predator). Maternal and egg stress levels
will be experimentally manipulated and resulting offspring phenotype measured
before offspring are released into high or low predator risk environments and
natural survival measured. By testing these assumptions in fence lizards
captured from fire ant invaded and non-invaded sites, this project evaluates the
influence of an evolutionary history of risk on the strength of these effects.
This project will contribute to the understanding of the consequences of
maternal stress for offspring fitness within evolutionary and ecologically
relevant environments, and challenge the assumption that consequences of stress
are necessarily negative. The proposed project addresses the globally-important
issue of invasive red fire ants. Investigators will partner with the Girl Scouts
of Southern Alabama and Park Forest Middle School in Pennsylvania, developing
science related classroom activities, educating the local community and school-
aged students. The proposed work supports the training of 1 Masters and 1
Doctoral student, 1 post-doctoral fellow, 4 undergraduates, and an early career
scientist.