* 1456662
* Collaborative Research: Integrative Approaches to Plant Cell Wall Digestion by Non holometabolous Insects
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Juan Luis Jurat-Fuentes, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 10/31/2018
* USD 230,354.00

Plant cell walls contain lignocellulosic compounds that are difficult to
degrade, such as xylan, cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectin. However, insect
herbivores are capable of degrading these compounds and using the simpler
compounds derived from the degradation processes for energy. While early work
assumed that the source of the catalyst enzymes involved in the biochemical
breakdown of lignocellulosic compounds (i.e., plant cell wall degradation
enzymes, PCWDE) in insects was gut-resident symbiotic bacteria, recent work has
shown that PCWDE produced by the cells of the insect gut are more important than
previously realized. The goal of this research is to examine the diversity of
PCWDE in two major lower insect lineages using a combination of functional
genomics and biochemical tests. This basic research will improve understanding
about the physiological mechanisms of insect digestion and may yield novel
insights about insect control methods, biofuel industry improvements, and other
industrial applications. This work will provide the opportunity for
undergraduate, high school and graduate students to gain experience in cutting
edge functional genomics, and insect physiology and biochemistry. Museum
exhibits will be produced to educate the public about the importance of wood
feeding insects. These exhibits will be presented at the University of
California David Bohart Museum of Entomology and several other science museums
across California and Tennessee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary work revealed
that Phasmids (walking sticks) and Thysanurans (silverfish and firebrats) have
strikingly high numbers of PCWDE, that these genes show compartment specific
expression within the gut, and are effective at degrading plant cell wall
compounds. This project will identify the full complement of PCWDE present in
the focal species (6 Phasmids and 3 Thysanurans) and compare the activity and
expression levels of them in the digestive systems of these insects. Using
heterologous expression, the researchers will characterize the activity of the
most active enzymes in these systems. The researchers will also analyze how
patterns of gene expression correlate with the physical attributes of the gut,
which vary greatly between the two focal insect orders. The ultimate goal is to
describe the variation in physiological compartmentalization of the digestive
system and determine how it works synergistically with a diversity of
differentially-expressed enzymes to maximize digestion of lignocellulosic
compounds. Findings from this research will be published in peer-reviewed
journals, and presented at regional and national scientific meetings.