* 1456548
* Collaborative Research: Functional and evolutionary bases of substrate-specificity in wood-decaying basidiomycetes
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Robert Blanchette, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2019
* USD 166,834.00

Wood (lignocellulose) is one of the most abundant carbon pools in terrestrial
ecosystems. Fungal decomposition of wood is a critical component of the carbon
cycle, impacts soil productivity, and has the potential to be exploited in the
production of biofuels and other 'green' technologies. The major wood-decaying
fungi are mushroom-forming (Agaricomycetes). The physical characteristics and
chemical composition of wood vary among plant species, and most wood-decaying
Agaricomycetes have characteristic wood substrate ranges. However, it is not
understood why individual species of wood decaying fungi tend to occur on
specific plant hosts. This project will investigate the mechanisms of substrate
specificity and substrate switching in wood-decaying Agaricomycetes using a
combination of analyses of genes expressed during decay, and physical and
chemical characterization of the decay process. Fungal enzymes that are involved
in wood decay or degradation have potential applications in emerging
bioprocesses, such as energy-related bioconversions, including biofuel
production, and bioremediation. Enhanced understanding of the mechanisms that
allow different species of fungi to exploit particular wood substrates could
help guide development of genetic resources that could be used for such applied
purposes. This project will support one Postdoctoral Fellow and two graduate
students, and will provide training to undergraduates at three collaborating
academic institutions in the US. To bring information about fungi and wood
decomposition to a wide audience, this project will create interactive exhibits
and develop accompanying public programs at the Worcester EcoTarium
(http://www.ecotarium.org/), a science and nature museum which serves over
140,000 visitors annually including large numbers of students from regional
public schools. Exhibits will illustrate fungal diversity, the decay process,
and the role of fungi in the carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will focus on four species of Agaricomycetes (with distinct substrate
preferences) with available genome sequences. The fungi will be cultured on
solid wafers of four different tree species (two conifers and two hardwoods).
Transcriptome profiling will be performed with the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform,
focusing on genes encoding enzymes known or suspected to be involved in wood
decay, as well as co-expressed genes of unknown function. Phylogenomic analyses
will make use of all available genomes of wood-decaying Agaricomycetes, focusing
on gene families that are likely to play a role in decay, as informed by
expression profiles. Physical and chemical characteristics of decay will be
addressed using microscopy, mass spectrometry, and chemical analyses of
colonized substrates. The proposed research is a collaboration between
researchers with expertise in fungal systematics and molecular evolution, wood
decay and forest products pathology, fungal genomics, and genetics and
biochemistry of decay systems. This project will capitalize on recent advances
in genomics of wood-decaying basidiomycetes. It will provide insight into the
functioning and evolution of fungi in forest ecosystems, and create a framework
for future studies aimed at understanding the specific plant-derived compounds
that affect expression of particular fungal genes.