* 1456472
* Model Systems in Neuroethology
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Kenneth Catania, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 05/31/2021
* USD 633,444.00

Many groundbreaking findings have been made by studying a specialized animal
species - a so-called "champion species." For example, our basic understanding
of how neurons in human brains send signals came from studies of the giant
nerves of squid, whereas discovery of the molecule (the acetylcholine receptor)
that allows communication between nerves and muscles in humans came from studies
of the electric eel. Using a similar approach here the researchers will study
star-nosed moles and their relatives to understand the sense of touch at both
the molecular and brain organization levels. Star-nosed moles have a
characteristic star-shaped set of tentacles at the end of their snout; food is
sensed and located by touch of the tentacles. Star-nosed moles have the most
developed sense of touch of any mammal species. Surprisingly, the molecules that
generate touch signals in the skin of mammals (and humans) remain undiscovered.
Preliminary investigations show that star-nosed moles have great numbers of
these molecules in their star, which may allow for a breakthrough in
understanding how touch signals are generated. In addition to this goal, the
researchers will investigate how space in the brain is devoted to processing the
most important inputs. This is important because skilled behaviors (such as
playing a musical instrument or typing on a computer) require large brain
territories. This is well understood at the higher brain levels (such as the
cerebral neocortex) but little is known about how space in lower areas of the
brain pathways (the brainstem and thalamus) is divided up for skilled behaviors.
Understanding both the molecules of touch and the way touch is processed in
brains is a basic goal that will inform researchers about both normal and
abnormal conditions in mammals and humans generally. In addition, the unique
animals serve as vehicles for teaching about biology and senses to both students
and the public. These investigations will provided compelling vehicles for
teaching and will provide trainees with broad exposure to behavioral
neurobiology ranging from behavior, to anatomy, to single-cell recordings and
molecular biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Studies of star-nosed moles will
explore the organization and representation of the unique "tactile fovea" on the
nose. This small area of the star, used for high acuity touch, is over-
represented in the brain, providing an opportunity for better understanding
brain mapping related to behaviorally important body parts. In addition, the
receptor-dense skin is useful for identifying the molecules that mediate touch
in sensory neurons using bioinformatics. Eastern moles, on the other hand, have
exceptional olfactory abilities and related behaviors that will allow for better
understanding of how animals localize odorants and follow scent trails. Because
all mammals share basic features of brain organization and function, findings
will help us to understand general principles of how nervous systems process
sensory information. More specifically, the star-nosed mole has advantages for
understanding brain mapping and the relationship between primary afferents and
areas of the central nervous system that represent behaviorally important skin
surfaces. This is fundamental to our understanding of normal and abnormal brain
organization and development.