* 1456088
* SBIR Phase II:  Disaster Recovery and Migration Technologies for Cloud Applications and Data
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Navraj Chohan, AppScale Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,344,579.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project results from lowering the barrier to entry for,
and simplifying the use of, cloud computing systems via a novel, open source,
cloud platform. The proposed advances have the potential to facilitate and
expedite innovation and technological progress by a diverse software and global
developer community, enabling more people to tackle the important yet
increasingly challenging and data-intensive computing problems facing businesses
today. The company's technologies address directly the key pain points of this
explosively growing platform-as-a-service (PaaS) and cloud-based application
development market - namely privacy, lock-in, and control. Unique to the
company's approach is compatibility with a leading, proprietary, public cloud
PaaS standard (Google App Engine). As such, the company's solutions have
significant commercial potential because they are directly applicable to
businesses that employ App Engine today (there are currently over 4.5 million
active applications), and they lay the groundwork for addressing the larger PaaS
market in the long term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is based on a distributed system that executes and
manages web-based and mobile cloud applications (apps) via automation, thereby
relieving developers, operations staff, and Information Technology (IT) groups
of the burden of doing so. The proposed technology advances address the issue of
vendor lock-in - i.e. the use of proprietary technologies, services, and systems
that effectively prevent users from switching to alternative vendors. In the
cloud space, lock-in is proliferated through the use of (i) proprietary
interfaces and tools, (ii) complex pricing models, and (iii) the lack of
interoperability across vendors. The proposed technology disrupts lock-in by
public cloud vendors by automating software deployment and management across
clouds, and by making it easy to move applications and data between vendor
offerings and on-premise clusters. In particular, the company's technologies
abstract away the complexities of cloud use, and provide monitoring,
backup/restoration, and migration of applications and data across clouds at the
push of a button. By providing features that are currently unavailable today,
the proposed technologies have significant potential for reducing the cost,
risk, and learning curve associated with cloud-based development, deployment,
disaster recovery, and migration for the next generation of cloud applications.