* 1456842
* RAPID: Empathy and Social Welfare
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Leonie Huddy, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 114,993.00

Governments are frequently asked to provide humanitarian assistance to people
who are victims of natural disasters, civil wars, ethnic conflict, poverty, and
violence. Public opinion can be a major factor in the willingness of politicians
to use public funds for this purpose. This project examines how people respond
to the needs of those who are victims of humanitarian crises. One major factor
that has not been adequately studied is empathy - the ability to understand and
feel what others experience emotionally. Research in psychology has shown that
people differ in their ability to empathize and this should affect how they
respond in these situations. But sympathy for those in need can conflict with
other beliefs and values like limited government and belief in legal procedures.
This project uses the situation brought about by the large number of children
from Central America arriving at the U.S. border to study the ways in which
empathy and values influence responses to humanitarian crises. Different news
stories about the situation are used to alter the values that people apply to
the problem and determine how this changes the impact of empathy on their
opinions. This research will shed light on the factors that influence people's
attitudes toward those in need in a number of political
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How the public responds to people in need is an
important factor in many domains of politics. In this research project the focus
is on the dynamics of opinion formation in cases of humanitarian crises. A novel
theoretical framework involving the interaction between individual differences
in empathy and the frames used by politicians, the media, and religious leaders
to shape public opinion and influence government policy is developed and tested.
The consequences of individual differences in empathy for public opinion have
not been adequately explored in political science. A measure developed in the
study of Autism Spectrum Disorder, the "Reading the Mind in the Eyes Test," will
be used to measure individual differences in empathic ability. The researchers
then draw on a modern version of cognitive dissonance theory to specify the
conditions under which empathy may conflict with other values and political
principles. Such dissonance can result in people high in empathy not feeling
compassion for people in need but, instead, bolstering these conflicting
principles and values. Using a media framing experiment that activates different
values and principles, the investigators explore how empathic ability affects
reactions to the Central American children who have been coming to the U.S.
seeking refugee status. The study will demonstrate the utility of the proposed
theoretical framework for understanding more broadly the impact of empathy on
public support for a range of programs designed to assist those in need.