* 1456932
* Sensory Physiology and Genomics of Olfaction in Drosophila Mojavensis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2023
* John Layne, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 05/31/2023
* USD 686,000.00

The perception of chemicals in the environment is a principal way in which many
animals gain information from their surroundings. How an animal behaviorally
responds to these signals may affect their reproductive success. An example of
this is the preference insects have for distinct plants they feed on, based on
the chemical compounds emitted from these plants. Specifically, changes in their
preferences for chemical signals through changes in their ability to perceive
them using their sense of smell (olfaction) can contribute to divergence among
populations and species formation. This study will examine the evolution of the
olfactory system within a single species, in the context of differences in
chemical cues across its geographical range. This knowledge is fundamental to
understanding more broadly how genetic and neural variation can result in
fundamental differences in behavior. Results from the proposed work will thus
document mechanisms by which a species emerges. It will also have broad
implications for applied agriculture. Many herbivorous insects locate food and
mates using their sense of smell, resulting in adverse effects on agricultural
productivity. In summary, in addition to advancing the understanding of
olfaction, this research will serve as a model for understanding the mechanisms
underlying divergence in behavior and ecological speciation. Moreover, its
integrative nature makes it ideally suited for training students, since it uses
behavioral, molecular genetic, and neurophysiological approaches. Outreach
activities will include exposing high school students to research through hands-
on experiential learning that highlights results from the proposed research and,
more broadly, concepts in sensory biology and
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding species formation ideally includes
examination of the process prior to its completion. Four geographically distinct
populations of the fly Drosophila mojavensis currently exploit four different
cactus species that emit specific combinations of volatile chemical compounds
that are primary cues for plant identification. The objective of this proposal
is to determine the correspondence between variation in olfactory cues,
olfactory sensitivity, and behavioral preference for natural odorants. The
specific aims are to compare populations of the same species that use different
host plants: (1) neurophysiological responses to host plant-specific volatiles,
(2) molecular genetic mechanisms underlying different neurophysiological
responses, and (3) to determine whether the volatiles eliciting different
neurophysiological responses translate into behavioral discrimination. These
studies will result in further understanding of how the peripheral nervous
system can change in response to changing ecological environments, and how these
changes may contribute to population divergence.