* 1456130
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Case Study of Traveling Abroad to Access Reproductive Technologies
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Heather Paxson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 18,499.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
quest of Turkish citizens to select offspring gender prior to in vitro
fertilization using pre-implantation genetic diagnosis. Citizens travel to
Northern Cyprus for these procedures, which are illegal in Turkey. The proposed
research will use a multi-sited ethnography to explore whether families are
utilizing gender selection technology to achieve traditional son preference
standards, or more modern, balanced families. As such, the research explores the
extent to which moral pluralism is present, meaning the extent to which there
are multiple values essentially involved that are equally fundamental, yet
conflict with one another. These ethical issues will be situated within a larger
socio-political context, Muslim-majority secular countries of the Mediterranean.
The results of this research will be disseminated to a broad a public using an
open source digital repository platform, as well as to professional journals and
conferences in both English and Turkish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study of Turkish cross-border pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis for non-therapeutic gender selection calls for the social
analysis of reproductive technology, trans/nationalism, family making, bio-
ethics, and gender. It focuses on two central social-scientific questions. One
concerns how gender selection is understood, utilized and made morally
appropriate by Turkish citizens as a mode of reproduction. The other concerns
what tensions or transformations in contemporary Turkish ideologies of gender
and family are revealed by these moral negotiations. The proposed research will
contribute to feminist studies of reproductive technologies informed by Science
and Technology Studies, the emerging scholarship on reproductive tourism in
anthropology and the ethnography of gender, family and nationalism in Turkey,
considering trans-nationalism in relation to global flows of technology and
people as well as constraints posed by the state.