* 1456940
* Getting Organized: Lungfish Reveal the Evolutionary Origins of Organized Mucosal Lymphoid Tissue
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Irene Salinas, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 03/31/2019
* USD 530,817.00

Every animal has points of contact with the environment. Those points of contact
are defensive barriers against pathogens and external aggressions and are
equipped with specialized cells and tissues that form the mucosal immune system.
In humans and birds, mucosal immune systems include well-organized immune
structures such as the tonsils in our nasopharyngeal passages. Currently,
organized mucosal immune structures are thought to be present in modern
vertebrates only. The investigator proposes for the first time that primitive
tonsils first appeared in lobe-finned (sarcopterygian) fishes such as the
African lungfish. African lungfish represent the transition of vertebrates from
water to land and are the closest living ancestor to all tetrapods.
Investigating the immune cells and molecules that drive the formation of
organized lymphoid (immune) structures in the mucosal surfaces of lungfish will
reveal the primordially conserved features of organized mucosal immune systems
in vertebrates. The project will not only use African lungfish as an animal
model in the laboratory but also as an educational tool for school children to
understand evolution, adaptation, physiology and immunity.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of adaptive immunity in vertebrates illustrates how
some key innovations have resulted in more efficient mechanisms to fight
pathogens. Amongst these innovative processes, the organization of lymphocytes
in specific anatomical areas, particularly mucosal surfaces, has proven a very
effective way for mammals to produce high affinity class-switched antibodies.
The high level of organization found in mammalian tonsils or Peyer's patches
must have evolved from some sort of primitive organized lymphoid structure.
Currently, many investigators see the lymphoid aggregates in the gut of
amphibians as the forerunners of mammalian organized mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissues (MALT). However, prior to amphibians, the sarcopterygian fishes reveal
that the evolutionary origin of organized MALT is actually older and it
coincides with the transition of vertebrates from water to land. Thus,
lungfishes, the closest ancestors of all tetrapods, may be the first animals to
have innovated by grouping lymphocytes in specific lymphoid structures. It has
been proposed that the diversification of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family
of genes from bony fish to mammals has been instrumental for the acquisition of
organized lymphoid tissues in higher vertebrates. To test this hypothesis, the
investigator proposes the study of the newly discovered lymphoid aggregates
(LAs) present in mucosa of the African lungfish (Protopterus sp.). The goals of
this project are 1) to characterize the TNF family members in African lungfish
and complete the phylogeny of this superfamily using deep sequencing
transcriptome databases generated by Dr. Irene Salinas (PI) and Dr. Chris
Amemiya (Senior Personnel); 2) to characterize lungfish LAs at the molecular,
cellular and functional levels using histology, laser capture microdissection
(LCM), RT-PCR and FISH; 3) to establish the role of TNF genes and microbial
exposure in the formation and organization of lungfish LAs.