* 1456369
* SBIR Phase II:  Trunk-Supporting Exoskeleton System for Workers
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,10/31/2017
* Minerva Pillai, U. S. Bionics
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2017
* USD 909,770.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to improve the lives
of workers who bend and stoop while performing their jobs. These activities lead
to back injuries which account of 36% of work place injuries. This project will
result in an assistive technology to reduce injuries in these workers. There are
many workers in shipbuilding and construction sites who perform tasks which
cannot be assisted by available technology. Robotics and automation fields do
not have solutions in the near horizon to automate these tasks. Therefore,
workers are an essential part of these industries. The technology proposed here
will make the workers? environment much more pleasant, prevent them from getting
disabled and maintain their quality of life. As back injuries cost the US alone
20 billion dollars annually in direct and indirect costs, the technology
proposed will not only benefit workers but also employers. Addressing a pain
point that costs billions of dollars globally each year gives this project
strong commercial potential. The evaluations performed during this project will
reveal the technology?s effect on workers? back. This will create an opportunity
for other institutions to investigate fundamentals of human back pain or back
injuries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 2 project will improve the lives of workers and reduce financial burden on
companies by developing a Trunk Support Exoskeleton (TSE) to reduce back
injuries in workers caused by stooping and bending. Back injuries account for a
large number of work place injuries. The goal of this project is to develop
technologies based on user and customer recommendations, issues encountered
during field evaluation, and experimentally evaluate the technology. The tasks
include analysis, design and evaluation to reduce separation between the
exoskeleton and the user, experiments and design to ease workers during
prolonged low angle stooping and determining the requirements for walking while
bending. It is expected that these features will make the technology more
attractive and useable to users and customers. In addition, to evaluating the
technology to validate the features above, experiments to quantify the
performance of the technology during activities similar to those that workers
would encounter will be performed. It is expected that the technology will
reduce the participants? strain on their lower back without reducing their
performance.