* 1456971
* Modulatory tone acts through microRNAs to exert a long-term regulatory influence on the operation of a lobster pattern generator
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Deborah Baro, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2020
* USD 680,000.00

Nerve cells in the brain are altered during physiological processes like
learning and aging, or in response to new sensory experiences or perturbations.
Despite these constant adjustments, neurons must also maintain key activity
features that are essential for their function. The mechanisms that stabilize
the identifying attributes of a given neuron are fundamentally important for
nervous system performance, yet they are poorly described. Defining these
cellular processes will provide insights into the organization and operation of
all neural circuits, and will speak to how nervous systems can produce reliable
behaviors while constantly adjusting in response to unique sets of ever-changing
perturbations. This research is important because it will advance the quest to
understand how the nervous system copes with variability arising from individual
differences in genetic, developmental and life histories so that each individual
nervous system can produce similar behaviors and respond to perturbations in a
like manner. Equally important, this project is designed to train the next
generation of scientists, instill a deeper appreciation of science in the
public, promote minorities in science and provide a valuable scientific
community resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses how low-level
modulatory tone stabilizes circuit output over the long-term using a simple
model, the crustacean pyloric network. This 14-neuron circuit comprises
identifiable neurons with specific activity features. A given attribute is
defined by an explicit balance of conductances and is maintained by preserving
its underlying conductance correlations. Low levels of monoamines can enable
feedback loops that preserve conductance correlations and their corresponding
activity features, even when one of the balanced conductances is persistently
altered through experimental manipulation. The goal of the research is to
elucidate the molecular processes involved in monoamine-enabled maintenance of
conductance correlations. Recent studies show that monoamines act through
microRNA to persistently influence a conductance correlation and stabilize its
corresponding activity feature. A combination of molecular and
electrophysiological techniques will be used to identify microRNAs that are
regulated by monoaminergic tone and that maintain a specific conductance
correlation. The expression of these microRNAs will then be altered to determine
the effects on neuronal and circuit output. An annotated microRNA database will
also be developed, hosted on a local server and made freely available.