* 1456862
* Understanding How BK Potassium Channels Enhance a Neuron's Input/Output Function
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Robert Brenner, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 06/30/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Brain function is dependent upon proteins that allow ions to pass across neuron
cell membranes (called ion channels) to create currents that mediate the
electrical activity of neurons. Protein channels that permit potassium ions to
pass through neuron membranes are generally thought to quiet excessive neuron
activity. However, there is a growing list of examples indicating that these
"BK-type" potassium ion channels may also increase neuron excitability. The fact
that BK channels are expressed throughout the nervous system suggests that
understanding such paradoxical effects is important for understanding brain
function in general. The investigators will record the activity of neurons in
mice to learn the conditions that cause BK channels to quiet or excite neurons.
The results will be used to make computational models that predict the anti-
excitatory or pro-excitatory behaviors of BK channels. The project will train
graduate students and a postdoctoral fellow to use state-of-art methods for
studying brain function and anatomy and to make computational models, and will
support the development of an integrated online virtual laboratory, "The Ion
Channel laboratory," to teach users about ion channels and the electrical
excitability of neurons. The mechanisms underlying how slow- and fast-gating BK
channel types either depress or paradoxically enhance a neuron's likelihood for
firing an action potential (AP) will be studied in dentate gyrus neurons of the
hippocampus. Using wild type neurons that express slow-gating BK channels, and
transgenic neurons (BK beta4 knockout) that express fast-gating channels, the
investigators will directly measure the cause-and-effect relationship between
BK-regulated AP shape, activation of spike-triggered bulk and local calcium,
recruitment of interspike conductances, and AP frequency. These data will be
used to generate a computational model of dentate gyrus neurons that predicts
the context in which BK channels reduce or enhance neuronal excitability. The
model will then be experimentally tested in hippocampus CA1 pyramidal cells and
cerebellum purkinje neurons to determine if pro-excitatory effects uncovered in
dentate gyrus neurons are features observed in other neuron types that express
BK channels. The findings of this study will create new understanding and new
neuronal computational models of spike-influenced conductance and its effect on
intrinsic excitability.