* 1456794
* Collaborative Research: Inflammation as a Key Component of the Metabolic Adaptations to the Lactating State
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Barry Bradford, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 518,134.00

The immune system is responsible for defending the body against pathogens and
mediating the responses to some injuries through inflammatory processes.
Inflammation can also impact metabolism and energy use. This award will support
studies to test whether the non-defensive roles of the immune system are
necessary for the metabolic transitions that occur with the onset of lactation,
a period when energy use in an animal undergoes extreme changes. The question
will be assessed through the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
administration at the start of lactation in cattle because they are well suited
for these studies and are very tractable experimental systems. This project will
support research training for under-represented students at the nexus of
biology, agriculture, and medicine, provide unique experience for several
advanced trainees, and generate transformative information relevant to a broad
spectrum of the public. Under-represented students will be recruited to
participate in the entire research process, from treatment application to
presentation of results. A post-doctoral associate and PhD students will also be
mentored. Additional societal benefit may be afforded by utilization of the
basic research results for the development of applied management strategies in
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to assess
whether endogenous inflammation in early lactation is necessary to induce
insulin resistance and conserve glucose as nutrient demands for the mammary
gland increase. Basal and insulin-stimulated glucose kinetics, as well as liver,
muscle, and adipose tissue markers of inflammation and insulin signaling will be
measured in cows at high and low milking frequency. Milking frequency will alter
milk yield, allowing for the assessment of whether inflammation-mediated
homeorhetic processes are particularly important for supporting extreme milk
yields. By blocking endogenous low-grade inflammation in early lactation, anti-
inflammatory treatment is expected to increase insulin sensitivity, resulting in
increased muscle and adipose tissue utilization of glucose, suppressed liver
gluconeogenesis, and impaired regulation of plasma glucose concentration in
early lactation. Results from the studies will be disseminated through peer-
reviewed journals and through presentations at scientific meetings.