* 1456286
* Biosynthesis, Regulation and Engineering of C-Lignin
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Nandika D'Souza, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 833,722.00

Lignin is one of earth's most abundant natural polymers, a key component of
woody plant material, and a major waste product in bio-refineries that process
plant material for production of liquid biofuels. The lead investigator and
collaborators have discovered a new type of lignin, apparently restricted to the
seed coats of a range of non-crop species. This new type of lignin has
significant promise for conversion to carbon fibers. If this type of lignin
could be engineered into bioenergy feedstocks, it would represent a high value
co-product of biorefining. This project will determine the biochemical pathway
by which this new type of lignin is synthesized, and the steps that will need to
be taken to make it accumulate in the stems and leaves of plants. Understanding
the limitations to the accumulation of different types of lignin in different
plant tissue and cell types also addresses a fundamental problem in cell
biology. This project uses a range of approaches from genetic mechanisms through
metabolic engineering to production and testing of biomaterials. Outreach
activities will target two demographically distinct groups; highly talented high
school students at the Texas Academy of Mathematics and Science, and mathematics
and science public school teachers with primarily Hispanic students who are
Limited English Proficient (LEP). Teachers will develop curricular activities in
Spanish and English to implement in their classrooms. The project will include
informal learning activities through deployment of the projects to encourage
K-12 girls into STEM through outreach with the Dallas Society of Women
Engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During lignin biosynthesis, the monolignol
precursors are functionalized by aromatic hydroxylation and O-methylation to
generate, successively, hydroxyphenyl (H), catechyl (C), guaiacyl (G),
5-hydroxyguaiacyl (5-OH-G), and syringyl (S) units. Natural lignins in
angiosperms consist of approximately equal amounts of G and S units, with less
than 2% of H units and no C or 5-OH-G units; gymnosperm lignins are similar but
lack S units. 5-OH-G units are incorporated into lignins in transgenic plants in
which the second methylation step is blocked, but C-units have not been reported
to accumulate in the lignin of angiosperms in which the first methylation step
is similarly blocked. The Principal Investigators have shown that the seed coats
of a wide range of dicot and monocot plants contain a novel type of lignin
(C-lignin) derived totally from catechyl units. This linear polymer has
advantageous properties for conversion to carbon fibers. However, C-lignin
appears to be restricted to seed coats in nature. This award will address two
major questions: what is the mechanism underlying the biosynthesis of C-lignin
in plant seed coats, and why does C-lignin not occur naturally in the vegetative
tissues of the plant? The researchers hypothesize that C-lignin biosynthesis
involves loss of function of one or both methylation steps in classical
monolignol biosynthesis, and will determine how this happens using transcriptome
profiling in developing seeds of Cleome hassleriana, in which there is an abrupt
transition from G lignin to C lignin biosynthesis at around 13 days post-
pollination. Addressing the second question will involve attempting to introduce
the C-lignin polymer into different tissues of the model legume Medicago
truncatula, utilizing existing mutants in which enzymes of lignin methylation
have been functionally disrupted. These studies aim to determine the potential
for engineering accumulation of C-lignin in vegetative tissues in sufficient
yields to enable industrial processing, and, in this context, improved methods
for extraction of C-lignin from both seeds and vegetative tissues will be
developed, and the physical properties of the polymer further analyzed.