* 1456532
* OPUS: Developing a synthetic understanding of suspension-feeders, master switches in freshwater ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* David Strayer, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2020
* USD 163,027.00

Understanding how animals interact with their environment and influence the flow
of energy and nutrients is critical to sustaining a healthy environment.
Suspension-feeders are animals that feed on particles (e.g., plankton) drifting
in the waters of lakes and streams. Because these particles influence water
clarity and chemistry, and support aquatic food webs, suspension-feeders can act
as a master switch that controls food webs, and the physical and chemical
properties of freshwater ecosystems, including their utility to humans. This
project contributes to understanding several important management issues for
freshwater ecosystems, including eutrophication and harmful algal blooms,
biological invasions, fisheries, and biofouling. Better understanding of
suspension-feeders should contribute to better management in all of these areas.
This project will also will contribute to better education and outreach about
freshwater ecosystems for audiences ranging from amateurs and undergraduates to
graduate students and professionals.

This project will propose and test theories about (i) the amount and kinds of
suspension-feeders in different kinds of fresh waters; (ii) the factors that
control the abundance of major types of freshwater suspension-feeders; (iii) how
the activities of different kinds of suspension-feeders differ from one another;
and (iv) how substituting one kind of suspension-feeder for another (as is often
caused by human activities) affects ecosystem functioning. The investigators
will synthesize existing data, write a book, and develop lectures to share this
new synthesis with researchers and students. This project will stimulate and
direct new research on both suspension-feeders and freshwater ecosystems.