* 1456233
* The Genetics of Natural Variation in Memory Retention in Nasonia
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* John Werren, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2019
* USD 650,000.00

Although some aspects of learning are well understood, little is known about the
genes involved in differences in learning between species or how animals forget
once they learn something. This project will investigate the "genetics of
forgetting", by first determining which genes cause forgetting differences in
Nasonia, a small insect suitable for efficient genetic study, and then
determining how these genes function. The work has the potential to reveal new
genes and mechanisms involved in memory. Species as different as insects and
humans share some of the same basic mechanisms underlying memory gain and loss,
so these mechanisms are likely to be broadly applicable. The discovery of genes
for "forgetting" is likely to capture the imagination of both scientists and
non-scientists, and will therefore contribute broadly to science education.
Educational outreach builds on ongoing collaborations with Jamestown Community
College. Efforts are geared towards introducing investigative learning
instruction using Nasonia in both high schools and community colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The insect genus Nasonia is a tractable laboratory
organism with a burgeoning research toolkit. The insects quickly learn to
associate novel odors with a host reward. However, memory retention following a
host reward differs considerably between closely related species. In an exciting
new finding, genetic regions containing reduced memory retention genes have been
successfully backcrossed from the low memory retention species into the high
memory retention species. The goals of this project are to clone the memory
retention genes by recombination, identify how their coding and cis-regulatory
regions differ, determine where and when they are expressed and whether they
modulate expression of other memory genes following a learning experience,
investigate their effects on memory retention using RNA interference knockdowns,
and determine whether the memory retention effects generalize to other learning
modes (e.g. visual stimuli, aversive stimuli). Given the genetic tools available
in Nasonia and an established track record in cloning genes causing species
difference, the project has a high probability of success. Data will be made
available through National Center for Biological Information (NCBI) databases,
the Hymenopteran database and through publication in open access journals.