* 1456516
* Choosing Sides: The Dynamics of Coalitions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Robert Powell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 288,246.00

In the fall of 2006 Sunni tribes turned on Al Qaeda in Iraq and allied with the
United States. This - along with the surge in American troops and a change in
American strategy - reversed the course of the insurgency. Alignment decisions
and coalition dynamics are often key factors in determining the outcome of civil
and interstate wars. Yet theoretical work done over the last two decades on the
causes and conduct war of has very little to say about coalitions. This work has
made very important insights. But it has almost exclusively focused on two-actor
models. Building on that literature, this project attempts to extend the
insights derived from two-actor models of war to the formulation and analysis
coalitions. These include a third party's decision of whether and how to
intervene in a war of attrition; the role of third parties in proxy wars; a
general model of divide and conquer, and the centripetal forces that tend to
break coalitions apart as they near their goals. A main result of this project
will be a clearer conceptual foundation for empirical efforts to estimate the
effects of third-party intervention in civil wars. Looking to the broader
impacts of the project, the United Nations High Commission for Refugees recently
reported that there were nearly 60 million displaced people in 2014, half of
them children (New York Times, 18 June 2015). Civil war was a major cause. A
clearer understanding of coalition dynamics may be a small step toward
mitigating these effects.

Alignment decisions and coalition dynamics are often key factors in determining
the outcome of civil and interstate wars. Yet the formal, game-theoretic work
done on the causes and conduct of war in the twenty years since Fearon's
"Rationalist Explanations of War" (1995) has largely focused on two-actor games,
often on two-actor bargaining games. This work is largely silent on coalitional
issues. Building on that literature, this project attempts to extend the
insights derived from two-actor models of war to the formulation and analysis of
models coalitional dynamics in the shadow of conflict. More specifically, the
goal of this project is to identify and analyze broad, canonical problems in
coalition formation and then formalize them as "workhorse" models. Preliminary
work has already analyzed the problem facing a third party in deciding whether
to take sides in a war of attrition. Two-actor wars of attrition are commonly
used to model many different kinds of conflict, including civil wars. Thought of
as all-pay, second-price auctions, wars of attrition have been generalized to
allow for n players competing for n-k prizes (Bulow and Klemper 1999).
Surprisingly, however, no one has previously analyzed the very natural question
of what a third party would do when it has preferences over who wins the war of
attrition and can influence that outcome by supporting one side or the other.
This project will first extend and generalize the preliminary results of the
analysis of the model of choosing sides in a war of attrition. The project will
then formulate other coalitional problems like divide and conquer (or rule), and
the centripetal forces that tend to break coalitions apart as they near their
goals.