* 1456115
* Genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation and its regulation by hormones during post-embryonic brain development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Robert Denver, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Colin Saldanha
* 07/31/2021
* USD 790,182.00

The goal of this project is to advance understanding of brain development by
studying a novel role of thyroid hormone (TH) in the regulation of gene
expression in early development. It is known that the expression of genes is
controlled in part by chemical modifications to deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and
the proteins that surround the DNA. These so-called 'epigenetic modifications'
result in heritable changes in gene function that do not involve changes to the
DNA sequence itself. Recent findings show that epigenetic modifications play
pivotal roles in organismal development, physiology, and behavior, and are
implicated in human diseases from cancer to complex behavioral disorders, such
as autism and schizophrenia. One such epigenetic modification is the addition of
methyl groups to cytosine residues in DNA (DNA methylation). Variable DNA
methylation at gene regulatory regions can influence gene expression. DNA
methylation typically promotes gene repression, whereas DNA demethylation
promotes gene activation. However, the patterns and functions of DNA methylation
in the brain during development, and the factors that control DNA methylation
are poorly understood. The Principal Investigator (PI) recently discovered that
TH, which is known to be critical for normal development of the central nervous
system, controls DNA methylation in the developing brain. Here, he will examine
the mechanism of DNA methylation by TH and its consequences for neurological
development using the frog as model system. The project also will involve
training of a diverse scientific workforce, establishment of an undergraduate
course in experimental design for life scientists, and science outreach
activities with middle school students and with adults at retirement
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this project are to: 1)
map DNA methylation patterns in the developing brain using genome-wide analyses
including RNA sequencing, chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing, and methyl
capture sequencing, 2) determine the mechanisms by which TH regulates DNA
methylation using targeted analysis of TH-dependent recruitment of enzymes to
chromatin, and 3) understand the consequences of TH regulation of DNA
methylation for neurological development through analysis of cell cycle control.
The PI will focus on metamorphosis of the frog Xenopus (Silurana) tropicalis, a
well studied TH-dependent process. They will conduct genome-wide methylation and
transcription factor association analyses to investigate the patterns and roles
of DNA methylation during postembryonic brain development. The results of the
proposed research will provide a deeper understanding of factors that modulate
the epigenetic landscape in neural cells, and will open new avenues for research
on the regulation and roles of DNA methylation in neurological development and
function.