* 1456650
* Hue, Saturation, and Brightness: Cortical Emergence and Modeling of Color Percepts
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Vincent Billock, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 06/30/2018
* USD 456,272.00

What neural processes allow humans to perceive and experience different colors?
The operation of human color vision has been among the most extensively
investigated topics in the scientific study of human visual perception, yet its
neural basis remains elusive. This project aims to investigate a new theory that
could help to explain how the perception of different colors emerges from neural
activity. Understanding the mechanisms of color perception is important to
designing successful artificial vision systems and visual displays, as well as
to understanding the basis of visual problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though many
aspects of color vision are well-understood, attempts to find specific neuronal-
level correlates of the various components of a color percept have failed.
Specifically, psychophysics research has shown that there are three aspects to
the perception of a color: 1) hue, 2) color purity (the difference between a
"saturated" color and a pastel one), and 3) brightness, and researchers have
long assumed that these properties result from relatively early-stage neural
processing, at the level of neurons that specialize in reacting to these
properties of a visual stimulus. However, existing research has failed to find
consistent evidence that specific neurons specialize in reacting to these
properties of a color percept. In this project, a new theory will be
investigated that could help to explain how the three properties of color
percepts emerge from neural activity. The new theory under investigation in this
project is that the properties of color perception (hue, purity, and brightness)
emerge from complex interactions among networks of neurons, involving
competition in some cases and cooperation in others. In this way, the three
color percept properties are emergent properties of complex neural activity,
rather than being represented at the level of specialized neurons. In the
project, the investigator will carry out sophisticated computational modeling of
the proposed complex neural interactions in an effort to explain existing data
patterns in the literature.