* 1456910
* Standard Research Grant: Contending with Metrics in the Corporate Food Supply Chain
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Susanne Freidberg, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 78,514.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project studies
food supply chains with a focus on the shift from certifiable standards of food
quality and safety to metrics of ecological efficiency; the shift may be
characterized more abstractly as a move away from ensuring compliance to
promoting ongoing measurable improvement. The primary goal of the project is to
understand the driving forces and implications of this shift. It will test two
related hypotheses. First, that the shift aims to produce common global
knowledge about what sustainability means in food supply chains, including how
it can be measured and improved, and that it does so in order to address growing
concerns about sustained access to agricultural raw materials. Second, the need
to promote measurable improvement requires global food companies to contend with
the local environments, practices, and knowledge of suppliers in new ways, and
that doing so has the potential to reshape corporate food supply chain
governance on a global scale. Reflexive engagement with pertinent supply chain
actors will encourage broadened perspectives on all sides. The results of the
study will be widely disseminated in both scholarly and trade publications and
presentations, which will further enhance the prospects for positive
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employing
multi-sited ethnography and drawing together scholarship on supply chains,
standards, and corporate knowledge production, the project will examine the
emergence of metrics-based governance both in multi-stakeholder initiatives and
in the corporate food supply chains where mid-level sustainability managers work
to enlist a wide range of other actors in their efforts to measure and achieve
improvement. The project includes a pilot study of dairy farmers, who have
become central targets of industry projects to assess and improve. The PI has
existing contacts and has recently established access to the Sustainability
Consortium, which will greatly facilitate carrying out the project. The project
brings researchers in STS and political ecology into closer conversation and it
does so in a new empirical terrain. While both fields have explored the
production and governing power of standards, this project brings them together
to analyze the rise of outcome-based metrics as tools of private food
governance. The project draws insights from STS to examine how meanings and
metrics of sustainability are co-produced in different social settings, and to
trace how they are deployed and perhaps contested across space and supply
chains. Following political ecology, the project analyzes the emergence of
metrics-based governance in light of broader political-economic and
environmental conditions. In doing so, this research considers how the situated,
sociotechnical work of making metrics actionable, particularly at the farm
level, could in itself lead to changes in how governance works.