* 1456928
* The propagation of memories within small groups and across social networks
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2022
* Suparna Rajaram, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 02/28/2022
* USD 597,262.00

Though the operation of human memory can be understood in terms of processes
occurring inside an individual's mind, human memory does not exist within a
vacuum--it operates within a larger context of complex social interactions among
people. An important question is how social interactions influence memory
itself, and likewise, how memory processes influence social interactions. Prior
research has established that social interactions among people regarding their
shared memories can influence what is remembered by any particular individual
involved. In some cases, the result is memory enhancement for the information
while in other cases the result is forgetting of the information. The current
project will investigate the social transmission of memory and how such
transmission shapes the memories shared among individuals as the basis for
understanding how social networks influence behavior. Overall, the project will
provide insight that will not only increase understanding of the basic operation
of human memory, but that will also improve understanding of how behaviors are
transmitted within large populations. This work could have important
implications for societal issues such as eyewitness memory, educational
practice, and how to effectively structure
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate how social interactions
influence memory and how these influences affect large-group aggregate behavior,
the researchers in the present project will examine the flow of information
among individuals. Behavioral experiments will be conducted and used to inform
the development of a computational model that in turn will allow rigorous
predictions to be made about how information flows within large, realistic
social networks. Because the structure of the network becomes increasingly
complex as social networks increase in size and because past work has almost
exclusively employed small, unstructured groups, the project focuses on the
structure of the interactions with a series of studies each investigating an
increasingly complex set of social interactions. Each study consists of a
behavioral experiment and an analogous agent-based computational simulation. The
project will ultimately yield a psychologically plausible model capable of both
describing the mechanisms that underlie the social transmission of memory and of
faithfully capturing the flow of memory convergence (and divergence) of
individuals situated within structured networks. Once realized, this
experimentally-validated model will allow collective memory phenomena to be
investigated at scales that are not currently feasible in laboratory settings.