* 1456984
* Constructions of Traditional Medicine during Decolonization and the Global Cold War
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Helen Tilley, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 247,751.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores indigenous
knowledge and medical practice in Africa during decolonization, which began in
the 1960s. One methodology to be used is to characterize African medical
knowledge through the voices of African scientists, politicians, leaders,
institutions, and the umbrella organizations such as the World Health
Organization. The goal is to explain the ways in which traditional African
medicine shifted from the relative periphery to the center of international
health concerns during the twentieth century. Such shifts were also taking place
in China and India; yet had it not been for the simultaneous efforts within
dozens of newly independent African countries, Chinese and Indian leaders might
have been lobbying in support of traditional medicine at the international level
in isolation. The results of this research are to be published as a book. In
addition to the book, the researcher will organize a multidisciplinary
conference on traditional medicine and knowledge that will be published as a
special issue of a journal. She also plans to develop a website relating
historical research on these subjects, and to forge closer ties with a small
number of policy think-tanks to provide deeper historical analysis to their
policy recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will serve to advance scholarly understanding
of three interrelated research areas that have begun to receive more sustained
attention in the history of science: decolonization and its effects on state-
sanctioned research, the role of scientists in defining and codifying
traditional medicine, and the role of international institutions and the law in
shaping and adjudicating global debates about the boundaries of valid and
acceptable knowledge. The project will advance these three areas by bringing to
bear findings from several fields that intersect with science and technology
studies including African and world history, development studies, environmental
history, medical and cultural anthropology, and legal and post-colonial studies.
The researcher will systematically explore the legal, disciplinary, political,
and economic trends during the course of the twentieth century that constructed
traditional medicine as a viable category of scientific research and policy-
making. The resulting book will explain the dramatic ascendency of traditional
medicine within global and pan-African institutions by situating it in the wider
context of decolonization, the rise of ethno-scientific research, and the global
Cold War.