* 1456505
* RAPID: International Election Observation and Perceptions of Election Credibility
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Sarah Bush, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 74,816.00

On June 25, 2014, Tunisia announced that it will hold its first post-revolution
parliamentary election on October 26, 2014, and its first post-revolution
presidential election on November 23, 2014. This project seeks to evaluate how
election observers affect citizens' political attitudes and behaviors around
these elections. Election observers, which come from both international and
domestic organizations, seek to improve public confidence in elections through
their presence at elections and their public reports on election quality.
Previous research suggests that local citizens' perceptions of elections'
credibility may affect their political participation in a myriad of ways, from
promoting democratic engagement and voter turnout to increasing the likelihood
of protest and election violence. Thus, election observers may have significant
effects on democratization and peace through their effects on beliefs about
election credibility. Given the political events in the Middle East and North
Africa since 2011, the knowledge produced from this proposed study has great
relevance for peace and stability in the region. In particular, the knowledge
can help to inform policymakers and international non-governmental organizations
that are involved in post-conflict re-construction . This project will embed
experiments in a panel survey around Tunisia's legislative and presidential
elections, which will occur on October 26, 2014, and November 23, 2014,
respectively. The experiments will deliver information about election observers'
presence and reports at the October 26th election to randomly selected citizens
in a nationally representative survey conducted immediately following that
election. Factors that will be varied include the identity of election observers
(U.S., European, or domestic) and the content of their reports (positive or
negative). The project's outcomes will include citizens' perceptions of the
credibility of the October 26th election as well as their election turnout, vote
choice, and other political behaviors (e.g., protest) during and after the
November 23rd election. The latter outcomes will be measured via a post-election
survey with the same panel of respondents immediately following the November
23rd election. Thus, if election observers affect perceptions of election
credibility, then this project will also be able to estimate how election
observers affect a range of other future political behaviors via beliefs about
election credibility for the first time using causal mediation analysis.