* 1457121
* Examining the Importance of Dynamic Trafficking in Systemic Acquired Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2023
* Pradeep Kachroo, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 842,255.00

Plants can induce a unique form of systemic resistance termed systemic acquired
resistance (SAR), which functions even better than the acquired immunity of
vertebrates because it protects against secondary infection from a broad-
spectrum of pathogens. During SAR, a mobile signal(s) generated at the site of
primary infection, moves systemically presumably through the phloem to prepare
the non-infected portions of the plant against future infections. However, our
knowledge of the intercellular transport of the SAR signal(s) is limited. The
investigators have identified several key components of the mobile SAR signal(s)
and associated them with specific biochemical signaling pathways responsible for
inducing SAR. In this project the investigators will study how these signals are
transported during SAR and identify the components involved in their transport.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the phloem is the presumed site of signal
translocation, little has been done to determine the mechanism of intercellular
transport of the SAR inducing signal(s). Potentially, the identification of SAR
signal(s) and the knowledge of their dynamic movement could facilitate the use
of SAR in protecting agriculturally important plants against a wide range of
pathogens. This project will examine the role of dynamic gating (opening and
closing) of the plasmodesmata (PD) in SAR induction and assess its relationship
to some essential mobile SAR inducers. PD gating will be assessed using dye-
loading assays during the time frame of SAR signal generation and movement.
Molecular and genetic tools will be used to alter PD gating within this time
frame and assess the effect on SAR. Metabolome analysis of petiole exudates from
plants defective in both SAR and PD gating will be carried out to determine
levels of known SAR inducers and to identify other unknown SAR regulators.
Molecular, genetic, and biochemical analyses will be used to characterize the
relationship between PD and various SAR related components. The knowledge gained
through this project will facilitate the use of SAR in developing long lasting
and broad-spectrum crop protection strategies. Regulation of metabolite
transport is fundamental to all aspects of plant development because it affects
the movement of metabolites and signaling molecules between cells and across
organs. Therefore, this project would provide conceptual advances relevant to
both health and disease physiologies of plants. The significant similarity of
symplasmic structures in animals and plants extends the relevance of this work
to animal physiology. This project will involve training of undergraduate
students from local colleges, which in turn will facilitate a partnership
between the University of Kentucky and primarily minority and/or
underrepresented student-serving institutions in the state. The investigators'
involvement in STEM education will generate research opportunities for
middle/high school students in the state. This project will also involve the
training of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. Data generated from
this project will be available via a project-specific website as well as
traditional routes including publications and presentations.