* 1457689
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Flow Regime Shifts, Anticendent  Hydrology, Nitrogen Pulses and Resource Quantity and Quality on Food Chain Length in Rivers
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Tamara Harms, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2021
* USD 492,532.00

The pattern of water flow in a river can affect the abundance of plants and
animals and the food web that supports fisheries. Severe floods that scour the
riverbed can potentially displace or kill plants and animals, however, little is
known about how floods (or droughts) or the timing of these across years affects
the complexity and diversity of food webs. Some work suggests that river flow is
a stronger determinant than the quantity of plant production on the flow of
energy through the food web, but little is known about how the quality of plant
food affects food chains and biodiversity. The study will provide fundamental
information on how the timing of floods and droughts across years influences
water quality (nitrate inputs to rivers), primary production, and the production
of animals higher in the food web, such as fish. The researchers will produce a
synthesis of research in hydrology and ecology to improve the management of arid
land rivers. This work will reach across fundamental knowledge to education,
from kindergarten to graduate levels. The project will have numerous broader
impacts including training of several undergraduates, graduate students, and a
postdoc. Researchers will work with a non-profit group to integrate project
findings into an existing citizen science program on river drying sponsored by
The Nature Conservancy, and develop an environmental education program for
grades K-5. Finally, the research team will establish an innovative open source,
distributed graduate seminar on application of statistical methods in
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will study streams spanning a gradient
in the timing of rainfall to examine the role of changing hydrologic regimes in
altering nitrogen supply, energy supply and food web structure in arid land
streams. This proposal will: 1) Quantify the effect of food quality, energy
supply and energetic efficiencies on trophic structure, 2) Quantify the effects
of time between floods on stimulation of plant production and trophic structure,
and 3) Quantify the effect of changes in flow regime on trophic structure via
direct mortality, shifts in plants at the base of the food web, and the
structure of the food web. Proposed research activities include characterization
of the hydrologic regime, analysis of food webs across a hydroclimate gradient,
and manipulation of nitrogen supply. Extreme event statistics and spectral
analyses will characterize properties of flood intervals and flow regime shifts
across 12 study sites spanning a gradient in timing of rainfall and hydrologic
variation (monsoon vs. winter precipitation dominance) in Arizona. Derived
hydrologic metrics will be used in combination with measures of ecosystem
metabolism, N supply, secondary consumer energetic efficiencies, resource
stoichiometry, and the proportion of autochthonous energy sources as predictor
variables of food chain length and trophic structure to understand the
mechanisms linking energetics and hydrology to food chain length. This
comparative study includes 12 streams within the same biogeographic province
that feature an algal-dominated food source and similar ecosystem size (1st-3rd
order streams). Additionally researchers will conduct a nitrogen enrichment
experiment in 6 streams to disentangle the indirect effects of water flow on
nitrogen cycling versus the direct effects on plants and animals.