* 1457232
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Mechanisms of Diversification in West African Rainforest Amphibians and Reptiles
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Matthew Fujita, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 02/28/2019
* USD 426,122.00

Understanding the processes that generate and maintain high species diversity in
tropical ecosystems has remained a prominent question in evolutionary biology
for over a century. As habitat degradation threatens the survival of countless
tropical species, this project is a timely and necessary endeavor that will
identify processes that have generated the incredible biodiversity of reptiles
and amphibians in West and Central Africa, one of the most diverse regions on
Earth. This project will address outstanding questions in biodiversity research
and accelerate the pace of biodiversity discovery of the region's rich amphibian
and reptile fauna by coupling the rapid generation of genetic data with
traditional morphological and ecological data to discover and describe new
species, by developing new computational tools for comparative biology, and by
providing computational approaches for addressing key questions in biodiversity
studies, thereby increasing the accessibility of genome analysis to a diversity
of organisms. The project brings together an international team with expertise
in African biodiversity. In addition, this project will help train the next
generation of systematic biologists by providing valuable training to talented
and diverse pools of undergraduate and graduate students at two collaborating
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methodological advances in both data
collection and analysis enable precise quantification of demographic and
evolutionary histories of populations and species at an unprecedented scale,
allowing sophisticated approaches to inform biodiversity studies of imperiled
fauna. This project will collect genome-scale data using next-generation
sequencing for co-distributed amphibians and reptiles across West and Central
Africa in order to infer biodiversity patterns and processes. First, the
researchers will discover cryptic diversity using emerging species delimitation
methods that can accommodate genome-scale data. Second, inferences of phylogeny,
gene flow, and historical populations sizes will impart insight into the
idiosyncrasies of biodiversity patterns among the different species, while
seeking to test hypotheses concerning shared historical patterns. Third, the PIs
will develop new methods for comparative phylogeographic inference aimed at
testing models of simultaneous diversification among species.