* 1457876
* Supporting Students for Success in Computer Science, Physics, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Holly Zullo, Westminster College of Salt Lake City
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 04/30/2022
* USD 605,908.00

Westminster College of Salt Lake City will implement a scholarship and support
program for students majoring in Computer Science, Physics, and Mathematics
(CSPM). The program will support 18 students for a period of 4 years. Applicant
recruiting will be broad, but seek to encourage first-generation college
students, female students, and students from racial and ethnic backgrounds that
are traditionally underrepresented minorities in CSPM majors. The proportion of
these students in CSPM is less than that at Westminster College as a whole. One
substantial barrier to increasing these numbers is the financial burden of
attending college and often a student's financial need is beyond their financial
aid package offer. This scholarship program will ease that burden and increase
the graduation rate in these majors that are vital for our nation's economic
competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fund a total of 18
students with two six-student cohorts beginning in their first year, as well as
two cohorts of three students each beginning in their sophomore year. Scholars
will be selected from the applicants to Westminster College who have indicated
an interest in one of the CSPM fields, have financial need, have an ACT score of
at least 24, and a high school GPA of at least 3.5. Applicants for awards as
sophomores should have at least a 3.0 GPA in their first semester of college.
The main support and cohort-building structure consists of a culturally
sensitive seminar course taken by students during their first two semesters at
Westminster College. The seminar class will be based on best practices for
educating first generation, female, and other underrepresented students to be
culturally sensitive. The seminar will increase cohesion among cohorts, provide
ample opportunities for advising and mentoring, and demonstrate socially
relevant applications of CSPM disciplines. It will address college resources,
study skills, opportunities such as student research and internships, as well as
career and graduate school information and support. Starting in the second year,
there will be monthly meetings to support these students through active
advising, mentoring, and professional opportunities. All Westminster S-STEM
Scholars will be matched with faculty, peer, and alumni mentors who will be
invited to the monthly luncheons. Their academic progress will be closely
monitored using detailed midterm reports already in place at Westminster. Any
potential issues will be addressed with multi-faceted support, including one-on-
one private tutoring at no cost to the student. With its 9:1 student to faculty
ratio, faculty focused on teaching, an extensive support network for struggling
students, research and other opportunities for strong students, Westminster
College is well-positioned to provide support to S-STEM scholars. Westminster
has had demonstrated success in serving female students, with graduating
percentages meeting the national average for computer science and exceeding for
physics and mathematics and the student population has been increasing in
diversity for the last ten years, The cultural seminar will serve as a model
course for other disciplines at Westminster and for other colleges. The lessons
learned in this seminar will continue to serve CSPM students beyond the life of
this project. The project will also be able to explore the impact of increased
monitoring and mentoring of students, and if successful these interventions can
be implemented for all STEM students. Project personnel will share the seminar
design and results from the project as a whole at national and regional
conferences.