* 1457237
* Ecophysiology of a host-parasite interaction that causes metabolic disease
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Rudolf Schilder, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 410,000.00

The causes and rates at which humans and other mammals develop metabolic
diseases such as diabetes and obesity are complex. Biomedical research has
traditionally focused on how shifts in diet and physical activity affect
metabolism in mammalian model organisms such as rats and mice. While these two
factors are known to be significant, there is very little information on other
conditions that can cause or contribute to metabolic disease. The range of
animal species that can develop metabolic disease is also unknown. The
investigators recently demonstrated that diabetes and obesity are not unique to
mammals and occur in natural populations of dragonflies as a consequence of gut
infection by a protozoan parasite. Preliminary data indicate that the level of
acidity in water bodies that dragonflies inhabit is a strong predictor of rates
of infection and therefore, metabolic disease in the dragonfly species. The role
of infection in the development of metabolic disease is poorly understood in any
animal system. This project represents a unique opportunity to provide new
ecological and physiological insights and will allow in-depth studies on this
problem. This integrative project will experimentally link natural variation in
water acidity, dragonfly gut microbiome composition and parasitic infection
susceptibility to dragonfly metabolic and other performance phenotypes. This
work will underline the importance of environmental factors to metabolic
disease. This project also has broad relevance given the growing prevalence of
natural insect-protozoan parasite interactions that cause disease in humans
(e.g. malaria, toxoplasmosis) and in species of economic importance (e.g. honey
bees, bumblebees) to humans.

The causative role of infection in the development of metabolic disease such as
obesity is poorly understood in any animal system. The project proposes to
conduct experiments that will extend previous work on this dragonfly host-
parasite interaction and provide novel insights into the ecophysiology of
infection-related metabolic disease in an insect. Based on new ecological and
physiological data from this system, these studies will examine the hypotheses
that both environmental pH and chemical interactions of parasite and gut
microbiota are important drivers of susceptibility to infection, and its
escalation into metabolic disease and reduced fitness in the dragonfly host. The
investigator will 1) use full factorial treatment designs to examine effects of
environmental (water) pH and exposure to infectious spores on larval and host
gut microbiome composition and parasite load, 2) determine infection effects on
flight muscle performance and fuel use during high intensity flight behavior
(field high speed videography, in situ work loop and respiratory quotient
assays), and 3) assess the extent of host manipulation by the parasite through
examination of systemic immunity in healthy and infected adults, in response to
parasite excretory/secretory products and to heat-inactivated bacterial
cultures.