* 1457279
* Functional and Genetic Basis of Leaf Venation: Testing and Expanding Theory and Core Knowledge with Arabidopsis Vein Mutants and Ecotypes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Lawren Sack, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,119,871.00

Leaf vein traits are considered to be critical for understanding plant
adaptation to the environment, responses to environmental changes, and crop
performance. However, the direct linkages of vein traits to whole plant
performance are not completely understood. This project will test and extend
current theory for the role of leaf veins in plant function, using the model
species Arabidopsis thaliana. The project will determine the genes underlying
different vein traits and how these lead to higher-level functions including
water transport and growth. This work will result in discoveries of how genes
determine plant function, create resources for improving plant productivity, and
clarify the evolution of natural species, with critical impacts in the fields of
plant physiology, ecology and genetics. Numerous undergraduate students will be
integrated into the project, receiving training is scientific methodology and
data analysis. The project includes the creation of a new web resource to enable
K-12 students, teachers, and members of the public to conduct their own analyses
to estimate how vein properties affect plant function. The work aims to advance
national prosperity and welfare through applications in agriculture and
ecological sustainability and education of science students and the public in
plant biology.

Leaf venation is increasingly recognized as important to plant performance, with
applications from agriculture to paleobiology. This understanding is based on
comparative studies across diverse plant species, which showed that major
structural features of leaf venation influenced leaf gas exchange. However, the
theory for the importance of vein traits has not yet been tested rigorously in a
model system, such as A. thaliana. Vein mutants have been identified with leaf
phenotypes showing altered vein cross-sectional anatomy, spacing, patterning
and/or connectivity. The project will utilize both leaf vein mutants and natural
ecotypes previously subjected to genomic sequencing in a combination of
physiological experiments, modeling, and genetic analyses. Hypothesized
mechanistic trait linkages and genome-wide association of traits will be
measured to address two research questions: (1) How do leaf vein traits
influence hydraulics, gas exchange and growth? (2) What are the genetic loci
associated with leaf vein traits, and how do they determine higher-level
function across A. thaliana genotypes? The project breaks new ground in the
ability to model how gene sequence determines key plant traits that scale up to
whole plant function. The integrative approach will provide new insights into
plant physiology and genetic architecture and set the stage for numerous further
analyses at the intersection of these fields. Broader Impacts work will
capitalize on the great appeal of leaf venation for scientists, students and
laypeople. In collaboration with undergraduate students and under-represented
high school students, a crowd-sourcing website will be created,
"VenationNation", to provide unique resources for researchers, citizens and
students to become involved in leaf venation research. The site will contain
downloadable images of leaf vein systems and protocols to calculate and
interpret vein traits with self-teaching and course curricula. This site will
increase the involvement of citizens and students in science, provide resources
for teaching, create pathways toward understanding of principles of plant
science, and aid in the global dissemination of the research.