* 1457033
* Membrane Biogenesis and Protein Targeting in Haustorium-invaded Plant Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Shunyuan Xiao, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 10/31/2019
* USD 629,766.00

Plants are the ultimate food source for non-photosynthetic organisms. Many
pathogenic fungi and oomycetes develop a feeding organ named the haustorium to
extract nutrients from host plants. Such pathogens cause widespread and/or
devastating crop diseases such as wheat powdery mildew and rust, potato late
blight and sudden oak death, resulting in huge crop losses and tree damages
worldwide. In recent years, much has been learnt about the molecular mechanisms
concerning plant immunity. However, how defense responses are executed at host-
pathogen interfaces is poorly understood. Interactions between the model plant
Arabidopsis (epidermal cell)and Powdery mildew (haustorium) provides a
convenient single-cell system for addressing this challenging question. The
project utilizes an Arabidopsis resistance protein that is specifically targeted
to the plant-fungal interface as a unique tool to investigate the formation of
the interfacial membrane, how that formation is coupled to immune signaling and
protein trafficking to enable defense execution at specific subcellular sites.
New information from this project should help elucidate the fundamental cell
biology principles governing formation of and activities at host-microbe
interfacial membranes, and yield new insight into novel intervention strategies
to control plant diseases caused by haustorium-forming pathogens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the host-pathogen interaction is determined
at the extra-haustorial membrane (EHM), the host-pathogen interface. However,
both the origin and biogenesis of the EHM and the molecular host-pathogen
interactions at this interface are largely unknown. The long-term goal of this
project is to understand the biogenesis of the EHM and its role in host defense
and fungal development. These investigators have shown that (i) a host
resistance (R) protein named RPW8 from Arabidopsis is specifically targeted to
the EHM where it activates haustorium-targeted defenses via an unknown
mechanism; and that (ii) RPW8 contains two putative basic residue-enriched
motifs essential for EHM-targeting. Therefore, RPW8 can be used as a unique tool
to understand the host defense at the EHM, the origin and biogenesis of the EHM,
and the EHM-oriented protein trafficking in the invaded host cell during
haustorial development. Specifically, there are three major aims for this
project. Aim 1 addresses how hydrogen peroxide is produced and accumulated in
the host-pathogen interface during RPW8-mediated and basal resistance against
haustorium-forming pathogens. Aim 2 is focused on characterization of a special
protein (SNARE) complex that is engaged in the EHM-oriented vesicle trafficking.
Aim 3 investigates EHM biogenesis and its role in host defense and fungal
pathogenesis. A combinatory forward and reverse genetics approach, aided by
chemical genetic assays and state-of-the-art confocal imaging will be employed
to achieve the above three specific objectives. Novel and important knowledge
from this project will significantly advance our current understanding of the
cell biology and molecular interaction between plants and haustorium-forming
pathogens, which should help design new strategies to control plant diseases
caused by such pathogens in the future. The investigators will also continue to
produce short videos of their work that can be disseminated and used for
teaching.