* 1457435
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Human alteration of sediment delivery to the coast - Legacies of land use, coastal wetland accretion and future vulnerability to sea level rise
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Scott Neubauer, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2019
* USD 70,888.00

Tidal marshes are productive ecosystems that provide key services to society
such as storm surge buffering, and water-quality mitigation. The long-term
stability of coastal wetlands is explained by interactions between sea level,
plant growth, sediment supply, and wetland accretion, but coastal wetland
stability is threatened by changes in environmental conditions. Sediment supply
has been implicated as the ultimate control on potential vertical accretion
rates in many tidal wetlands and, hence, their ability to keep pace with sea
level. Human activities in watersheds have significantly altered the delivery of
sediment from watersheds to the coast, and indeed there is evidence of past
expansion of tidal wetlands in response to increased sediment supply. However,
more recent land use change, reforestation, and dam construction have reduced
sediment delivery from many watersheds to the coast. The goal of this project is
to understand how past and current land use in watersheds that drain to the East
Coast of the United States has altered sediment concentrations in rivers, to
determine how changes in sediment supply influences sediment accumulation rates
in coastal wetlands, and to project future wetland vulnerability along the East
Coast under various scenarios of sea level rise and sediment supply. This
information is critically needed, and will be of use to researchers, managers,
and stakeholders. This collaborative project includes a strong commitment to
integrate research and undergraduate education and increase diversity in the
sciences. The lead institution on this project serves primarily undergraduate
students, and undergraduate student summer interns and academic year thesis
research students will be involved in all aspects of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes the novel approach of documenting
temporally-variable wetland accretion rates over the past century to evaluate
changing watershed-derived sediment supply in nine estuaries along the East
Coast of the United States. Land use change over the same time period will be
examined in these watersheds to determine the major drivers of changing sediment
supply. The investigators will test the following hypotheses: H1. Suspended
sediment concentrations (SSCs) have decreased in many (but not all) rivers
draining to the East Coast in recent decades due to increased population
densities, shifts away from agricultural land-use, and dam construction in
watersheds, H2. Recent declines in fluvial SSC are reflected in lower wetland
mineral accretion rates in many coastal estuarine wetlands. Geographic patterns
of recent accretion rates reflect regional patterns of sediment decline, with
the greatest reductions in mid-Atlantic wetlands, H3. Sediment deposition and
marsh accretion will be greater in the plots with higher SSC availability and
with plant trapping of SSCs. Further, due to complex ecogeomorphic feedbacks
between marsh elevation, sediment deposition, and plant production, plant
productivity will respond to SSC availability, and H4. Coastal wetland
vulnerability to current sea level rise follows a regional pattern that reflects
both the rate of relative sea level rise (highest in mid-Atlantic) and SSC
(lowest in Northeast and Southeast). However, changing SSC and mineral accretion
rates (greatest declines in mid-Atlantic) will alter future regional patterns of
vulnerability to sea level rise. The researchers will use innovative experiments
to manipulate suspended sediment concentrations in water flooding a marsh over
several years in a sediment-poor marsh system to directly evaluate rates of
sediment deposition, plant growth, and marsh elevation, yielding empirical
evidence for the role of sediment availability on ecogeomorphic feedback
processes in marshes. These data will be used to validate, parameterize, and
expand an existing model (the Marsh Equilibrium Model). The model will then be
used to hindcast marsh accretion rates and to forecast marsh stability under
various future scenarios of sediment availability and rates of relative sea
level rise. The land use change and fluvial sediment supply analyses will be
coupled with measurements of temporally-variable marsh accretion rates and
modeling to provide a comprehensive examination of estuarine wetland
vulnerability to sea level rise. This research will provide integrated
assessment of estuarine marsh response to both sea level rise and sediment
availability.