* 1457686
* Collaborative Research: Does genetic load drive mating system evolution? Tests in an explicit historical context
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Laura Galloway, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2018
* USD 371,778.00

This research will quantify the interplay between historical events and current
natural selection in shaping plant mating system. Evolution is an ongoing
process but depends strongly on the past. While nearly everyone acknowledges
this fact, it has been difficult to quantify the relative importance of
historical and current selection pressures as explanations of patterns in
nature. This research will look at the factors that have determined the amount
of self-pollination versus outcrossing in the American bellflower
(Campanulastrum americanum). The project will immerse undergraduate and graduate
students in the collection of next-generation DNA sequence data to reconstruct
historical events and studies of current selective environment in the study
species. Analyses of data from these disparate sources into a single, unified
framework will provide a clearer understanding of the processes shaping complex
patterns in nature, and yields a predictive framework that can be applied in any
biological system. Broad dissemination of this predictive approach is valuable
because it will help predict the response of species to increasingly altered
environments in the modern age.

Plant mating systems are evolutionarily labile, ranging from highly outcrossing
to highly inbreeding. This wide variation provides an excellent system for
understanding the ultimate drivers of evolutionary change. Variable mating
system strategies across levels of the biological hierarchy are commonly
explained as adaptations to the current selective environment. A significant
fraction of this variation, however, may reflect historical evolution in
response to colonization during range expansion. This idea will be tested using
Campanulastrum americanum, a North American herb in which preliminary data
indicate reduced inbreeding depression and greater autogamy in sites where
phylogeographic data suggest recent colonization. Using populations a range of
distances from glacial refugia, the researchers will gather data with coalescent
analysis of RAD-seq polymorphism, greenhouse studies of fixed and segregating
genetic load, field studies of pollen limitation and reproductive assurance, and
population-genetic inferences of selfing rates. Analyses of these data will
determine whether initially non-adaptive processes associated with range
expansion provided a permissive environment for later evolution of the mating
system. The research framework therefore provides a mechanism for discerning the
ultimate drivers of organismal change across past and present time scales.