* 1457844
* Territoriality and reproductive interference between species
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Gregory Grether, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 682,607.00

Why do some closely related species coexist peacefully while others fight over
space? Aggressive territorial interactions between species are very common, much
more so than expected based on current theory, and may determine whether species
are able to coexist. The importance of understanding the causes of such costly
interactions is highlighted by evidence that the ranges of many species are
changing rapidly. One potentially crucial factor that has generally been
overlooked is reproductive interference. Reproductive interference occurs when a
male or a female of a species recognizes a male or female of a different species
as a potential mate. This mistake has negative impacts on the fitness of both
species. Reproductive interference is effectively a form of mate competition and
thus may be the root cause of territorial aggression between species in some
cases. By developing new theory and testing it with new empirical research on
dragonflies and birds, this project will advance our understanding of why
aggression between species is so prevalent.

This research aims to clarify the factors that determine whether interspecific
territoriality is evolutionarily stable or transitory. An individual-based
modeling framework that the researchers have developed for studying the
consequences of secondary contact between closely related species will be
extended to evaluate the consequences of reproductive interference between (1)
species in which males defend mating territories, and (2) species in which males
defend multi-purpose territories. Rubyspot (Hetaerina spp.) damselflies are the
ideal study system for testing the first of these new models. It has already
been established that interspecific territoriality covaries with reproductive
interference in this genus, but further research is needed to determine whether
the variation in reproductive interference explains the variation in
interspecific aggression. Fieldwork will be carried out to parameterize the
model and to test its predictions on 10 species pairs. The second model, for
species that defend multi-purpose territories, will be based on the biology of
socially monogamous passerine birds, and parameterized using data from the
literature, to evaluate whether current levels of resource competition are
sufficient to maintain interspecific territoriality in the absence of
reproductive interference. Finally, a major comparative study of North American
passerine birds will be carried out to elucidate the ecological, phenotypic and
phylogenetic correlates of interspecific territoriality. This work includes
substantial international fieldwork experiences for students in Costa Rica and
Mexico and is partially funded through the Global Venture Fund.