* 1457340
* WiFiUS:  Device-to-Device Communications at Millimeter-Wave Frequencies
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Andreas Molisch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2019
* USD 280,000.00

The dramatic increase in traffic - both aggregate, and peak traffic per user -
will soon outpace the capabilities of current cellular systems like LTE. To cope
with the increased requirements, new systems need to be developed that both
exploit the use of new spectrum, and new radio access methods. An especially
promising method with those features is device-to-device (D2D) communications
operating at millimeter-wave frequencies. D2D communications exploits the fact
that in many situations, such as in social networks, two devices that want to
communicate are in close proximity to each other. While such devices could talk
to each other via infrastructure nodes, it is much more spectrally efficient to
enable direct communications between the devices, especially for inter-device
distances much smaller than the cell radius; this also enables higher data
rates. Further data rate increases can be obtained by exploiting the large
swatch of new spectrum in the millimeter-wave frequency bands. The use of
millimeter-wave frequencies for WiFi-like systems is has already been
standardized and first products are reaching the market. Furthermore,
millimeter-wave links are now also considered for wireless access, i.e.,
connection from a mobile cellphone to a base station or access point. Recently,
cellphone manufacturers have demonstrated prototypes of handsets with
millimeter-wave transceivers and adaptive antennas, showing the practical
viability for mobile applications. This opens up the possibilities for
millimeter-wave based D2D systems as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will investigate fundamental questions of realizing D2D communications at
millimeter-wave frequencies. Critically, such systems are not simply "regular
D2D systems operating at higher frequencies"; rather, new and important
challenges arise in the context of channel modeling, link setup, link
adaptation, and robustness. To solve these, we tackle the following 4 main
challenges: (i) measurement of D2D propagation channels at mm-wave frequencies,
using innovative measurement techniques and evaluations such as laser-scanning
based ray tracing; (ii) neighbor discovery, i.e., finding which devices can talk
to each other, taking into account the directional nature of the device
antennas; (iii) dynamic beamforming and beamtracking, which integrates a key
property of millimeter-wave channels that the directions of the strongest
multipath components can change rapidly; and (iv) capacity and reliability
investigations. Results from this project will form the basis for systems that
support wireless high-speed connections, as are relevant for video conferences,
real-time gaming, situational awareness, and many others. Equally importantly,
by offloading resource-consuming connections, cellular resources are freed up
for other applications.