* 1457293
* Collaborative Research: Focused Study of Aleutian Plutons and their Host Rocks: Understanding the building blocks of continental crust
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Steven Goldstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2018
* USD 200,003.00

Arc magmatism is the most important process that generates the continental crust
today and likely throughout Earth's history. However, average continental crust
composition is andesitic and calc-alkaline, while average arc lava composition
is basaltic and tholeiitic. The largely unexposed and unsampled plutonic part of
the arcs, on the other hand, may be more similar to the continental crust.
Therefore, understanding the genesis of plutonic rocks is a key to understanding
continental crust formation and evolution via arc magmatism, a key science goal
for the GeoPRISMS initiative. The Aleutian arc is uniquely well-suited for such
a study, because of the extensive exposures of plutonic rocks, unmatched in any
other intra-oceanic arc. In the Aleutian arc, most felsic plutonic rocks have
compositions that overlap estimates for the bulk continental crust. Our pilot
study found that Eocene-Miocene plutonic rocks and Holocene volcanic rocks show
distinctly different elemental and isotopic signatures, which indicate that they
were derived from distinct parental magmas. This difference could reflect
temporal variation of the mantle under the region, or fundamentally different
mechanisms that form plutons and lavas - perhaps strongly calc-alkaline magmas,
with high H2O contents, tend to degas in the mid-crust, causing a rapid increase
in viscosity and crystallinity, therefore they tent to stall and form plutons;
while hotter, drier, tholeiitic basalts have lower viscosity and readily erupt
to form lavas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As it is crucial to understand the extent
and origin of the compositional difference between central Aleutian lavas and
plutons through time and space, this project will map and sample plutonic rocks
exposed on the central Aleutians and their coeval volcanic host rocks. A subset
of the most promising samples will be measured for major element, trace element
and isotopic compositions (Sr, Nd, Hf, Pb). The ages of the plutons and/or the
lavas will be constrained using U-Pb zircon geochronology and 40Ar/39Ar
geochronology analyses of plagioclase phenocrysts and the groundmass. These
preliminary results and the samples acquired in this study will help to answer
fundamental questions of continental crust formation, and shed light on the
formation mechanisms of plutons and volcanics in arcs.