* 1457726
* Collaborative Research: A Comparative Phylogeographic Approach to Predicting Cryptic Diversity - The Inland Temperate Rainforest as a Model System
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2020
* John (Jack) Sullivan, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 10/31/2020
* USD 622,609.00

Biologists have been conducting surveys aimed at discovering and describing
species for centuries. However, it is not known how many species are on the
Earth, because discovering species on a one-by-one basis is time consuming and
expensive. This lack of knowledge is an impediment to conservation aims and
other goals important to society. To address this need, the researchers have
developed an approach to identifying groups of populations that are likely to
consist of several independent species. Because this approach is based on
existing ecological and genetic data, the technique will become more refined as
additional data are collected. The proposed research will develop and test this
approach using data from an ecosystem in the Pacific Northwest that supports
much biodiversity, and where several cryptic species have recently been
discovered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop a predictive
framework for the discovery of cryptic biodiversity that can be applied to all
members of an ecosystem. In this two-phase framework, researchers will (i)
gather environmental, taxonomic, functional, and genetic data from a reference
set of taxa native a model ecosystem and identify which of these species contain
cryptic diversity, (ii) conduct statistical analyses to identify habitat
features shared by the taxa that harbor cryptic diversity, (iii) collect and
analyze environmental data for a second set of species to make predictions about
which of these species contain cryptic diversity, and (iv) test these
predictions via collecting genetic data for the second set of taxa. The
temperate rainforests of the Pacific Northwest of North America will serve as
the model system. The disjunction of conspecific populations or putative sister-
species pairs between Pacific coastal and interior Rocky Mountain segments
presents clear hypotheses regarding potential cryptic diversity: either pre-
Pleistocene vicariance, which predicts high cryptic diversity, or post-
Pleistocene dispersal where which predicts a lack of cryptic diversity. These
predictions will be tested by collection of genomic scale data for 24 endemic
disjunct plants and animals, and application of Approximate Bayesian Computation
to assess support for each hypothesis. This set of taxa will be then used as a
training-set for classifying cryptically diverse species from their occurrence
data and climatic variables associated with each. Classical multivariate
approaches, such as Discriminant Function Analysis, as well as newer decision-
tree approaches (such as RandomForest) will be assessed.