* 1457589
* RUI: SG: Identification of evolutionary processes driving plant diversification on Madagascar in Megistohibiscus (Malvaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Margaret Hanes, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

One of the most important aims of evolutionary biology is to understand the
processes responsible for speciation, and one of the best places to study
species is on the island of Madagascar. The island is home to an extraordinary
number of charismatic plant species and has been identified as an ideal region
to investigate the processes of species diversification. This work will provide
insight into how such a remarkable flora came to be. Though many ideas have been
suggested as possible mechanisms for diversification on Madagascar, the
evolutionary processes responsible for the island's botanical biodiversity
remain poorly understood. This research will fill this gap in knowledge, test
many existing hypotheses for the first time, and provide a much-needed synthesis
of evolutionary process for plant diversity on the island. Powerful, new
sequencing technologies and innovative analyses will be applied to a species-
rich plant group, called Megistohibiscus, which has evolved exclusively on the
island. Madagascar is also one of the highest priority areas for biodiversity
conservation in the world and genomic data collected for this project have the
potential to guide conservation decisions and help limit further losses of
biodiversity. The research will provide research opportunities for female
undergraduate students and underrepresented minorities at Eastern Michigan and
provide important training in evolutionary genetics, systematics,
bioinformatics, and conservation. One Malagasy graduate student will be involved
in the research and a short course will be taught at the country's major
university to facilitate international scientific exchange and address the
significant shortage of trained local scientists on Madagascar.

This research will synthesize findings from phylogenetic and phylogeographic
investigations, information theory and ecological niche modeling to explore the
mechanisms that have led to the extraordinary diversification of plants on
Madagascar. Because multiple processes have likely contributed to the evolution
of the flora, the work will evaluate a full range of evolutionary forces (and
assess their relative contributions) in order to identify the most important
processes. Speciation hypotheses will be rigorously tested for the first time in
Malagasy plants and focus on a morphologically diverse, monophyletic and endemic
clade (Megistohibiscus) in an important Malagasy plant family (Malvaceae; tribe
Hibisceae). Analyses of genetic data collected via RAD tag Illumina sequencing
will identify mechanisms promoting diversification at the species and population
level. This research specifically aims to: I) Infer patterns and timing of
diversification in Megistohibiscus; II) Integrate phylogenetic, geographic and
temporal information to explicitly test models of speciation; III) Explore
phylogeographic histories in three endemic genera (Humbertiella, Megistostegium,
and Perrierophytum); and IV) Identify, rank and compare demographic processes
responsible for population diversification. The resulting taxonomically complete
and resolved phylogeny of Megistohibiscus will help delimit species boundaries,
revise taxonomy, and provide insights into relationships of the Malagasy flora.
A Malagasy Plant Evolution Working Group will be assembled to assess and
strategize ways to inspire the future execution of speciation studies in other
endemic plant clades to uncover comprehensive patterns of Madagascar's floristic
diversity. American undergraduate students and a student from Madagascar will be
trained at Eastern Michigan University, an RUI Institution, in all aspects of
the research.