* 1457221
* Investigation of the hydrogeologic role of faults in the downgoing plate through comparison of Central America, Cascadia, Nankai, and Alaska subduction zones
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Nathan Bangs, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2018
* USD 256,975.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The award will fund a GeoPRISMS postdoctoral Fellowship for two
years of training at the University of Texas, Institute for Geophysics (UTIG).
The proposed work seeks to quantitatively determine the structure and water
content in the faults within the select segments of the subducting plates. This
will allow the assessment of the effects of subducting water on subduction zone
processes. The study will use existing 2D and 3D multichannel seismic data from
Central America, Cascadia, Nankai, and Alaska subduction zones. The results will
provide a better understanding of the geohazard potential in subduction zones,
which is particularly relevant for the Pacific Northwest region where large
magnitude earthquakes have occurred on the Cascadia megathrust in recent
history. The postdoctoral fellow is an early-career female scientist. The
results of the study will be presented at workshops and conferences and will
contribute to the high school curriculum development program at UTIG.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are provided for a
postdoctoral fellow to conduct amplitude preserved seismic prestack depth
migration, 2D waveform modeling of fault plane reflections, and fluid flow
modeling of the 2D multichannel seismic data at Nicaragua, Cascadia, Nankai, and
Alaska subduction zones to explore the limits on the water content of the fault
zones in the oceanic plate seaward of the trench. From these results she will
begin to quantitatively assess the hydration state of incoming plate at
different subduction zones. The seismic attribute analysis of decollement, near-
basement sediment, and basement crustal rocks, and the waveform modeling of the
faults in the down-going plate beneath the slope in Nankai and Costa Rica 3D
datasets will allow the assessment of fluid exchange between the hydrologic
systems of upper and lower plate. The post-doctoral fellow will identify water
expulsion along faults in the down- going plate as it migrates upward into the
upper plate. The results from this study will contribute to answer the two key
questions in the GeoPRISMS Subduction Cycles and Deformation science plan: "How
are volatiles, fluids, and melts stored, transferred, and released through the
subduction system?" and "How do volatile release and transfer affect the
rheology and dynamics of the plate interface, from the incoming plate and trench
through to the arc and backarc?"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed work will provide a better understanding of the geohazard potential in
subduction zones, which is particularly relevant for the Pacific Northwest
region where large magnitude earthquakes have occurred on the Cascadia
megathrust in recent history. The project will support the postdoctoral training
of an early-career female scientist. The results of the study will be presented
at workshops and conferences and will contribute to the high school curriculum
development program at UTIG.