* 1457173
* Assessment of Paradoxical Signal Reliability
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Philip Stoddard, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2019
* USD 485,000.00

Successful communication and social assessment require receivers to discern when
signals are reliable and when they are not. Compounding the problem is that
signal reliability varies between signalers and across time within signalers.
Because communication systems are not intrinsically reliable, primates,
especially humans, spend a great deal of time and resources assessing the
reliability of information received from members of their own species.
Surprisingly, hard-wired communication systems of animals with simpler
communication systems than humans are proving no more reliable, and we do not
know how receivers in these species deal with unreliability of signals. This
project will focus on a species with less sophisticated cognition to examine how
fundamental strategies have evolved to cope with unreliable signals, the most
important outstanding scientific puzzle in the field of communication. The
investigator will also continue a successful hands-on science pedagogy workshop
series that brings inquiry-based teaching methods into middle school classrooms,
as well as offering direct mentorship opportunities for minority college and
high school students in the research lab.

The proposed project will address the central question by determining (1)
whether receivers know when signals are reliable and when they are not, (2)
whether receivers have strategies for addressing variable reliability and (3)
whether signalers compensate for a receiver's lack of trust by providing more
reliable information through other means. Male electric fish (Brachyhypopomus
gauderio) are ideal for such investigation because their signal waveforms encode
body length and androgen level with near perfect reliability, or virtually no
reliability. Signal reliability in this system depends on population density and
food availability. These variables will be controlled in the lab to promote
reliable and unreliable signals, and to create prior exposure of receivers to
signals that vary in reliability. Behavioral mate choice and male-male
competition experiments will determine whether receivers assess reliability of a
male signal by (i) monitoring prevailing social and food conditions, (ii)
reviewing recent signal reliability, or (iii) whether receivers ignore signals
and assess other, more reliable traits. The project will also determine whether
signalers compensate for their lack of reliability by making the desired
information readily available through other sensory strategies. Both raw and
analyzed data are secured by the investigator prior to publication and made
available for electronic sharing upon acceptance of the resulting manuscripts.