* 1457762
* Collaborative Research: Developing novel methods for estimating coevolutionary processes using tapeworms and their shark and ray hosts
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Janine Caira, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 02/29/2020
* USD 395,925.00

Parasites are everywhere and many species have been with their hosts for a long
evolutionary time and are extremely particular about the kinds of hosts they
parasitize. Somewhat unexpectedly, recent research suggests that many parasite
species do not necessarily share a similar evolutionary history with their
hosts; rather other factors may be at play in shaping these parasitic
associations. Yet, little is understood about which other factors, such as diet
or geographic distribution, influence these relationships. This is largely
because a method for assessing the importance of other factors is not currently
available. This research will develop a method and will test it using a well-
known and species-rich system consisted of the tapeworms of sharks and
stingrays. This method will be widely applicable to other coevolutionary
systems, helping to further our understanding not only of host-parasite systems
in general, but also of other biological systems involving intimate
associations. Close species associations are ubiquitous and better knowledge on
the role of the environment in shaping species associations will be critical to
forecasting biodiversity's response to climate change. The research will train
postdoctoral researchers and graduate students in quantitative techniques in
evolutionary biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project moves towards
a more mechanistic modeling of the biological influences involved in the
coevolution between parasites and hosts. Phylogenies will be generated for a
large number of cestode genera, time-calibrated phylogenies will be generated
for their corresponding shark and ray (elasmobranch) hosts and robust parasite-
host association data will be compiled. New methods and open-source software
tools using approximate Bayesian computation will be developed to allow the
estimation and testing of models for the evolution of parasite-host systems. The
models for parasite evolution will be geographically explicit and will include
factors such as cospeciation, environmentally driven extinction, geographic
constraints on dispersal and host-switching, and some effects of intermediate
hosts. These rich empirical data sets will allow the use of robust, cross-
validation methods for hypothesis testing. The end result will be a
methodological framework for assessing the contributions of multiple factors, in
addition to cophylogeny, in structuring host associations and parasite
evolution. The new software will be used to address three main research
questions regarding factors that underlie parasite-host interactions including
the relative roles various factors play in systems with different properties.