* 1457518
* Diversification of Interactions in Multi-species Laboratory Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Kalin Vetsigian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2020
* USD 667,998.00

This project will explore how species interactions evolve by using bacteria in
controlled laboratory conditions as a model. It will result in a greater
understanding of the mechanisms by which initially simple communities can grow
in complexity over time due to changes in species interactions. Most natural
environments harbor diverse microbial communities within which microbes live in
close proximity and interact via secreted chemicals. Such interactions are not
static but constantly and rapidly evolve over time. This evolution happens
because the optimal amounts and types of chemicals secreted, and the optimal
microbial responses to these chemicals, depend on the other species in the
community, that in turn changes as the interactions change. Given society's
growing interest in predicting, manipulating and engineering microbial
communities, it is essential to develop approaches for measuring and
understanding these fundamental processes. In addition, bacterial strains,
protocols and suggested activities will be put together as part of a toolkit for
high school teachers. This project also features field trips for middle-school
students and hands-on workshops for high-school students focusing on rapid
microbial evolution and its implications for society.

While microcosm experiments have demonstrated that microbes can evolve rapidly,
they have usually focused on single-species communities, which often show
diversification due to adaptation to available abiotic niches. In complex multi-
species communities, the eco-evolutionary dynamics may be driven by dynamic
biotic factors. The project will test the hypothesis that bacteria experiencing
a novel and interaction-rich multi-species context are under strong selection to
evolve and diversify their ecological interactions. The project will utilize
bacteria from the genus Streptomyces, which are prolific producers of bioactive
small molecules. Multi-species communities of various numbers and complexities
will be established on agar, allowed to evolve for several weeks, and then
measured for changes in their interactions. Laboratory evolution studies in such
contexts have been limited by the lack of suitable model systems and monitoring
tools. To address this gap, a novel high-throughput approach is introduced that
allows systematic investigation of changes in interactions as they arise in
multi-species laboratory communities.