* 1457102
* Collaborative Proposal: Cellular and Molecular Dissection of "Organizing Activity" during Development in the Spiralia
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Elaine Seaver, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2020
* USD 600,418.00

During normal development, signals between cells in the early embryo can have
substantial influence on how the body develops, such as how the eyes and brain
become localized in the head or how the spinal cord becomes localized on the
back and not the belly. These early events have a tremendous effect on the
organization of the tissues within the body and are critical for normal
development of all animals. This project will determine how changes in early
developmental mechanisms can lead to formation of new body parts. The three
study animals are segmented worms, and offer the advantage that their embryos
possess only 16 to 64 cells when these critical early signaling events occur.
This contrasts with the approximately 1000 cells at a comparable stage in the
vertebrate embryo. Thus, development will be studied on the single cell level,
and similar cells can be compared across distantly related animals. The specific
goals of this study are to identify the signaling cell and the molecules
responsible for instructing surrounding cells to correctly position and generate
body parts. The proposed study will provide strong STEM training opportunities
by integrating scientific training with research for college students, graduate
students and postdoctoral scholars. In addition, there will be ongoing community
outreach activities, including hands-on activities with several different K-12
age groups in the local school districts to teach about animal biodiversity of
the oceans, and general talks to adults in the local community.

This project seeks to understand how developmental changes lead to a range of
body plans, and represents a unique opportunity to gain insight into the
evolution of developmental programs. A group of animals known as the Spiralia
exhibit enormous body plan diversity, yet many phyla in this clade share a
highly stereotypic embryological program called spiralian development. This
conservation allows studies of the evolution of homologous embryonic cell
lineages with single cell resolution across diverse taxa. Specifically, the
molecular signaling repertoire of a single cell will be determined, and the
evolutionary plasticity of its organizing activity will be assessed by comparing
distantly related species. Spiralian development will be investigated
experimentally in the annelids Capitella teleta, Platynereis dumerilii and
Chaetopterus sp. The phylogenetic position and embryonic studies of the three
species will be used to reconstruct the ancestral cellular and molecular
characteristics of annelid organizing activity. Specific goals of the project
utilizing the three annelids are: 1) deletion of single cells in early stage
embryos to identify cell(s) possessing 'organizing activity', 2) identification
of molecular signals that mediate organizing activity, 3) determination of the
function of organizing signals by knockdown and mis-expression studies. The
proposed study will provide strong training opportunities by integrating
scientific training with research, and continue to develop Capitella and
Platynereis as annelid models for Evo-Devo studies. There will be ongoing
community outreach activities, including hands-on activities with several
different age groups in the local school districts that highlight biodiversity
in the oceans, and general talks to adult audiences in the local community.