* 1457260
* LTREB: Female Settlement Patterns and Social Relationships in Chimpanzees, a Male-Philopatric Species
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Ian Gilby, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 09/30/2021
* USD 447,939.00

Social connectedness greatly affects human health. Investigation of the
evolutionary basis of human relationships through study of factors influencing
social bonding in chimpanzees, humans' closest living relatives, will reveal how
and why social bonds are important. Chimpanzees, like humans, are very unusual
among mammals in that males remain in their birth group, while most females join
another group at adolescence. Kinship is a powerful basis for friendly bonds,
but dispersing females must leave their kin and join groups of unrelated
individuals, many of which are hostile to these new competitors. This project
takes advantage of the uniquely long-term field study of the Gombe chimpanzees,
initiated by Jane Goodall in 1960, to examine factors influencing whether
females disperse, how they integrate into a new community, the kinds of
relationships they establish with other females, and how they benefit from these
bonds. Results, disseminated in scientific papers, the press, film
documentaries, and widely visited websites will keep these iconic chimpanzees in
the public eye, and will continue to draw young people (especially women) into
science. The project involves undergraduates from underrepresented groups and
provides scientific training and education experience to Tanzanians. It provides
crucial information for community conservation efforts around Gombe and across
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first half of the decadal research plan, the
objectives have been to compile and analyze 40 years of spatially-explicit
ecological and behavioral data to identify factors influencing female
distribution and social association, and to initiate collection of behavioral
data on young females in three communities as they settle. In the next 5 years,
the first objective is to continue data collection on maturing females to
produce a sufficient sample to test the hypothesis that female settlement is
based on the location of high quality resources, the density and dominance rank
of resident females, and the presence of related or familiar females. The second
objective is to collect detailed data on adult female behavior to test
hypotheses arising from initial analyses about the nature and consequences of
female relationships. Do social bonds enhance the ability to compete for
resources and/or dominance via coalitionary aggression? Do bonds with other
mothers benefit male offspring by promoting their interactions with male peers?
Results will contribute to greater understanding of chimpanzee behavior and
provide a basis from which to consider the evolution of mammalian social
organization and human relationships. Data are compiled in a relational
database, stored at Duke University and available to colleagues, worldwide.