* 1457510
* Collaborative Research: Can Hundreds of Unlinked Loci Really Resolve Recent, Rapid Radiations of Plant Species?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Mark Fishbein, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2021
* USD 303,659.00

Milkweeds (Asclepias) are common and ecologically important perennial plants of
North American grassland and forest ecosystems. They are the only host plants of
the monarch butterfly, a species of significant conservation concern. Because
milkweed species diversified over a short evolutionary time span, reconstructing
their relationships is exceedingly difficult and requires examination of a large
amount of data from across their genomes and powerful computational techniques.
This research will contribute to the development of new methods for more
accurately determining evolutionary relationships when many species have been
formed in rapid succession. The results will have implications for better
understanding the coevolution between milkweeds and monarch butterflies and the
evolution of plant defense, as well as provide a robust evolutionary context for
understanding the results of other scientific studies exploring aspects of plant
reproduction, genome evolution, and other areas using milkweeds. The project
will train postdoctoral fellows and graduate student in the latest phylogenetic
and bioinformatics methods thereby training the next generation of phylogenetic
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will demonstrate the feasibility
of solving difficult phylogenetic problems at the species level in plants by
employing improvements in next-generation sequencing techniques. The work
combines methods for targeted sequencing of hundreds of specific regions of the
nuclear genome applied to unusually large within-species sampling. The project
applies nuclear gene probes developed directly from Asclepias genome and
transcriptome sequences to effectively target 768 genes and substantial amounts
of their non-coding flanking regions. Phylogenetically useful off-target
sequences, (e.g., complete chloroplast genomes) are also obtained. By sampling
20 individuals per species, the approach will distinguish common causes of gene
tree discordance: incomplete lineage sorting and introgression. An analytic
workflow will be applied that incorporates simulation of incomplete lineage
sorting and a combination of species tree inference methods that are effective
even when introgression has occurred. Because current species tree approaches
are constrained by a computational tradeoff between the number of loci and
number of alleles that can simultaneously analyzed, the project will evaluate
the strengths and weaknesses of alternative methods. The large sample of loci
will also validate the recognition of species not currently accepted in
Asclepias. Undergraduate and graduate student training in genomics,
bioinformatics, and phylogenetics will target participants from underrepresented
groups. Project outcomes will reach the broader scientific community and the
general public through workshops held at scientific meetings, K-12 education
modules focused on milkweed ecology and evolution, and demonstration exhibits at
a public botanic garden.