* 1457894
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Avian Community Response to Broad-Scale Ecological Disturbances Across Spruce-Fir Forests
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 12/31/2017
* USD 15,247.00

Shifts in natural disturbance regimes can radically change communities at
regional scales and consequently impact ecosystem functions and processes. This
doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the impact of broad-
scale ecological disturbances on the avian community in sub-alpine conifer
forests. The doctoral student will use Bayesian modeling methods to evaluate the
community-level impacts of logging treatments and bark beetle epidemics on the
common avifauna guilds. The research will quantitatively predict the effects of
logging and beetle outbreaks on both future forest dynamics and ecosystem
services, including avian diversity. It will provide new perspectives regarding
bark beetle-wildlife relationships for aiding ecologists in determining the
effects of a warming climate on broad-scale forest disturbance dynamics. The
study has important implications for forest and natural resources government and
non-government agencies because it will provide insights regarding alternative
approaches for improving forest resiliency and conservation. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

The doctoral student will use observational and modeling approaches to
understand the ecological consequences of landscape-altering beetle
disturbances. The study will be conducted at four sites in the spruce-fir
forests of Colorado's San Juan Mountains. Using remote sensing derived products,
in-situ data, and Bayesian modeling methods, the student will seek to answer two
core sets of questions: (a) How do spruce beetle outbreaks impact avian
community composition and abundance, and what forest structure variables are
associated with increased diversity? (2) How does avian diversity change as a
function of specific forest structure variables in forests that are logged to
mitigate spruce beetle infestations? Project results will enhance understanding
of disturbance-wildlife relationships and their effects on broad-scale forest
disturbance dynamics, thereby helping to preserve future biodiversity more
effectively.