* 1457177
* RUI:Formation of the Turtle Plastron by Re-specified Trunk Neural Crest Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Judith Cebra-Thomas, Millersville University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 10/31/2020
* USD 507,763.00

This research investigates how new types of animals evolve through changes in
their body plan. The turtle shell evolved about 220 million years ago, and it is
the defining character of an entire order of animals, turtles and tortoises.
This research examines the developmental origin of the cells that form the bones
of the turtle plastron (the bottom portion of the shell). The plastron bones
form in the same way as those of the face and much of the skull; they form
without a cartilage intermediate from a stem cell-like population known as
neural crest cells. Importantly, this means that cells that do not produce bones
of the body in mice and chicks, do so in turtles. Previous work demonstrated
that a unique subpopulation of neural crest cells found only in turtles migrates
into the plastron region. The experiments use specific dyes to study the
migration of the unique neural crest cells, and test the prediction that if they
can make bone, they should express a set of genes similar to those neural crest
cells that form the head and skull bones. This research will help to explain the
mechanism by which cells "choose" their developmental fate from a variety of
options, and provide insight into how this process can be altered to produce a
novel structure such as the turtle shell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
focused on the characterization of a unique osteogenic population of trunk
neural crest cells that appear to give rise to the turtle plastron, an
evolutionary novelty that defines the vertebrate order Testudines. One goal is
to investigate the developmental origin of the plastron bones in red-eared
slider turtle (T. scripta) embryos using lineage-tracing experiments to follow
the movement of labeled cells from the dorsal neural tube. The second goal is to
investigate the temporal and spatial pattern of expression of neural crest
inducers and specifiers in and around the neural tube in turtle and chick
embryos. The final goal is to compare the differentiation potential, gene
expression pattern and transcriptional profile of early (conventional) and late
(unique) trunk neural crest cells, and cranial neural crest cells. This will
test the hypothesis that a portion of the trunk neural crest cells in turtle
embryos has been respecified, or has reactivated or recruited the skeletogenic
transcriptional program.&lt;br/&gt;These activities will enhance the research
environment at a public liberal arts college where many students are
economically disadvantaged and/or first generation college students, and provide
research opportunities for women and under-represented minorities. The students
work in research teams, and receive training in embryology, cell and organ
culture, antibody staining, in situ hybridization and bioinformatics. Over 60
undergraduates have already begun their careers working on earlier stages of
this project, and more than a dozen of them have subsequently received their
PhDs or MD/PhDs. This project has been used in numerous outreach programs, and
the results have helped unite developmental biology and paleontology in seeking
explanations for the origin of new body plans.