* 1457602
* Collaborative Research: The Sustainability of Riparian Forests in Expanding Amazonian Agricultural Landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Michael Coe, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2019
* USD 694,457.00

The conversion of large areas of Amazon forest vegetation for intensive crop
production is one of the major forces shaping the Earth. Riparian forest buffers
along streams can reduce the potential negative effects of forest clearing on
stream water quality and stream habitat by intercepting nutrients, providing
shade to reduce temperature and protecting stream channels. This project
investigates how deforestation, cropland expansion and intensification, and
increased fertilizer use influence the structure and sustainability of riparian
forests, and ultimately affect their capacity to keep nutrient runoff from
reaching streams. Research will take place in the Amazon state of Mato Grosso,
Brazil?a global hotspot of deforestation where soybean cultivation has expanded
rapidly in the last two decades. Producers in the region are now shifting from
single-cropped soybeans to double-cropped soybeans and corn, which greatly
increases fertilizer inputs. This project addresses the globally important issue
of how to protect and sustain water quality and aquatic resources in tropical
regions, where high deforestation and rapid cropland expansion are increasingly
common. By improving understanding of the trajectories and causes of riparian
forest change and predicting the movement of nitrogen through riparian zones,
these results will provide a basis for managing the negative impacts of tropical
agricultural intensification. The project team will convey findings to
policymakers and farmers in Brazil and the US by conducting two workshops on the
scientific basis for riparian forest management and conservation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate whether riparian forest
fragments in cropland maintain their vegetation structure over time and how that
structure is influenced by alterations to watershed hydrology and microclimate
that are typical of cropland areas. Investigators will determine whether
riparian forests bordering streams in croplands intercept and remove nitrogen
from watersheds and whether this nitrogen removal function is sufficient to
prevent excess nitrogen from reaching streams in cropland watersheds with high
fertilizer inputs. The project will quantify how changes to riparian forest
structure in croplands alter stream temperature, metabolism, nutrient uptake and
downstream nutrient export. This will be accomplished by comparing riparian
forests in replicated watersheds within intact tropical forest, soybean-only
cropland and soybean-corn cropland.&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the
following three hypotheses: (1) Riparian forests in cropland watersheds have
higher tree mortality, lower tree growth and a more open canopy than either
upland forests or riparian forests in forested watersheds. (2) Cropland
watersheds have lower evapotranspiration, greater runoff and nutrient export,
higher water tables, and wetter streamside hillslopes than forest watersheds but
denitrification in riparian zones is insufficient to prevent excess nitrogen
from reaching streams in double-cropped watersheds. (3) More open canopies in
cropland riparian forest will increase stream temperature and metabolism. This
project will create a new conceptual framework for understanding how
deforestation, cropland expansion, and agricultural intensification influence
tropical riparian forests and streams.