* 1457323
* Plant-soil feedback and species coexistence: interactions among soil pathogens, irradiance, and species life histories
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Richard Kobe, Alma College
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 02/29/2020
* USD 508,213.00

Ecologists have long been puzzled about how so many tree species can coexist
within a given forest. The main goal of the project is to link two seemingly
unrelated and competing mechanisms that have been proposed for tree species
coexistence. These are how tree species respond to light availability and to
increasing density or proximity of other individuals of the same species. Tree
seedling response to soil fungi may hold the key to tree seedling response to
light availability and densities of other individuals of the same species.
Seedling mortality to soil pathogens associated with their own species is likely
enhanced in low light environments for many species, and much more prevalent in
species considered 'shade intolerant'. In addition, these biotic plant-soil
feedbacks may play a large role in heightening differences among species in
their responses to light. This research may help to better define shade
tolerance and explain tree species coexistence; both results are vital for
effective conservation and management of temperate forests. For instance,
results may have implications for forest restoration or the timber industry with
regards to tree species with specific light requirements or regeneration
difficulties. Additionally, this project will educate, train and mentor
undergraduate students in plant and soil microbial ecology as well as provide
public outreach to local K-12 teachers and students.

The primary goal of the project is to investigate biotic plant-soil feedbacks
that can affect distance- and density-dependent seedling survival and growth
across light gradients and among tree species with varying life-history traits.
The researchers will employ a novel field-based transplant experiment using
fungal exclusion pots, which will investigate the mechanisms of tree seedling
response to: 1) feedbacks between plants and the soil microbial community as a
function of light availability, and 2) response to low light as a function of
these feedbacks for eight temperate tree species that vary in seedling shade
tolerance, local adult abundance and association with arbuscular and
ectomycorrhizal fungi. Thus, this research will investigate the degree to which
plant-soil feedbacks contribute to species coexistence through not only
negative-density dependent processes, but also as a driver of species light
gradient partitioning. The project will also investigate which factors (e.g.,
soil pathogen density and composition, and/or seedling traits) contribute to
greater negative effects from disease and plant-soil feedback in low light.