* 1457731
* Genetic parallelism and allele reuse in herbivore-plant chemical phenotype matching
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* May Berenbaum, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2018
* USD 699,999.00

Globalization of trade means the United States is under constant threat of
invasion by foreign plant species, which, once established, can become invasive
weeds. Such weeds can sometimes be managed through biocontrol, by importing
insect enemies from their ancestral land. Impacts of an ancestral enemy on its
host plant in new environments depend on the toxicity of the weed's chemical
defenses and the efficacy of the insect's detoxification enzymes. Wild parsnips
and parsnip webworms, both native to Europe, were accidentally introduced to
North America and co-occur across the continent. This project will determine how
the parsnip's chemical defense profile and the webworm's detoxification enzyme
profile coevolve in response to each other and local conditions. This reciprocal
adaptation may involve re-use of the same genetic variants or it may require
different variants in different places. Understanding which of these options is
most common can inform both basic research on the patterns and processes of
coevolution and agricultural research about how invasive plants either escape
from or succumb to herbivores. This project builds on past NSF funded research
and will provide diverse training and outreach opportunities for students and
the general public.

Expression of cytochrome P450 detoxification genes in webworms and of cytochrome
P450 biosynthetic genes in parsnips will be assayed by RNAseq in samples from
different populations. Differentially expressed genes, their allelic variants,
and their impact on chemical defense and detoxification will be characterized in
parsnips and webworms across their range. Genotyping-By-Sequencing, another
genome-enabled method, will be used to identify molecular polymorphisms in the
interacting genomes in multiple environments. These data will be statistically
analyzed to determine if these species re-use the same genetic variants when
they interact or whether different genetic variants in different locations
permit coadaptation.