* 1457324
* Collaborative Research: Controls Over Decomposition By Microbial Communities Under Climate Change
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Eoin Brodie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 203,957.00

One way that microbes, including bacteria and fungi, play a critical role in the
global carbon cycle is by recycling dead plant matter into nutrients and carbon
dioxide. Although necessary for plant growth, carbon dioxide is also a
greenhouse gas, so changes in activities of the Earth's tiniest life forms could
have affects on a global scale. Warming temperatures, in turn, could affect
microbial activities. If warming increases microbial activities and carbon
dioxide production, there could be a positive feedback that compounds the
severity of environmental changes. The goal of this project is to study the
effects of temperature warming on natural communities of microorganisms in soil.
The research team will use cutting-edge experimental and computational tools to
analyze the importance of microbial diversity. The project investigators have
designed an experiment to test how well microbes from one climate do in another.
For example, they will transplant microbes from a cool, wet mountaintop and
measure how fast they can recycle dead plant matter in a desert. It's plausable
that the mountaintop microbes will lack essential genes for survival in a desert
- genes that desert microbes already have. To test this possibility, the
investigators will use DNA sequencing to identify the genes present in nearly
all of the microbes from each climate condition. The study will also test
whether all microbes are equivalent and speed up their metabolism when the
temperature rises. The investigators will apply a sophisticated computer model
to extend their experimental findings. The broad societal impacts of this
project include training for a postdoctoral researcher and four graduate
students, new computational infrastructure, and an outreach-education program
for visitors to a California state park. Student and postdoctoral training will
focus on interdisciplinary research that links microbial diversity with
environmental change. The investigators will make their computer models
available on the Web so that they are easily accessible to the scientific
community. This project will train a postdoctoral scientist and four graduate
students, develop computational infrastructure, and establish an outreach-
education program for visitors to a California state park. Training will focus
on interdisciplinary research that links microbial ecology and genomics with
ecosystem function. A specific aim of this project is to develop a web-based
version of the microbial community model for dissemination to the scientific
community. On the local scale, the PIs will partner with a University of
California-Irvine outreach internship program and the non-profit Crystal Cove
Alliance to develop an interactive research education station for visitors to
Crystal Cove State Park, CA. Park visitors will have the opportunity to learn
about the ecosystem process of litter decomposition and the consequences of
microbial diversity in the context of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional ecosystem models assume that
biogeochemical rates are independent of microbial community composition, yet
emerging empirical evidence contradicts this assumption. In light of this new
evidence, the investigators hypothesize that litter decomposition rates and
responses to climate change depend on microbial community composition. They will
test this hypothesis by manipulating microbial community composition and
transplanting communities across a climate gradient in southern California. The
hypothesis would be supported if different communities transplanted into the
same location decompose litter at different rates. Similarly, the response of
litter decomposition rate to climate variation across the gradient should vary
for different microbial communities. This project will also analyze the
microbial traits underlying differences (or similarities) in microbial community
function. The investigators hypothesize that variation in decomposition rates
across different microbial communities will be driven by extracellular enzyme
traits. Likewise, variation in the microbial community response to climate
change should relate to differences in 'response traits' such as drought and
temperature tolerance. These hypotheses will be tested by sequencing the
metagenomes of litter microbial communities and extracting functional traits
using bioinformatics analyses. The taxonomic composition of the microbial
communities will be quantified with high-throughput sequencing of 16S and ITS
markers for bacteria and fungi. Finally, the investigators aim to examine the
consequences of their experimental results under future climate change
predictions. Molecular and ecosystem data will be incorporated into a simulation
model that accounts for microbial community composition. The transplant
manipulation results will be compared to model simulations with and without
diverse microbial communities to test the importance of composition for
function. Following a model selection procedure, the investigators will simulate
litter decomposition under climate change scenarios in southern California.
These efforts will reveal the consequences of microbial community composition
for ecosystem responses to future climate change.