* 1457508
* Mutualism theory predicts how legumes influence biodiversity-ecosystem function relationships under global change
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Ellen Simms, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2021
* USD 799,364.00

Primary productivity, the conversion of solar energy to plant biomass via
photosynthesis, is a particularly important ecosystem service that supports most
global ecosystems and is positively related to plant biodiversity. This project
will increase mechanistic understanding of the biodiversity-productivity
relationship to better explain how environmental conditions influence ecosystem
services. Ecological theory predicts that differences among plant species
underlie variation in the biodiversity-productivity relationship. However, the
mechanisms underlying this variation among plant species are rarely
experimentally quantified, leaving causal connections between plant variation
and the biodiversity-productivity relationship elusive. Plants in the legume
(bean) family are infected by beneficial soil bacteria called rhizobia, which
fix atmospheric nitrogen (N) in exchange for carbon (C) from their plant hosts.
As most plants obtain N from soil, access to atmospheric N via this mutualism
can differentiate legumes from non-legumes, thus influencing the productivity-
diversity relationship. This project will experimentally examine biotic
processes that differentiate legume species from each other and from non-legumes
to understand how these differences cause variation in patterns of primary
productivity within a long-term biodiversity, CO2, and N manipulation experiment
in Minnesota, USA--BioCON. To promote public understanding of science, middle
school students will grow and observe legume seeds inoculated with local
bacteria under two N treatments to test if bacteria from regions with high soil
N are less beneficial than those from regions with low soil N. Undergraduates
will be trained in relevant techniques and develop independent projects within
the scope of this work. The research and outreach projects will inform
management of ecosystem function under current and future global change
scenarios, with important implications for human well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Niche differences (ND) and relative fitness
differences (RFD) among legume species will be assessed by determining the
composition and density of, and plant benefit from, the species-specific
nodulating rhizobial community (NRC) in soil samples from the ambient condition
BioCON biodiversity plots. Structural equation models will relate ND and RFD,
and their underlying mechanisms, to relative yield totals calculated from each
diversity treatment, to test the hypothesis that higher ND between legumes and
non-legumes produces stronger richness-productivity relationships and higher RFD
weakens the richness-productivity relationship. Evolution of the NRC in response
to enhanced CO2 and/or N, and its consequences for the richness-productivity
relationship, will be assessed by determining the composition and density of,
and plant benefit derived from, the NRC of each BioCON diversity, CO2, and N
treatment combination. Finally, variation among legume species in how CO2-
and/or N-availability shifts enforcement of rhizobial cooperation (partner
choice and sanctions), and the consequences of this variation for the richness-
productivity relationship, will be examined through mixed-inoculation
experiments.