* 1457855
* NSF BPC-A: Institute for African-American Mentoring in Computing Sciences (iAAMCS)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Juan Gilbert, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 5,053,715.00

The University of Florida, in collaboration with Clemson University, University
of Alabama, Auburn University, Carnegie Mellon University, Rice University,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, and Winston-Salem State University, propose to
extend the work of multiple NSF BPC Alliances (A4RC, ARTSI, EL Alliance) and
Demonstration Projects (AARCS) that utilized different strategies toward
broadening the participation of African-Americans in computing sciences.
Although these previous alliances and demonstration projects differed with
respect to implementation strategies, they all had a strong emphasis on
mentoring. As such, the newly combined Institute for African-American Mentoring
in Computing Sciences (iAAMCS, pronounced "i am cs") will serve as a national
resource and emphasize mentoring as the primary strategy for increasing the
participation of African-Americans in computing, specifically at the Ph.D. level
and beyond. The overarching goal of the iAAMCS is to increase the number of
African-Americans obtaining computing sciences doctoral degrees leading to an
increase in the number of African-American researchers in the academy,
government, and industry. Toward this goal, the iAAMCS Alliance will (1)
increase the number of African-American Ph.D. graduates who enter the workforce
with a research focus; (2) retain and advance African-American Ph.D. students,
faculty and researchers in computing; and (3) develop future African-American
leaders with computing expertise in the academy, government, and industry. The
iAAMCS will be evaluated by a prestigious advisory committee consisting of
experts from computing as well as an external peer evaluation conducted by the
new Center for the Evaluation of the Research Pipeline (CERP).