* 1457870
* Collaborative Research:  Relating detrital peptide sequences to particulate organic matter diagenetic histories
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Lawrence Mayer, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 05/31/2018
* USD 59,863.00

Biological, chemical, and physical processes alter recently deposited marine
sediments. During this alteration, commonly referred to as early diagenesis, the
quantity and composition of organic matter is changed which influences key
components of the marine carbon cycle. In this study, researchers will use
analytical techniques to evaluate the geochemistry of peptides during early
diagenesis, and develop methods for assessing the role bacteria play. This
research is important because organic molecules such as peptides influence
degradation rates and the fate of carbon and nitrogen in the ocean, and
therefore have broad relevance for understanding the geochemical cycling of
these key nutrients. The project will also involve research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as encourage diversity in the next
generation of ocean scientists by providing summer internship opportunities for
female middle school students from underrepresented communities (Project COOL).

Most diagenetic indices for evaluating how "far along" organic matter is in its
early diagenesis are based on amino acid compositions. Total hydrolyzable amino
acid compositions indicate, in a coarse manner, organic matter degradation
status, bioavailability, and source. Further development of amino acids as tools
to assess geochemical processes requires including the wealth of information
held within the peptide chains, information that is currently lost during
hydrolysis. A powerful approach to sequencing detrital peptides is the
application of tandem mass spectroscopy followed by de novo sequencing. In this
project, researchers will use de novo sequencing to evaluate peptide and protein
geochemistry during early diagenesis, and to develop a peptidoglycan-specific
quantification method that allows utilization of the unique peptidoglycan
peptide structures found in different bacteria. Specific actions to be taken
under this project include (1) applying de novo sequencing to a set of well-
characterized archive samples, (2) conducting a set of sorption experiments to
evaluate the propensity for different detrital peptides to adhere to mineral
surfaces and be protected from degradation, and (3) developing a quantitative
method for measuring peptidoglycan peptides. By comparing detrital peptides to
other known quantities of the sample set, relationships between organic matter
diagenesis and peptide source, sequence, and preservation will be assessed.