* 1457960
* Conference proposal: International Symposium on High-Order Methods for Computational Fluid Dynamics (San Diego, CA, July 26-30, 2015)
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Chunlei Liang, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2016
* USD 16,000.00

The symposium will be attended by both prominent and young scientists in
computational mathematics and computational fluid dynamics from around the
world, who will be discussing future directions of research and research
challenges that, if addressed rigorously, would have a strong impact in
technology. Better computational modeling of fluid dynamics in complicated
geometries can lead to improved understanding of a number of engineering
problems in aerospace and naval applications, biomedical applications, wind
energy production and energy conservation, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal seeks funds to partially cover travel expenses of speakers and student
participants to the conference entitled, "2015 International Symposium on High-
Order Methods for Computational Fluid Dynamics", to be held in San Diego, CA,
during July 26-30, 2015. This international symposium emphasizes the fundamental
development of high-order computational mathematics methods for solving fluid
problems with complex geometry. The meeting will emphasize the development of
methods for robust and accurate methods for shock capturing; efficient methods
for turbulence modeling (Large Eddy Simulations and Reynolds Averaged Navier-
Stokes simulations); high-order computation mesh generation with curved elements
and resolving wall flow physics; moving and deforming grids to enable high-
fidelity simulation of fluid-structure interaction; implementing high-order
methods using more efficient computer architectures and GPU systems; and using
high-order methods for predicting new flow physics.