* 1457413
* Workshop Series to Gauge Community Requirements for Public Access to Data from NSF-Funded Research
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Timothy Beers, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 12/31/2017
* USD 114,111.00

This project seeks to engage stakeholders from the branches of science
represented by the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate at the NSF --
astronomy, chemistry, materials research, mathematics and physics -- into an
active dialogue aimed at making publicly available the results of scientific
research sponsored by NSF. Scientists with a broad variety of expertise will
come together for a series of workshops to discuss the possibilities of
scientific and educational reuse of data (which data is useful and what should
be preserved?), the cyberinfrastructure needs for making data publicly available
(what data access methods are required, what sort of accompanying metadata will
be needed for easy access, and what are the parameters of the necessary archival
storage?) and the commonality aspects of public access (how much of the existing
infrastructure can serve multiple disciplines?) The answers to these questions
are expected to be discipline dependent, but promoting a dialogue between
communities is necessary in order to identify best practices and cost-effective
solutions to serve the community needs and to help pave the way to a world with
broad public access to scientific data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making research
data broadly available opens the scientific enterprise to citizen scientists and
other researchers and enhances the potential for discovery. Recognizing that the
transition from the Digital Age to the Big Data Age provides also the technical
means needed to make public the research data from a wide variety of scientific
inquiries, the workshops supported by this project will work towards a framework
by which public access can be accomplished. Economies of scale are expected by
combining projects and infrastructure across various disciplines. As such, this
effort will identify new opportunities for interdisciplinary research by
emphasizing the dataset and metadata interoperability in the design of archival
systems.