* 1457381
* Repression Mediated Embryonic Paterning in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Jeffrey Long, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 05/31/2019
* USD 567,442.00

Plants begin their life with a very basic body plan consisting of a shoot at the
top and a root at the bottom. These structures form in the embryo, and proper
development of the shoot and root is controlled in large part by a plant hormone
called auxin. Auxin is synthesized and transported throughout the embryo and
therefore each cell must make a decision whether to respond or not respond to
its presence. This project seeks to uncover the mechanisms used by cells to
dampen the response to auxin, and the resulting gene expression and
developmental changes that occur when this process is disrupted. As auxin is
used to pattern organs throughout the life of the plant, these studies will be
broadly applicable to plant development and will apply to the growth and
patterning of commercially available crop plants. Reagents created from this
work will also be used during outreach programs for the general public at the
Mildred E. Mathias Botanical Garden as well as in undergraduate classrooms at
the University of California Los Angeles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to understand the relationship between two classes of transcription
factors, the AUX/IAA and AUXIN RESPONSE FACTORS, during Arabidopsis embryo
patterning. Specifically, the action of three AUX/IAAs (AUX/IAA8,9,31) and three
ARFs (ARF1,2,9) that work with the co-repressor TOPLESS (TPL) to repress gene
expression will be explored. Genome wide targets of AUX/IAA8 and ARF2 will be
determined during embryogenesis using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
deep sequencing. These targets will then be compared to the known targets of TPL
to define a shared transcriptional network. RNA-seq in both aux/iaa8 and arf2
mutant backgrounds will be used to correlate gene expression changes with genome
binding. The study will also document both the protein and mRNA accumulation
patterns of all six of these genes and a characterization of a hextuple mutant
will be carried out using well-characterized fluorescent reporters and in situ
hybridizations. Finally, the biological function of the B3 repression motif
found in ARF2 will be explored and an in planta repression assay will be used to
determine the transcriptional activity of ARF2 at a cellular level. Taken
together, these experiments will provide the field with one of the most complete
characterizations of an AUX/IAA and ARF protein to date. As these proteins are
used throughout development and are found in almost all plants, the results
should be applicable to many studies on how plant hormones regulate development.