* 1457532
* Collaborative Research: Responses of Desert Endotherms to Rapid Recent Climate Change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Barry Sinervo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,151.00

Considerable uncertainty exists about the effects of changing climates on the
distributions of plants and animals. Most studies of recent climate change on
species' geographic ranges are based on projections from computer models rather
than measured responses from field studies. This research takes a very different
and multi-tiered approach by using historical records and specimens with the
necessary precision, geographic and temporal scale, and magnitude of observed
climate change to produce important insights into the direct and indirect
effects of climatic and nonclimatic factors on changes in species' geographic
distributions. This research will resurvey field sites in the southwest United
States last surveyed more than 70 years ago, which will not only advance our
understanding of environmental changes but will establish a new benchmark for
comparison of future changes. Federal land-management agencies will benefit from
greater knowledge of the status of sensitive species and wildlife responses to
climate change. Specimens and audio recordings collected will be available for
ancillary studies. Results will be extended broadly to the public through talks,
popular press and media, and museum displays, including new exhibits of the San
Diego Natural History Museum and the Oakland Museum of California. The National
Park Service Science and Education Office will distribute results widely through
videos and podcasts to train their interpreters on the biological effects of
environmental change and to provide interpretive materials for their visitor
centers. Undergraduates, graduate student and postdoctoral researchers will
participate in this study, learning field and lab techniques, natural history,
physiological methods and modeling. Results and data will be shared with
scientists and the general public through websites and online databases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will resurvey sites that were sampled from
1908-1945 to examine the impact of 20th century climate change on small mammal
and bird communities in Sonoran, Mojave, and Great Basin deserts. These areas
have warmed greatly over the last 50 years, with the average annual temperatures
increasing up to 2Â°C. The research will advance understanding of animal
responses to climate change by: developing new models that mechanistically
project species' ranges by linking climate through important physiological
thresholds of temperature and water stress; developing novel tests to examine
whether climate change results in species shifting their geographic ranges
individually or whether whole communities of species shift similarly; and
testing if body sizes and diets of species have responded to climate change.
Birds and mammals will be resurveyed at 105 sites. Both audio and physical
voucher specimens will be collected and made available for future reanalysis.
Standard morphological data will be collected for birds and mammal skulls.
Ratios of carbon and nitrogen isotopes will be measured from tissues.
Multispecies occupancy models will account for detectability in historical and
current surveys to develop unbiased estimators of local colonization and
extinction of species and changes in community composition in response to site-
level characteristics. Measures of thermal and hydric stress at and above the
upper limit of the thermal neutral zone will be made for 12 species of mammals
to develop models of heat stress that can be validated.