* 1457827
* Microbial facilitation at the leading edge of plant species distributional shifts
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Katharine Suding, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2019
* USD 772,000.00

In high-elevation mountain environments, the ranges of many alpine plant species
are limited by a short and cold growing season. Beyond these limits no vascular
plants survive, but microbial life thrives. Warmer spring temperatures and
earlier snowmelt could allow alpine plant species to expand into these
unvegetated areas. This research will examine whether some plant species will
benefit from soil microbes as they expand their distribution in response to
climate change. The interactions of plants with the high elevation soil microbes
will be examined to test whether microbes increase the ability of plants to
withstand cold, drought, and low-nutrient stress. The research will advance
ecological science in the context of understanding the impacts of climate change
on biodiversity and changes in species distribution on the landscape. The
project also will contribute to secondary school education through curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the influence of
a key biotic interaction, between plants and soil microbes, on the ability of
plant species to track climate change and expand their range uphill in high
montane systems. Recent methodological advances will be used to develop
experiments to quantify mechanisms that underlie plant-microbial associations
and to include results in habitat distribution models. The research includes (1)
observational work on distributional patterns of both plants and soil microbes
(bacteria and fungi) in a spatially-explicit grid at the upper edge of plant
distributions into unvegetated sub-nival areas, (2) manipulations of plant-
microbial interactions via inoculation experiments combined with dual-RNA
transcriptomics to assay gene expression to describe interactions among plant
and microbes and (3) field manipulations of growing season length and plant-
microbe associations to quantify the effects of microbial facilitation into
previously plant-free zones. Partnership with Rocky Mountain National Park will
enable the project to collect data relevant to management concerns and
participate in outreach programs, and Science LIVE, an interactive web-based
tool, will be used to develop high school curriculum modules.