* 1457126
* Coordinating adhesion mechanisms during brain morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2020
* James Jontes, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2020
* USD 683,398.00

Animals and their constituent tissues are assembled from large numbers of cells,
which are held together by specialized adhesion molecules. As the three-
dimensional structure of embryos emerges in development, cell-cell adhesion
regulates the coordinated changes in cell shape, and movement, as well as cell
number. How cell-cell adhesion coordinates these cell properties during
development is not well understood. The long-term goal of this research program
is to understand how cell adhesion controls development using the vertebrate
brain as a model. The Principle Investigator has previously found that two
adhesion molecules (Protocadherin-19 and N-cadherin) appear to cooperate in
early stages of brain development. Investigators will use time-lapse imaging of
living zebrafish embryos to visualize the functions of Protocadherin-19 and
N-cadherin during the formation of the embryonic brain. As both Protocadherin-19
and N-cadherin are members of larger families of molecules, the proposed studies
will be broadly relevant to the mechanisms by which vertebrate animals are
formed during development. The proposed research will provide a rich training
environment at the graduate, undergraduate and high school levels, with exposure
to state-of-the-art genetic tools, sophisticated imaging approaches and
quantitative image analysis.

During animal development, changes in cell number, cell shape and cell movement
are coordinated to bring about the morphogenesis of complex three-dimensional
tissues. Cell-cell adhesion is particularly important for morphogenesis, as it
facilitates cell motility, maintains cell polarity and coordinates collective
cell migration. Despite this central importance, relatively little is known
about the mechanisms that dynamically regulate cell-cell adhesion during
development. The classical cadherins (including N-cadherin) comprise a family of
hemophilic cell adhesion molecules that are essential for vertebrate
morphogenesis, and participate in a range of developmental processes.
Protocadherins are a large family of molecules that are related to classical
cadherins, although much less is known about their cellular and developmental
functions. Previous work from this investigator's laboratory showed that
Protocadherin-19 (Pcdh19) is involved in anterior neurulation in zebrafish, that
it functions synergistically with N-cadherin (Ncad), and that Pcdh19 and Ncad
interact in cis to form an adhesive complex. This interaction could provide a
mechanism for dynamically switching between functional adhesive states within
the cell, thus coordinating distinct adhesive systems during complex sequences
of morphogenetic movements. The core objectives of this proposal are to: 1)
understand how adhesion by Ncad and Pcdh19-Ncad coordinate collective cell
behaviors during anterior neurulation, and 2) understand how these distinct
adhesion mechanisms regulate actin dynamics during cell movements. To accomplish
these objectives, the Principle Investigator and colleagues have established a
zebrafish line mutant for pcdh19, as well as transgenic lines generated with
ncad and pcdh19 promoters. These transgenic and mutant zebrafish lines will be
used in conjunction with in vivo 2-photon time-lapse microscopy to dissect the
functional significance of the Pcdh19-Ncad complex during development of the
nervous system, and to determine how they influence actin dynamics during
coordinated cell movements.