* 1457925
* ABI: Sustaining - MorphoBank: the web tool and database for phylogenetic tree-building with phenotypes and the interpretation of trait evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* David Ferguson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 548,107.00

Scientists understand and interpret the evolution of species by studying both
phenotypes (anatomy, behavior, physiology) and genotypes. The integration of
these data, including fossil species, permits the reconstruction of the Tree of
Life, which has been identified by Science magazine as one of the 125 top
scientific challenges of the new millennium. By documenting phenotypes for tree-
building, researchers test major evolutionary hypotheses such as when did a
species develop flowers? Or the ability to fly? With tens of millions of species
on the planet, organizing this informatino requires substantial creative
computer infrastructure. Such infrastructure has existed for genotypic
information for some time, initiated in large part by the Human Genome Project
in the 20th century. Organizational tools and databases for phenotypes has not,
however, received similar attention historically. Thus in 2001, with support
from the National Science Foundation, investigators initiated MorphoBank
(http://www.morphobank.org/), an open-source Web application and database that
has become a modern tool for collecting, organizing, storing and presenting data
on phenotypes across the Tree of Life. Because software must continuously change
to function in the ever-evolving world of the Internet, this project is to
sustain MorphoBank software and infrastructure such that the tool and database
endures as a robust resource for the evolutionary biology community and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MorphoBank gives scientists a unique digital
workspace to collaborate - in real time - with others worldwide and to conduct
data collection relevant to the Tree of Life and evolution. Prior success of
MorphoBank is underscored by key statistics. Each month scientists record
&gt;90,000 observations and load &gt;2,000 newly-generated, curated and
annotated images. Over 2,000 visitors reach the site monthly to view projects
&gt;3,000 times, matrices &gt;6,000 times, and media &gt;75,000 times. 30% of
published projects on MorphoBank are derived from separate NSF-funded geology,
biology and anthropology grants. Another &gt;35% of projects hold the research
output funded by scientific agencies internationally making MorphoBank a global
destination as a tool and archive. Scholarship that would have been impossible
before MorphoBank includes the NSF-supported Assembling the Tree of Life (AToL)
project for mammals. This research was published in Science and included
&gt;12,000 images tied to hundreds of thousands of scientific observations by a
team of over 20 researchers. The paper received wide press (New York Times, BBC,
Time Magazine), including mention of MorphoBank as the research-enabling
innovation. Morphobank represents a new element in the US scientific
infrastructure, providing a model platform for location-independent global
scientific collaboration. Proposed contributions to education and training
provided by the current project include: (1) a software course in Web-based
bioinformatics for ethnic minority computer science majors from Stony Brook
University, New York, (2) two summer internships for selected students from that
course, and (3) two "Morpholution" courses at the American Museum of Natural
History for high school students to learn scientific practices for studying
phenotypes.