* 1457168
* WiFiUS: Message and CSI Sharing for Cellular Interference Management with Backhaul Constraints
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Venugopal Veeravalli, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 02/28/2018
* USD 270,000.00

The past decade has witnessed significant growth in the use of cellular
networks, reflecting increased data demands. This has been the driver of recent
research for new ways of managing interference in wireless networks. The focus
of this project is to explore the potential benefits of exploiting anticipated
infrastructure enhancements, particularly in terms of a more flexible use of the
backhaul network connecting the base-stations, through the lens of information-
theoretic models of single hop wireless networks. The goal is to show how
centralized channel-aware decisions for assigning backhaul resources, by sharing
messages and channel state information, can lead to rate gains and
simplification of interference management schemes in network models that prove
relevant to practial deployments.

The project connects three research thrusts. The first is to study the
fundamental limits of the rate of communication in large interference networks
with a rate-limited backhaul that allows for sharing messages between base
stations in both downlink and uplink scenarios. This study uses high level
channel state information to identify the topology of the network and carry out
a degrees of freedom based analysis and design of message sharing schemes. The
second thrust builds on the first thrust to design distributed multi-antenna
interference control and resource management schemes using more detailed channel
state information and exchange. The third thrust addresses interference
management in dynamic networks, accounting for dynamics in topology due to
fading as well as due to users entering and leaving the cellular network. An
important component of this thrust is the joint optimization of the rate-limited
backhaul for message sharing and channel state information exchange.

Research on interference management, coordination and related resource
allocation will advance our understanding of how to significantly improve the
energy and spectral efficiency of evolving wireless networks. While this project
will advance the science and engineering of wireless networking, it should also
impact the national and international wireless industry by developing new design
principles and methodologies for the design and implementation of future
wireless networks. By enabling more efficient use of wireless spectrum, such
networks have the potential to improve broadband access across the world and
provide the communication infrastructure for numerous new wireless services.
Furthermore, these advances are necessary to enable the evolving internet of
connected objects or the Internet of Things (IoT). Education initiatives include
the involvement of undergraduate students in the research project; integration
of the research results developed under this project into graduate and
undergraduate curricula; presentation of tutorials on topics related to the
project at international conferences, seasonal schools and WiFiUS meetings; and
facilitating student exchanges between the two collaborating institutions.