* 1457460
* RUI: Plant-Herbivore Dynamics in an Herbivore-Protection Mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Enrique Peacock-Lopez, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2019
* USD 244,117.00

Many mutualisms involve the exchange of a resource reward by one partner for
some service by the other. Such interactions can influence the structure of
ecological communities as well as the functioning of ecosystems. For example, in
ant-protection mutualisms, ants protect plants or herbivores in exchange for a
nectar reward. Ant mutualisms are hypothesized to have large effects on plant
and herbivore species diversity and abundance. This project combines modeling
and field work to explore the long-term consequences of a mutualism involving
ant-protected herbivores. Understanding the feedbacks among plants, mutualistic
herbivores and ants across multiple growing seasons will advance ecology by
highlighting the potentially destabilizing effects of mutualisms on terrestrial
ecosystems. This project brings together two researchers at a primarily
undergraduate institution with a strong record of undergraduate training and
incorporation of underrepresented groups in science. The proposed work will
employ honors undergraduate research as its primary vehicle for outreach and
training, including integrative empirical and theoretical approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By definition, the short-term effect of mutualism is to
increase population densities. In herbivore-protection mutualisms, this increase
in population density may lead to over-exploitation of host plants in the long-
term with corresponding negative consequences for protected herbivores.
Preliminary results show that herbivory by the ant-protected herbivore, Publilia
concava, reduces the attractiveness of its perennial host-plant, tall goldenrod,
to subsequent generations. Using a two-way factorial design experiment
(presence/absence of herbivores and presence/absence of ants) in two tall
goldenrod field sites, this project will experimentally evaluate the
consequences of the delayed herbivore effect on host-plants for host-plant
selection and performance of Publilia concava. Repeated censuses of plants,
herbivores, and ants over two years will document if herbivory mediates plant
responses that influence herbivore performance and future host plant selection.
These data will also be used to test a generalized spatial model of herbivore-
protection mutualisms linking host choice behavior, induced plant resistance,
and herbivore population dynamics. Results from the proposal will increase
understanding of the potentially destabilizing effects of mutualism and the
effect of host-choice behavior by herbivores on herbivore-plant dynamics
following delayed effects of herbivory.