* 1457079
* Neuronal-glial interactions mediating crosstalk of homeostatic systems
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Jeffrey Tasker, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2019
* USD 656,711.00

Ghrelin and vasopressin are two critical hormones that control physiological
balance, or homeostasis, in animals including humans. Ghrelin is secreted by the
gut and provides a hunger signal to the brain during fasting. Vasopressin, a key
regulator of fluid balance (the antidiuretic hormone), is secreted from the
brain under conditions of dehydration. Feeding and drinking are tightly
coordinated behaviors that are largely controlled, respectively, by circulating
ghrelin and vasopressin hormone levels in the blood. Understanding how the two
systems that control eating and drinking interact at the cellular level in the
brain is critical for understanding how they are coupled and how the two basic
behaviors are coordinated. This research will determine the brain cell
mechanisms of ghrelin control of vasopressin secretion, and how ghrelin
influences blood fluid levels and drinking behavior. These studies will reveal a
novel interaction in the brain between the nutritional signal ghrelin and the
vasopressin fluid balance system, providing a physiological basis for the
coordination of feeding and drinking behaviors. The project will involve
undergraduate students from a neighboring historically black university in
intensive research experiences over two months during the
summers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ghrelin is a key regulator of energy balance and
vasopressin provides the primary control of fluid balance. Ghrelin stimulates
vasopressin secretion into the blood via a central excitatory effect on
vasopressin neurons. The overarching hypothesis of this research effort is that
ghrelin serves as a homeostatic regulatory signal in the brain that integrates
energy balance with fluid balance. This study will investigate the cellular
mechanisms responsible for the ghrelin stimulation of vasopressin neurons. Pilot
studies suggest that, under fasting conditions, ghrelin activates a non-
canonical excitatory GABAergic synaptic input to vasopressin neurons in the
hypothalamus by stimulating a novel retrograde signaling cascade that recruits
neighboring astrocytes via the dendritic release of vasopressin and
gliotransmitter activation of presynaptic GABA neurons. The ghrelin-induced
activation of astrocytes and presynaptic GABA neurons will be studied using in-
vitro electrophysiological and imaging methods in brain slices from rats and
wild-type and transgenic mouse models. These studies will reveal a novel
interaction in the central nervous system between the nutritional signal ghrelin
and the osmoregulatory control of vasopressin, and will provide a physiological
substrate for the integration of energy and fluid homeostasis.