* 1457758
* Constraints on the evolution of chromosome dosage compensation: a test in butterflies and moths
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2019
* James Walters, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2019
* USD 711,000.00

This research addresses the question of how genes evolve when individuals have
different numbers of copies of each gene. In many species, the sex of the
individual is determined by how many copies of the sex-determining chromosomes
one has. In humans, females have two copies of the X chromosome and males have
just one. Levels of gene expression usually reflect gene dosage: how many gene
copies are present in an individual. Disrupting the balance of gene dosage
between chromosomes typically has severe negative consequences. Understanding
how and why mechanisms evolve to compensate for unbalanced gene dosage is an
important goal both for medical and evolutionary research. This project focuses
on moths and butterflies in which males have two copies of the sex-determining
chromosome and females have just one. This project will systematically survey
dosage compensation associated with sex-determining chromosomes in moths and
butterflies. It will also test how factors like mutation rates and natural
selection play a role in determining the evolution of balanced gene expression.
The researchers will use the wide public appeal of moths and butterflies as a
means to increase public engagement and knowledge about scientific research.

Theory predicts that a mechanism should exist for compensating X-linked gene
expression between the sexes. Observations from different species reveal that
often such mechanisms have evolved, but sometimes they do not. The reasons for
this difference are not understood. Preliminary results suggest moths and
butterflies harbor intriguing variation in the magnitude of dosage compensation.
The research will combine transcriptome and genome sequencing to characterize
patterns of dosage compensation in 10 phylogenetically diverse moth or butterfly
species. RNA-sequencing will provide genome-wide estimates of gene expression to
test for differences between sexes in sex-linked gene expression. This broad
survey of dosage compensation will resolve questions regarding the presence of
sex-determining chromosome dosage compensation in this prominent female-
heterogametic taxon. Comparative genomic analyses and resequencing of targeted
species will be used to infer patterns of male mutation bias and the relative
effective population sizes of sex-determining chromosomes and other chromosomes.
These population genetic factors are expected to correlate with the presence of
dosage compensation and will be compared across species to test for such a
relationship.