* 1457835
* SG: Exploring the Impact of Model (Mis) Specification on Empirical Divergence-Time Estimates
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Brian Moore, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2019
* USD 149,998.00

Phylogenetic trees - estimates of the evolutionary relationships among species -
have become central to virtually all areas of research in systematics,
evolutionary biology, ecology, molecular biology, and epidemiology because of
the essential and explicit historical perspectives they provide. Phylogenies
have extended the branches of their influence from the scientific to the public
realm, informing decisions regarding the surveillance and monitoring of
pathogens, vaccine design, and conservation priorities. Although many
phylogenies are based on molecular sequence data (DNA) collected from extant
species (or strains), these trees can also provide information regarding the
absolute or relative branching times within a lineage. This temporal information
is critical to many questions, such as inferring when a virulent strain of a
virus first arose and estimating how quickly it is changing. These
considerations have motivated the development of a large number of mathematical
models for inferring the time scale of evolutionary trees. This project seeks to
assess the reliability of these mathematical models using empirical datasets,
and will inform researchers and public alike on the best practices for using
these methods. Undergraduates recruited through the University of California
Historically Black Colleges and Universities initiative and the US Davis
Initiative for Maximizing Student Diversity will be trained in statistical
phylogenetic methods and bioinformatics. All software developed will be
distributed freely under open-source licenses. The researcher will also develop
a new, stand-alone workshop and associated teaching materials on Bayesian
divergence-time estimation methods to be used broadly, including by researchers
who do not work directly in phylogenetic research.

The primary objective of this research is to explore the statistical behavior of
Bayesian methods for estimating species divergence times in an empirical
setting. This main goal will be achieved by applying all currently implemented
relaxed-clock models and calibration methods to a large sample of empirical
datasets to: (1) reveal the extent to which divergence-time estimates are
sensitive to the specified relaxed-clock model/calibration method; (2) explore
the relative influence of the three primary model components - branch-rate
priors, node-age priors, and calibration approaches - on divergence-time
estimates; (3) assess the relative fit of the pool of candidate relaxed-clock
models to real data using robust Bayesian model-comparison methods; and (4)
develop analytical protocols and implement pipelines that automate the efficient
exploration of relaxed-clock model space for empirical analyses. Facilitating
more careful model selection will improve our ability to estimate divergence
times, which, in turn, will broadly benefit scientific and broader communities.