* 1457383
* An Integrative Approach to the Ecological and Evolutionary Causes of Geographic Range Limits
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2022
* Cameron Ghalambor, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 749,691.00

The proposed research will investigate the physiological responses of fish
species to altered salinity. Salinization of freshwater ecosystems has been
identified as an important global threat to ecosystem goods and services. Yet
very little is known about how increased salinity will impact freshwater
communities and ecosystems. The proposed research will contribute a mechanistic
understanding on how salinity alters suites of physiological and behavioral
traits and how these changes in turn shape geographic distributions and fish
community structure. The proposed research also includes an educational outreach
component focused on middle school students. Live fish will be used in
classrooms to teach students biological concepts through inquiry-based
approaches. Assessments of a pilot program have shown improved student
understanding of biological concepts and increased test
scores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All species in nature show a limited geographical
distribution. Indeed, one of the most fundamental goals of ecological and
physiological research is to explain why some organisms occur in some
environments and not others. Geographic range limits also pose a fundamental
evolutionary question; why don't populations evolve over time to occupy a wider
range of environments. Such simple questions remain largely unanswered for most
organisms, limiting our ability to predict how organisms respond to
environmental variation. The challenge persists in part because the causes of
geographic range limits requires an understanding of how multiple abiotic and
biotic factors covary in the environment, and how suites of different traits
respond and adapt to these challenges. In the research proposed here, the
distributional limits of closely related tropical fish species in the genus
Poecilia are investigated. When these fish occur together they segregate along a
salinity gradient, but when they occur alone they span a broad range of
salinities, suggesting salinity tolerance and competitive interactions jointly
shape distributional limits and community structure. The proposed research
focuses on how osmoregulation, behavioral aggression, hormones, metabolic scope,
and locomotor performance interact with each other. These traits are typically
studied separately, however, their joint study reveals new hypotheses on how
shared mechanisms can influence multiple traits in ways that lead to geographic
range limits. The proposed research will use lab and field experiments to first
test 1) how elevated energetic costs of salinity stress, interspecific
competition, and predation pressure may make some environments too expensive to
persist in, and 2) how hormonal changes associated with osmoregulation may
compromise competitive ability and food acquisition. Second, the proposed
research will explore the role of gene flow, additive genetic variation, and
negative genetic correlations as evolutionary constraints on osmoregulation and
competitive ability using a combination of lab breeding experiments, genomic
approaches, and artificial selection experiments. Collectively, the proposed
research not only offers an opportunity to test the eco-physiological and
evolutionary causes of geographic range limits, but also provides an integrative
framework that can be applied more broadly.