* 1457785
* MPWR II: Mentoring Partnerships for Women in RUME
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Jess Hagman, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* teri murphy
* 11/30/2015
* USD 49,986.00

This project will help stimulate the growth of Partnerships for Women in RUME
(Research in Undergraduate Mathematics Education) and foster a sustainable
support system for women at all career stages in undergraduate mathematics
education research. Stemming from the need articulated in national reports and
research findings, the project will emphasize face-to-face mentoring and a
partnership system that targets participation amongst women researchers within
undergraduate mathematics education. The project will also function as a
clearinghouse for opportunities for established women to mentor newcomers into
the field, and to build partnerships among women researchers of undergraduate
mathematics education at all career stages.

The project goals are to provide an environment for women in the undergraduate
mathematics education research community to discuss issues specific to them, as
well as facilitate mentorship and partnership opportunities among graduate
students and faculty, both junior and senior, within the research community.
Building on the success of MPWR I, the project will initiate the process with a
seminar that will occur in conjunction with the annual RUME conference. The
project will have seventy participants. Following the RUME conference,
participants will submit requests for formalized mentoring and partnership
networks composed of one senior faculty, two junior faculty, and three graduate
students. The project aligns with the national effort to support the careers of
women and minorities within the STEM disciplines. It takes up specific
recommendations for this support in the form of fostering personal, face-to-face
mentoring and partnership opportunities. By supporting women in undergraduate
mathematics education, the project seeks to increase the number of graduate
students pursuing undergraduate mathematics education research who will go onto
academic positions, as well as to increase the productivity of female junior and
senior faculty who already hold academic positions. The MPWR seminar will
further expand the role of women pursuing research in undergraduate mathematics
education within in the broader Discipline Based Education Research (DBER)
community.