* 1457964
* Scholarship Program for Undergraduate Retention and Success (SPURS)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Amar Bhalla, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 626,890.00

The Scholarship Program for Undergraduate Retention and Success (SPURS) at the
University of Texas San Antonio (UTSA), a Hispanic-Serving Institution, will
focus on recruiting financially disadvantaged undergraduate students pursuing
degrees in the departments of biomedical, civil, electrical and computer, and
mechanical engineering. At least three students from each department will
receive scholarships each year, so at least 12 students yearly will participate
in the program. The approach will increase the number of undergraduate students
who enroll in Engineering and ensure student persistence and completion of a
B.S. Engineering degree. The outcome of the program will, in turn, increase the
number of students in the STEM workforce and/or graduate programs. The proposed
program is significant because it recognizes the need for a diverse work force
trained to solve the world's problems and it will eventually increase the
diversity of the engineering workforce, especially in South-Central Texas. The
program will enhance how UTSA educates and engages students in STEM fields and
by encouraging undergraduate students to participate in K-12 outreach
activities, the pathway towards engineering will be opened from the earliest
grades; this approach could promote more students to study STEM fields. SPURS
will provide the participating students skills needed to succeed in engineering
careers and those who take advantage of optional research opportunities will be
better prepared to pursue graduate studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three tasks
will accomplish the overall objective: (1) Create an Undergraduate Engineering
Scholarship Program; (2) Create a Workshop Series on Critical Thinking,
Professional Development, and Research; and (3) Provide students with optional
opportunities in research, internships or K-12 STEM outreach programs. Data will
be collected to perform formative evaluation of 1) project implementation
including management, recruitment, student selection, et alia and 2) progress
such as achievement of retention and graduation goals and student academic and
professional development success. Summative evaluation of project components
will be conducted to determine overall project success at meeting its objectives
and lessons learned. The evaluation will also study potential for replication of
program components to other universities. The results of the project will be
presented to other colleges at UTSA and at national conferences and will be
published in engineering educational journals.