* 1457009
* Analysis of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Amanda Simcox, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2021
* USD 710,000.00

During animal development, cells increase in number as the overall body and each
part of the body grow in size and complexity. The processes that coordinate
growth, shape generation, and final size are essential to ensure the correct
body pattern is made and key features such as limbs are properly formed. In this
project, the fruit fly wing will be used as a model to study limb growth. By
studying the wing at the beginning of development, when the tissue is simpler,
the direct effects of genes that regulate cell growth can be tested. The
research will use important resources that have been developed in the nationally
funded genome projects and will involve molecular biology, genetics and
microscopy. It is expected that a comprehensive view of how a limb is
established from the earliest stages will emerge. The genes used in limb
development in fruit flies are conserved with other animals, including humans,
so that general principals will be learned. To increase public understanding of
science, an animated movie will be made in conjunction with the Advanced
Computing Center for the Arts and Design. The movie will highlight the beginning
of fruit fly genetics, which started a field of research that has fueled the
fundamental understanding of animal biology for more than a century.

As animal body parts and organs grow in size and complexity, cell proliferation
must be linked to cell fates so that the final structure has the correct pattern
and proportions. A major goal in developmental biology is to understand the link
between patterning and growth (scaling) at a mechanistic level. In the proposed
work, the small group of cells comprising the wing disc, which become the fly
thorax and wing, will be studied as they increase in number from about 30 to 150
cells. In this short time window the major pattern is established. The
mechanisms that operate here encapsulate those typical of all growing systems
and involve conserved growth factors in the Dpp and Egfr pathways. By studying
the regulation of cell-cell signaling and determining how cell fate is linked to
domains of cell proliferation, the work is expected to both fill a gap in
knowledge about early development of the Drosophila wing and provide insight
into fundamental processes shared in all animals. In an effort to broaden public
understanding of genetics, the story of the pioneer Drosophila geneticist,
Morgan, will be documented in a biographical film. In partnership with ACCAD
(Advanced Computing Center for the Arts and Design), a state-of-the-art graphic
film will be made that describes the discovery of the first Drosophila mutant -
the famous white-eyed fly. The film will be posted on YouTube for broad
dissemination.