* 1457226
* Regulation and function of RFRP-3 neurons in the inhibition of mammalian reproduction
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Alexander Kauffman, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2019
* USD 760,856.00

Stress can drastically inhibit fertility and reproductive status, but how this
happens in the body and brain is poorly understood. Indeed, although the
negative effects of stress on reproduction are well appreciated, the specific
signaling factors and neural mechanisms that converge in the brain to inhibit
reproduction under stressful conditions remain poorly defined. This proposal
will use novel mouse models and neural gene profiling to test how psychosocial
stress alters inhibitory neural circuits in the brain in relation to controlling
fertility. This proposal will substantially expand our knowledge of how
stressors "communicate" with specific parts of the brain that control
reproduction. This information will significantly advance the field of
reproductive neuroendocrinology. Moreover, given the common theme of stress
inhibition on reproduction in many animals, this research will ultimately have
broad impact for better understanding brain and hormone functioning of multiple
vertebrate species. The research component is complemented and integrated with a
comprehensive broader impact plan which includes training and mentoring
undergraduate students and post-doctoral scholars, including women and under-
represented minorities. The proposal also includes a program aimed at engaging
under-represented minority high school students in science research, as well as
a new brain research outreach program and internship collaboration with a local
high school with students from diverse ethnic and socioeconomic
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stress can inhibit fertility and reproductive
status, but exactly how this occurs mechanistically is poorly understood.
Reproduction is simulated by gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion
from the brain. The highly-conserved neuropeptide RFamide-related peptide-3
(RFRP-3), encoded by the Rfrp gene, negatively regulates the reproductive axis
by inhibiting GnRH secretion. However, very little is known about the phenotype,
regulation, or functional necessity of RFRP-3 neurons. As an inhibitor of GnRH,
RFRP-3 is poised to relay inhibitory stress signals to the reproductive axis,
but this requires testing. This proposal will utilize new transgenic RFRP-3
mouse models (the first of their kind), coupled with cutting-edge molecular
tools, to functionally test the involvement and necessity of RFRP-3 neurons in
mediating the negative effects of stress on reproductive status, as well as
identify novel brain genes that are activated under stressful and non-stressful
conditions. This study will therefore provide fresh insight into the
physiological regulation and functional roles of RFRP-3 neurons and other brain
circuitry in the modulation of reproductive status during stress, and will
empirically probe RFRP-3 regulation and function in new ways that have not been
possible with former histological and pharmacological methods.