* 1457774
* Bridging observational, experimental and genomic insights on species and speciation through comparative analyses in a new vertebrate model system
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2023
* Richard Glor, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2023
* USD 603,424.00

Species are the fundamental units of biological diversity, but the
identification of species in nature, and understanding of how and why these
species form, remain significant scientific challenges. The goals of this
research are to identify species boundaries, explain why species diverged, test
for the presence of reproductive isolation between species, and investigate the
role of natural selection in speciation. By addressing each of these objectives
in a group of closely related species at varying stages of divergence, this
research will involve the most detailed analyses of species and speciation ever
conducted in a reptile. The results of this work will provide new insights that
are central to understanding species and to effective conservation management of
biological diversity. Discoveries resulting from this work will be shared
publicly in the form of an exhibit at the University of Kansas Natural History
Museum that will engage school aged visitors and their instructors as well as
via two online resources that are popular with the general public and students
of all ages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will investigate challenges to the
modern synthesis-era view that species are phenotypically distinct and
reproductively isolated populations that diverged in geographic isolation due to
founder events, genetic drift and related phenomena. First, by quantifying
genomic, phenotypic, and ecological variation across a highly variable species
complex, this work will test if recent speciation events have been overlooked by
traditional taxonomic methods. Second, landscape genetic analyses will be used
to test the contribution of biogeographic and ecological processes to species
divergence. Third, multi-generational experimental crosses will test if
intrinsic reproductive isolation evolves relatively early in the speciation
process, and in accordance with general rules. Finally, fourth, using mapped
genomic sequence data from individuals sampled in nature and individuals with
known pedigrees, this work will test if initial divergence between species
results largely from natural selection acting on a limited number of loci or
genomic regions. This work will investigate each of these topics in a highly
variable species complex that includes populations at various stages of the
speciation process. The work proposed here will entail the most detailed and
integrative analyses ever conducted in a reptile and will result in development
of a new laboratory model organism, the first reptile genome assembled via
linkage mapping, and the first estimates of heritability and the genomic basis
for phenotypic traits important to systematic studies of reptiles.