* 1457940
* HACU STEM Task Force
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* John Moder, Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 03/31/2017
* USD 65,697.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program: Centers of Research Excellence in Science
and Technology&lt;br/&gt;Organization: Hispanic Association of Colleges and
Universities &lt;br/&gt;Title: HACU STEM Workforce (Conference Proposal)
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1457940&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CREST Program is
interested in building knowledge related to the underlying issues affecting the
differential participation and success rates in STEM disciplines of students,
postdoctoral researchers and faculty from underrepresented groups, as well as
the obstacles faced in promoting graduate study in STEM for students at
minority-serving institutions and how these may effectively be overcome. With
National Science Foundation support, the Hispanic Association of Colleges and
Universities (HACU) will implement a Conference Project entitled: HACU STEM
Workforce. The conference project will establish and convene an expert Task
Force to develop policy recommendations and to identify and promote high impact
practices to be implemented at Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs) as well as
majority institutions for the development of a more diversified STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a national and international association of more than
450 colleges and universities committed to improving Hispanic success in higher
education, HACU is positioned to convene such a Task Force, support its efforts,
and promote both the policy recommendations and the high impact practices
identified by the Task Force. While HACU member institutions in the U.S.
represent only 10% of all higher education institutions nationwide, together
these institutions enroll more than two-thirds of all Hispanic college students.
HACU goals include promoting the development of member colleges and
universities; improving access to and the quality of postsecondary educational
opportunities for Hispanic students; and meeting the needs of business, industry
and government through the development and sharing of resources, information and
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two reports will be produced as a result of the
Task Force efforts, one discussing policy issues related to Hispanic STEM
education and the other will highlight promising practices for creating a
diverse STEM workforce. The Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities
will publish the reports on its website, incorporate policy recommendations into
its annual Legislative Agenda, and disseminate and promote high impact practices
to its 450 member institutions, as well as majority institutions through its
Annual Conferences and other program activities.