* 1457350
* Inventing monogamy: innovation and adaptation in the epigenome
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Steven Phelps, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2020
* USD 686,889.00

How do new behaviors evolve? Recent technical advances allow us to ask exactly
which deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequences underlie evolutionary innovations in
gene expression, neural function, and complex behaviors. The ability of an
organism to form a bond with another individual is a complex behavior, one that
shapes the social behaviors exhibited by many species, including humans. In the
current project, the investigators identify evolutionary adaptations that
underlie social bonding in a well-studied species, the monogamous prairie vole.
The investigators compare the subtle changes in DNA sequences that distinguish
monogamous prairie voles from promiscuous relatives. They also ask whether these
changes in DNA influence gene function in brain regions important for pair-
bonding as well as brain regions important for spatial memory because space use
is a major factor in animal mating systems. Lastly, the investigators ask
whether natural selection has operated on these DNA sequences by examining
patterns of DNA variation. The findings will help understand how changes in
complex behavior can emerge from variation in DNA. To complete the studies, the
investigators will recruit and train undergraduates from under-represented
groups. Further, the investigators will develop and disseminate research tools
needed to perform similar studies on a great variety of species, making it
easier to do cutting-edge studies of genome function and behavior in any
species. The answers obtained from this work will elucidate the relation between
behavior and subtle genetic variations that contribute to diversity and
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How is an existing genotype sculpted, locus by
locus, to result in a new phenotype? The investigators use the genus Microtus as
a model for understanding the epigenetic innovations that gave rise to social
monogamy, building on an extensive body of work in social neuroscience,
molecular genetics, and behavioral ecology. They examine the epigenome and its
evolution in three vole species: the monogamous prairie vole, M. ochrogaster;
the promiscuous meadow vole, M. pennsylvanicus; and a promiscuous outgroup, the
California vole, M. californicus. Although many brain regions merit study, the
investigators focus on four brain regions: reward structures (nucleus accumbens,
ventral pallidum) and spatial memory structures (hippocampus, retrosplenial
cortex). In the first aim, they use RNA-seq and ChIP-seq to identify species
differences in gene regulation. In second aim, they use phylogenetic and
population genetic methods to identify adaptations within the epigenome. The
intersection of these two data sets will identify regulatory regions likely to
be causally involved in pair-bond formation, and in mating system differences in
spatial cognition. Finally, the investigators test whether the evolution of
monogamy in this group relied predominantly on changes related to bonding, to
cognition, or both. The identified DNA sequences can then be subject to
manipulation in future studies.