* 1457400
* Water Balance and Plant Ecophysiology in Coastal California: Linking Models and Mechanisms to Project Winners and Losers under Future Climate Scenarios
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Todd Dawson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2019
* USD 726,511.00

The geographic ranges of plant and animal species are closely tied to
environmental conditions, including the seasonal patterns of temperature and
rainfall. In California, almost all rain falls in winter, and plants experience
severe water deficits during the hot, dry summer months. The summer dry season
can have very different effects on different species, depending on how deep
their roots grow to access water and differences in the degree of drought
tolerance. Understanding how these factors vary across a landscape is critical
to understand and predict the vulnerability of trees to a warmer and drier
climate. This project will address this important problem in tree species of
California oak woodlands, currently experiencing a severe, four-year drought.
Isotopic and physiological measurements of trees will be combined with a
landscape scale model that captures the effects of climate and soils on water
deficits. By connecting these two approaches it will improve the ability to
predict how different climatic conditions will impact the performance of tree
species in different parts of their geographic range, and their vulnerability to
warmer and drier conditions. The project will also provide training to young
professionals at several career stages, including recruitment of undergraduate
assistants from under-represented groups.

The study of species distributions along environmental gradients is central to
ecological research, and plays a critical role projecting species responses to a
rapidly changing environments. This project addresses the physiological
mechanisms underlying the responses of tree species in California oak woodlands
to spatial and temporal variability in water deficits. A central goal is to
understand how species differences in landscape position, rooting depth and the
physiological regulation of stomata (isohydry vs. anisohdry) influence the
intensity of seasonal water deficits, and the implications for vulnerability to
a warmer, drier future climate. Eight tree species will be studied across four
sites that span gradients of temperature, precipitation and climatic water
balance. Oxygen isotopes and predawn water potentials will be used to assess
functional rooting depth. Comparative hydraulic strategies, including measures
of xylem vulnerability to embolism and leaf water relations, will capture
species' responses to dry season water deficits. The results will be integrated
into a high-resolution, landscape-scale water balance model to develop novel
projections of how water deficits will impact species with different hydraulic
strategies in responses to varying climatic conditions. These calibrated models
will be further combined with projections of future environments to generate
mechanistic predictions of species vulnerability to environmental change. The
results of this project will be directly incorporated into local conservation
planning and resource management, through collaborations with regional NGOs.
Training will be provided for one post-doc and several graduate students;
undergraduate research assistants will be recruited through the Berkeley
Scholars Program, an award winning program supporting research and career
development for students from under-represented groups, and through Pepperwood
Preserve's collaborative programs with the Santa Rosa Junior College, an
Hispanic-Serving Institution located close to the primary field site.