* 1457183
* Integrating Photoassimilate Source to Sink Transport in Legumes to Enhance Seed Development and Nutrition
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Mechthild Tegeder, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 647,525.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;The development of strategies to improve crop
productivity to meet growing societal needs for food supply and alternative
sources of energy provides a challenge to current and future research on plants.
In addition, the balanced intake of essential nutrients or metabolites is
important for human nutrition worldwide, but their content is often sub-optimal
in crop species, as is the case for the essential amino acid methionine in
legume seeds. In higher plants, carbon and nitrogen are quantitatively the most
important nutrients for plant development. The macronutrients are taken up by
the plant and are assimilated into sucrose and amino acids. These are then
transported in the vascular system to the seeds to support growth and
accumulation of storage reserves such as proteins, starch, or oils. The goal of
this project is to understand and manipulate carbon and nitrogen assimilate
transport to legume seeds, and to overcome potential bottlenecks of assimilate
movement. This study will provide clues as to how transporter proteins function
in delivery of carbon and nitrogen nutrients to seeds, and on their critical
role in seed yield and nutritional quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description of the Project:&lt;br/&gt;Transgenic modifications of amino acid and
sucrose transporters have underlined their essential roles in assimilate
partitioning; however, there has been only limited success integrating
transporter function with seed development, seed metabolism, and the synthesis
of seed storage compounds and their nutritional quality. Current data suggest
that a bottleneck within the long distance transport pathway lies in the
transporter activity, or the lack of it, in both leaves (i.e. phloem) and
embryos. Furthermore, research supports strong regulatory control by nitrogen
assimilate transporters over metabolic processes up and downstream of their
function. In this study, Pisum sativum L. (pea) will be used as a model system.
Transgenic plants will be analyzed, in which photoassimilate transporters are
simultaneously overexpressed in the phloem and in cotyledon transfer cells,
where assimilate import into the embryo occurs. Potential constraints will be
overcome in source to sink transport of photoassimilates to promote sink
development and seed storage product accumulation (Aim 1) and to resolve if and
how different embryo uptake systems affect seed assimilate flux, metabolism and
metabolite compartmentation (Aim 2). Molecular, biochemical, and cell-biological
analyses, and physiological techniques, as well as a combination of magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) for assimilate flux studies in living seeds and modeling
approaches will be used to answer some long-standing questions about rate
limiting and regulatory processes in assimilate transfer to, and distribution
and usage within, the main embryo storage sites. The proposed activities will
further promote student and public education in plant biology by discussing
research schemes in the classroom, by mentoring and training undergraduate and
graduate students in research, by engaging students in international
collaborations, and through demonstrations and activities involving the local
community. Overall, this project will foster effective integration of plant
biology education and research.