* 1457106
* Collaborative Research: The Genetic and Anatomical Determinants of Olfaction
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Blaire Van Valkenburgh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2020
* USD 804,448.00

The sense of smell is the oldest of the vertebrate senses and yet it remains the
least understood. In humans, it is often considered a less important sense than
vision or hearing, and this may explain in part why research has lagged behind
that of other senses. Nevertheless, scent detection is a fundamental sense in
animals involved in food acquisition, spatial orientation and mating. The wide
variation of the sense of smell in animals (from marine mammals with very
limited abilities to keen-scented species such as dogs) is affected by
anatomical differences and likely has a genetic basis, yet the mechanistic
connections between anatomy, genetic variation, gene expression and scent
detection are poorly understood. This project uses dogs as a model system to
investigate the anatomy and genetics of scent detection. Many dog breeds, such
as scent hounds, have been strongly selected for an enhanced sense of smell,
whereas other breeds, such as sight hounds, have been selected for visual acuity
and are likely to have diminished ability to smell. Other canines, such as
short-faced breeds, have impaired breathing and airflow across the nasal
passage, which likely affects their sense of smell. Consequently, domestic dogs
present a unique long-term experiment in scent detection and provide a range of
sensory variation not found within any other mammal species. The results will
uncover the mechanisms that enhance or lessen the sense of smell in animals and
may allow for predictions of sensory function in a specific ecological context.
Further, the results may lead to new biomedical insights for human health and
impairments in the sense of smell. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
full sequence of the canine olfactory repertoire, which includes 1178 olfactory
receptor genes, coupled with an analysis of gene expression will be undertaken
in about 400 dogs from 26 breeds of varying olfactory ability. The genes will be
sequenced using a capture array designed from existing complete genome sequences
and the sequencing of gene transcripts (RNA-seq) will be based on olfactory
tissue samples. This genetic information will complement anatomical and
functional analyses of 66 dogs from the same breeds using high-resolution CT
scans that will facilitate reconstruction of the olfactory organ, which will be
analyzed and correlated with indices of olfactory sensitivity and olfactory gene
repertoire diversity. Computational fluid dynamics simulations of airflow and
odorant deposition in anatomically accurate reconstructions of the nasal cavity
will be compared across these breeds to determine if the nasal anatomy and
architecture of some dogs directs more odorant-laden airflow to the olfactory
region of the nose. Anatomical, genomic and expression data will be available on
the program website or submitted to public databases (e.g. DigiMorph or
Genbank).