* 1457845
* Collaborative Research: A Biotic Inventory of Terrestrial Vertebrates, Spiders, and Haemosporidian Parasites of Sulawesi, Indonesia
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2023
* Rosemary Gillespie, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 10/31/2023
* USD 721,177.00

The Indonesian island of Sulawesi is unusually rich in species and therefore is
an important location for biodiversity discovery. This research project will
inventory terrestrial vertebrates (amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals),
spiders, and vertebrate parasites of this large tropical island. Field teams
composed of specialists on each of these taxonomic groups will survey 10 major
mountains on Sulawesi over the course of five field seasons. By thoroughly
sampling this island now while some forest remains fully intact and depositing
these collections in natural history museums, the raw materials (specimens)
supporting the study of tropical diversification will be made available to this
and future generations of biological researchers. This project includes training
of undergraduate and graduate students, postdocs, and technicians from US and
Indonesian research institutions in biotic survey research. Senior Indonesian
scientists will aid US researchers in a collaborative analysis of specimens. The
research team will organize two workshops primarily oriented around molecular
genetic data collection and analysis, including high-throughput sequence data,
and corresponding population genetic, phylogenetic, and biogeographical
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sulawesi is characterized by a highly endemic
biota, resulting from its large size, geographic setting, long period of
isolation from all other land masses, and complex tectonic history. The island
exhibits substantial topographical relief, with vast areas over 1000 m above sea
level, 20 summits greater than 2500 m in height, and six summits above 3000 m.
It probably has never been connected to the more proximate Sunda continental
shelf to its west, nor with the more distant Sahul Shelf (New Guinea, Australia,
and their land-bridge islands) to its east, and thus has been isolated for its
entire history of 20-25 million years. Sulawesi is a composite island composed
of at least five paleo-islands that were distantly separated from one another
for several million years before merging more or less simultaneously between 10
and 5 million years ago. The composite nature of the island has been strongly
implicated in the process of in situ species diversification on Sulawesi. Field
sites for biotic survey work were selected to allow thorough sampling of the
four arms of Sulawesi as well as its Central Core. A major focus of the program
will be sampling along elevational transects on the largest mountains of each
Area of Endemism, thereby enabling transects that reach &gt;2500 m in elevation.
None of the focal taxa targeted here have been sampled adequately from high
elevation sites. The scientific value of the proposed field efforts are
considerable and fall broadly into the following themes: (1) documentation of
biodiversity, including species and their distributions, evolutionary and
population genetic relationships and affinities, and the chronology and
geological context of species and community diversification, (2) conservation
biology, including documentation of disease outbreak and response, invasive
species, and extinction, and (3) understanding of interesting evolutionary
processes, including adaptive radiation, hybridization, ecological opportunity,
and the genetic basis of biological innovation.