* 1457159
* Bilingual Language Control
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Tamar Gollan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 01/31/2019
* USD 627,042.00

People who regularly use more than one language in their daily life, bilinguals,
seem to easily switch back and forth between languages without any obvious
difficulty. However, recent research studies demonstrated subtle but reliable
differences between bilinguals and monolinguals on a variety of tests including
both tests that measure linguistic ability and tests that measure other
cognitive skills (e.g., the ability to avoid distraction). Such differences have
potentially significant implications in all settings where testing occurs,
including educational and medical settings. In some cases, bilinguals might
appear to be less fluent than monolinguals because they know some words in one
of their languages but not in the other. It might seem that allowing bilinguals
to switch back and forth between languages during testing should eliminate any
testing disadvantage associated with bilingualism. However, language switching
can itself introduce disadvantages in some testing situations (e.g., slowing of
responses). It is important to identify how people might be affected by their
diverse linguistic experiences both for practical reasons related to academic
goals and for scientific reasons related to developing an understanding of the
human capacity for acquiring and maintaining language skills. Such knowledge
will affect an increasing number of Americans as more than 1 in 5 currently
speaks a language other than English at home and this number is growing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies will compare young to aging Spanish-
English bilinguals in a series of behavioral experiments designed to identify 1)
how bilingualism and aging jointly affect test performance, and 2) when language
switching may enhance the ability to rapidly and fluently produce words and
sentences. A driving hypothesis underlying the current work is that language
selection is sometimes implemented relatively automatically but at other times
requires effort. This hypothesis will be tested by asking how language switching
ability changes as bilinguals get older; whereas automatic processes should stay
the same in aging, processes that require focused effort should decline. These
studies will clarify the relationship between bilingualism and test performance
and will specify a well-articulated theoretical model of bilingual language
production that may lay the groundwork necessary to develop theory-driven
optimization of experience for bilingual individuals in educational and medical
settings.