* 1457815
* A Mechanistic framework for elucidating temperature effects on population and community dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Priyanga Amarasekare, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/29/2020
* USD 629,534.00

This project examines the effects of climate change on biodiversity and the
spread of exotic species, two of the greatest environmental problems that the
nation and the planet face. New mathematical models will be developed to predict
how temperature effects on the biochemistry and physiology of individual
organisms translate into species interactions that in turn generate the large-
scale of patterns of biodiversity that we observe in nature. The resulting
intellectual challenge requires integration across several subfields within
biology and across biology and mathematics. At the same time, the research has
tremendous societal consequences. Results will inform the biological control of
pests and pathogens, which, either in isolation or combined with an integrated
pest management scheme, reduces pesticide use and minimizes pollution of water
sources and associated health risks to humans and livestock. Equally important
is the project's contribution to education. It will train students and
postdoctoral researchers to develop rigorous, quantitative approaches to address
environmental problems and, in so doing, to advance the conceptual boundaries of
ecology and evolutionary biology significantly.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A
sophisticated approach will be used to tackle these intellectual and societal
challenges. Four innovative components will be integrated to investigate the
mechanisms by which temperature affects both the ecological and evolutionary
dynamics of species interactions. First, new theory will build on the first
principles of thermodynamics to predict temperature effects on biochemical
processes, such as reaction kinetics, that underlie important life history
traits. These predictions will then be incorporated into delay-differential
population models that realistically capture the key characteristics of
ectotherm life cycles. Second, models for both population dynamics and species
interactions will be parameterized with experimental data generated by
laboratory manipulations. Third, models and their predictions will be validated
by comparing outputs to abundance data collected over time in natural
populations. The final component will use quantitative genetics methods to
determine how temperature effects on ecological traits, measured as reaction
norms, influence the evolution of thermal responses. These individual components
will be integrated, via eco-evolutionary models, to predict how perturbations to
the thermal environment (e.g., climate change) influence population persistence
and species coexistence under ecological dynamics alone (the case if species are
unable to adapt to changes in the thermal environment or cannot do so fast
enough) and under eco-evolutionary dynamics (the case when perturbations lead to
rapid evolution of thermal responses of key life history and interaction
traits). Results will significantly advance general understanding of organisms'
abilities to respond adaptively to rapid environmental change.