* 1457329
* Alternative Polyadenylation as a Major Regulatory Mechanism of Plant Innate Immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Thomas Eulgem, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/29/2020
* USD 609,762.00

Plant disease resistance (R)-genes encode immune receptors that mediate disease
resistance upon recognition of pathogenic microorganisms. Their expression has
to be coordinated. The investigators previously identified a new process that
controls the expression of two R-genes in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana.
The main goals of this project are (1) to examine extent to which this new
mechanism is utilized in plants for the regulation of additional R-genes and
other defense genes and (2) to gain detailed understanding of this new
mechanism. Results from this study are likely to have a broad impact on the
fields of plant immunity and gene expression control. This project may also lead
to the design of new strategies for enhanced disease protection in crop plants.
An important component of the project is major involvement of undergraduate
students, mainly from minority groups. The project will be linked to classes on
biochemistry and biotechnology taught by the Principal Investigator and the
ongoing NSF-REU Plant Cell Biology program within the Center for Plant Cell
Biology at UC-Riverside. In addition, the project will provide a strong platform
for training of postdoctoral scholars and graduate students and prepare them for
careers as senior researchers in academia or industry. The goals of the America
COMPETES Act of 2007 that emphasize awareness of the responsible and ethical
conduct of research are a top priority of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alternative polyadenylation is emerging as a major
mechanism of eukaryotic gene expression control. The investigators previously
found the epigenetic mark H3K9me2 to control differential use of polyadenylation
signals of the Arabidopsis R-genes RPP4 and RPP7 and to modulate levels of
immunity mediated by their encoded immune receptors. This mechanism is
controlled by the epigenetic factor EDM2 and several additional newly identified
regulators. The investigators further showed this novel mechanism to be
responsive to pathogen recognition and to dynamically adjust RPP4 and RPP7
expression. The central hypothesis of this project is that alternative
polyadenylation is a major mechanism controlling inducible plant immune
responses. The two specific aims that are to be pursued are: &lt;br/&gt;1)
Genome wide profiling of alternative polyadenylation events after defense
induction; 2) Identify regulatory factors linking alternative polyadenylation to
pathogen perception and defense signaling. Alternative polyadenylation has so
far not been recognized as a major mechanism controlling plant immunity. This
project will provide a genome-wide overview about defense-associated alternative
polyadenylation in plants and uncover molecular details of this type of
regulatory process.