* 1457011
* Standard Research Grant: A Comparative Study of Three Models of Innovation in Their Transnational Implementation
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2022
* Sheila Jasanoff, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 394,094.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the practice
turn in innovation policy by comparing the adoption of three best-practice
models of innovation in four cities: Bangalore (India), Boston (USA), Cambridge
(UK), Karlsruhe (Germany). The models in question are the MIT model, the Silicon
Valley model, and the Public Engagement model. Each research site is regarded as
a motor of innovation in its nation and each is a site where at least two of the
models have been implemented. Informed by STS insights about the limits of
standardizing, packaging, or universalizing social practices, the study asks
what is at stake when social welfare is recast in terms of innovation policy and
best practice transfer. The proposal uses qualitative STS research methods and
focuses on the biotechnology and IT sectors for empirical analysis. The results
of this study will have a direct impact on policy-practitioners (such as
government officials, institutional managers, and consultants), who increasingly
turn to plugin-type policy solutions but lack the analytic tools to theorize,
evaluate, and coordinate these attempts. The study will explicate the
assumptions and implications of using best practice transfer to promote social
welfare and seek avenues to re-democratize technocratic approaches to innovation
policy. It will sustain close interaction with the practitioners interviewed,
and aims to amplify a critical public discourse on how the social welfare
functions of the state are being redefined and redirected through innovation
policy. Through a transnational network of researchers, it will extend to
additional regions, thus generalizing the research beyond the four selected
sites and three models. The project will provide education and training at the
nexus of STS and innovation policy analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores how countries imagine their
sociotechnical futures through the practice turn in innovation policy. This turn
entails a three-fold shift in the use of innovation policy as an answer to basic
socioeconomic challenges confronting 21st-century nations and a touchstone for
governmental legitimacy, as a category that sees innovation as desirable and
achievable through standardized practices; and as a benchmark activity
preferably implemented through best-practice transfer. The study will illuminate
the tacit assumptions, implementation experiences, institutional
transformations, and broader social impacts of best practices transfer efforts.
More specifically, it will address how each of the three best-practice models
were systematized sufficiently to have global influence, how have policymakers
interpreted these models and the underlying assumptions made in doing so, how
the models are being locally implemented, how their performance have been
assessed, how their circulation feed back into the redefinition of each, and the
policy lessons of their circulation. The project lays the foundation for an
innovation theory that accounts for the practice turn and best practice transfer
as a de-facto mode of operation of policy actors. It will build upon and go
beyond the dominant analytic frameworks of pipelines and systems of innovation,
and it will extend prior STS efforts on responsible innovation and anticipatory
governance by paying particular attention to the implications for democratic
values such as equality, participation, and access to the fruits of innovation.