* 1457145
* Regulation of Nuclear Receptor Function during Drosophila Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Leslie Pick, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2019
* USD 745,000.00

The formation of a complex organism from a single cell, the fertilized egg,
requires the expression of different genes at different times and in different
cells as the embryo develops. Many of the gene products controlling these early
steps in development determine cell fate through their function as regulatory
genes, encoding transcription factors or signaling proteins that regulate the
expression of downstream cascades of genes encoding products directly involved
in growth and differentiation of different cell types. If these regulatory genes
are active in the wrong cells at the wrong time, it is catastrophic for the
embryo, which will likely die as a result of this mis-expression. The goal of
this project is to unravel the mechanisms controlling the activity of embryonic
regulatory genes. It will use a well-established animal model, the fruit fly
Drosophila melanogaster, for these studies. The focus is on one family of
embryonic transcription factors, a nuclear receptor, which is regulated by
interactions with protein partners. Findings will provide a fundamental model
for studies of other members of the nuclear receptor family, in Drosophila and
other species, by contributing to an understanding of cell type specification
during embryonic development and elucidating different levels at which the
function of transcription factors is regulated to produce unique cell types.
This proposal will train students from diverse backgrounds in the laboratory in
bench science, critical thinking and scientific presentation. In addition, it
will support formal collaborations with a majority minority middle school in
Maryland(Wilde Lake Middle School)to bolster the genetics curriculum for 7th
graders and with the MARC program at Northeastern Illinois University that will
send up to two students/year for summer internships to Northwestern. These
efforts are part of ongoing efforts on the part of both the PI and Co-PI to
educate the public about science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Nuclear Receptors (NRs)
are a large family of transcription factors that control a broad range of
biological processes. Although the activity of many NRs is regulated by ligand,
a large number of these receptors are orphan NRs that share a common fold with
NRs with known ligands. This likely reflects the ancestral state of this protein
family. How is the activity of orphan NRs regulated? Drosophila Ftz-F1 is the
founding member of the NR5A nuclear receptor family. In previous work, the
Principle Investigator and colleagues showed that Drosophila Ftz-F1 interacts
with the homeodomain protein Ftz, a classic pair-rule protein expressed in seven
stripes in embryos in the primordia of body regions missing in ftz mutant
animals. Ftz-F1 and Ftz form a stable complex in vivo and bind to composite DNA
sites, synergistically activating target gene expression. Thus, although Ftz-F1
is a strong transcriptional activator alone in vitro, and it is present in the
nuclei of all somatic cells of the embryo, its activity is limited to the cells
in which Ftz is also expressed (Ftz+ cells). These studies demonstrate that
protein-protein interactions modulate Ftz-F1 activity and provide an in vivo
model system to dissect the mechanisms underlying this regulation. Here we will
test whether Ftz-F1 is regulated: (1) at the level of DNA binding; (2) by a
corepressor/coactivator exchange, and/or (3) by Ftz-induced conformational
change. This work will combine biochemical and structural methods with molecular
genetic approaches in Drosophila embryos to evaluate the contributions of each
of these mechanisms to the regulation of NR activity in vivo. It will train
postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduate students in molecular
biology, genetics, biochemistry, biophysics and, most importantly, critical
thinking: generating, testing and evaluating hypotheses.