* 1457695
* Collaborative Research: Molecular mechanisms and biogeochemical consequences of decomposer species interactions during succession in ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Daniel Segre, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2021
* USD 661,373.00

Over 100 gigatons of terrestrial plant matter are produced globally each year.
Ninety percent of this biomass enters the pool of dead organic matter in soils.
However, our understanding of how communities of decomposer microorganisms
process this material is not yet clear enough to predict the rate of carbon and
nutrient cycling through soils. This is a major gap in our knowledge of
ecosystem stability, as the biochemical process of decomposition determines the
balance between carbon storage on land and the amount of carbon dioxide released
from the biosphere to the atmosphere. Decomposer microorganisms are a highly
diverse group of organisms: hundreds of species of microbes can live on a piece
of decomposing woody debris at any one time. The objective of this research is
to identify the specific, biochemical ways in which these decomposer species
interact during the decay of plant matter, and how these interactions shape the
species composition and total activity of these important communities over time.
The results of this research will provide detailed information on the biological
processes that give rise to one of the largest natural fluxes of carbon dioxide
to the atmosphere. The project will include training opportunities for a
postdoctoral scholar, and graduate and undergraduate students. The PIs will
disseminate a K-12 curriculum about the importance of decomposer microorganisms
through summer programs for children.

Microbes are the engines of ecosystem-level biogeochemical cycling, such that
their frequent synergistic and antagonistic interactions likely determine rates
of these processes. A widely observed pattern of microbial species interactions
occurs during decay of dead organic matter (i.e. litter), where communities of
decomposer fungi succeed one another over time and track changes in the
abundance of litter chemicals. Across systems, the same orders, genera, and
species of fungi often dominate the decomposer community present at each stage
of decay, yet the mechanisms by which these individual species consistently
become dominant, and how they influence the biogeochemistry of the system, are
unknown. The objective of this research is to identify the molecular-level
factors that regulate these processes. While classic theories of species
interactions originally developed for macroorganisms may apply to decomposers,
new information on microbial metabolic strategies, such as cross-feeding between
species and anticipatory regulation of growth and metabolism, may also account
for the structure and activity of these communities. Changes in litter and
microbial chemistry during decay constitute one of the most predictable
sequences of stimuli for microorganisms in nature, yet it is not known how
microbes respond to these stimuli, or how these processes vary across a
diversity of fungi. The proposed research will address these questions by
leveraging state-of-the-art transcriptomics, metabolomics, and metabolic flux
modeling with a model fungal-litter system to 1) determine the molecular stimuli
that mediates interactions between competitively dominant and rare fungal
species, 2) develop metabolic network models that predict the outcomes of
species interactions, community dynamics, and metabolite cycling through litter,
and 3) test whether molecular-level models can successfully recapitulate
community and biogeochemistry dynamics previously observed in natural litter
decay. The potential contribution of this work will be a complete gene-to-
ecosystem-level analysis of decomposer fungal interactions, expanding and
building linkages between the fields of analytical chemistry, molecular biology,
microbiology, community ecology, and ecosystem ecology.