* 1457193
* The Prison Inmate Networks Study (PINS)
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Derek Kreager, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 03/31/2018
* USD 323,814.00

This study will advance our understanding of incarceration and its consequences
by focusing on prison social systems and their informal network structures. The
project will answer three related research questions: (1) What is the informal
social structure within prison? (2) What are the processes through which
informal social structure is created and sustained? and (3) What are the
consequences of informal social structure and inmates' positions within it for
inmate-level and prison-level outcomes? Understanding the prison social system
and its connections with risk and rehabilitative behaviors will improve inmate
and ex-inmate health, thereby reducing the costs associated with recidivism and
underemployment. Study results will also contribute to our understanding of the
collateral consequences of mass incarceration on vulnerable communities (e.g.,
disadvantaged and minority communities) that receive the majority of released
inmates.

The project will take a network perspective and collect longitudinal data in a
single prison to reveal the informal network structure and correlate this with
inmate health, safety, and rehabilitative outcomes. The investigators will
design and field a network survey measuring ties of friendship, respect,
communication, and support for all inmates in one prison unit (150-200 inmates)
of a Pennsylvania medium security men's prison. Survey administration will be
conducted via three Computer-Assisted Personal Interviews (CAPI) repeated at
3-month intervals. Drawing on network and social influence theories, the study
will analyze how the prison's informal network structure relates to the
distribution and diffusion of inmate behavioral and rehabilitative outcomes--
including misconduct, schooling, prison employment, and prison program
completion. These analyses will be conducted using sophisticated methods for
cross-sectional and longitudinal networks. Behavioral data will be assessed from
multiple sources, including inmate surveys, prison work records, misconduct
records, drug tests, visitation lists, and gang classification data. Inmate
prison network surveys will be accompanied by retrospective accounts of pre-
prison conventional and criminal social ties. These data will be combined with
visitation records to analyze how prison affects social capital accumulation,
family cohesion and social support, and the balance of conventional and criminal
ties over time, including after prison release.