* 1457080
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Participation in Water Management-Conflicting Objectives in the Era of Integrated Water Resource Management.
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Stefanie Falconi, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 17,544.00

General Audience Summary

The proposed dissertation research project will study water management issues in
the metropolitan region of Sao Paulo, Brazil, which is currently facing a
historical drought that has placed the public and industry under great risk of
water shortages. The impending water crisis has brought into question the
reliability of the water system, a problem that is not unique to Sao Paulo; it
has raised the question on how to encourage adaptive capacity and robust
institutions that can govern in the face of growing environmental challenges.
The work will be conducted at the water basin level in partnership with local
universities, water utilities, federal and state agencies, and water basin
committees to engage stakeholders in a collaborative modeling process. At the
core of the case study are questions of how models support decision-making, how
scientific knowledge gets incorporated into policy, and how meaningful
participation can strengthen the modeling, decision, and institutional building
process. The results of this project will illuminate the water challenges of
rapidly growing urban regions and ways to meet these challenges. They will be
disseminated to multiple audiences through a university-hosted website where
material is available in both Portuguese and English. They will also be
presented at public workshops, academic conferences, publications in peer-
reviewed journals, and training of water managers.

Technical Summary

The proposed research is interdisciplinary. It draws on Science and Technology
Studies to understand water governance, institutional arrangements, and the role
of public participation in adaptive management. It has three objectives: It will
examine the evolution of water resource management models, trace water
governance and participation in the case of the Cantareira system joint water
management, and develop a collaborative modeling framework for the region that
incorporates the challenges and opportunities defined by stakeholders and create
a set of rules of engagement. These objectives will be accomplished through a
mixed-method approach including qualitative and quantitative methods. The
methods employed to examine the evolution of water resource management models
are document analysis and archival work. The other two objectives will be met by
way of interviews, meeting attendance, content analysis of technical documents,
collaborative model building and a series of workshops to engage the public. By
using a participatory modeling process and stakeholder engagement, the project
aims to improve the role of models as boundary objects that allow the public to
use scientific knowledge for water allocation decision. This innovative
collaborative approach has the potential to transform water resource planning by
decreasing information asymmetries and improving transparency through didactic
tools that are made accessible to the public.