* 1457561
* Collaborative Research: Genetic diversity, resistance genes, and negative density dependence in tropical tree seedling dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Scott Mangan, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2019
* USD 163,739.00

Tropical forests are famous for their high diversity, as well as the large
number of rare species they harbor. Recent studies have found that, compared to
common species, rare tropical tree species suffer more from pathogens that are
specialized to a single host species that then spread rapidly through dense
patches of seedlings of that single host. This research will test the novel
hypothesis that rare species are more strongly impacted by host-specific
pathogens because they have lower diversity of resistance genes at the
population level, such that all their seedlings will be susceptible to the same
suite of pathogens, promoting rapid pathogen spread and increasing mortality
rates. This hypothesis will be tested using experimental greenhouse and field
studies, combined with genetic analyses that will quantify the diversity of
resistance genes for rare and common tree species in lowland tropical forest on
Barro Colorado Island, Panama. Computer simulations will also be used to examine
whether the measured differences in resistance gene diversity would impact
infection levels, mortality rates and local abundance of tree species. Results
of this study will improve understanding of plant-pathogen interactions, with
potential applications for agriculture and horticulture (e.g. increasing
pathogen resistance in crops). Hands-on training in cutting-edge genetic
techniques would be provided to a wider audience through a summer workshop for
students and faculty.

This study will be the first to obtain large transcriptome datasets from a tree
community and will provide gene sequence data that will be informative for
future studies of genetic diversity in tropical forests. Examination of the
effects of resistance gene diversity on forest dynamics will bridge the gap
between molecular evolution studies that indicate ongoing selection for multiple
resistance genes at many loci, and how this diversity functions in nature.
Furthermore, this study is likely to bridge competing theories for tropical
plant diversity by providing a genetic explanation for why rare tree species are
more strongly controlled by their species-specific enemies, while simultaneously
supporting dispersal limitation as a feature determining which species are
locally dominant. Ultimately, the study should elucidate whether local rarity
restricts local genetic diversity, which in turn reinforces local rarity, a
cycle that can be escaped only by recruitment of new alleles via long-distance
pollen or seed movement. Demonstrating such a coupling between the ecological
and genetic features of populations would bring new perspectives and avenues for
theoretical advances in evolution and ecology. The project will provide research
experiences for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a postdoctoral
researcher.