* 1457848
* RCN: Diversity of the Indo-Pacific Network (DIPnet): A collaborative research network and database for advancing marine biodiversity research
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Harilaos Lessios, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,516.00

The objective of this Research Coordination Network project is to develop an
international network of researchers who use genetic methodologies to study the
ecology and evolution of marine organisms in the Indo-Pacific to share data,
ideas and methods. The tropical Indian and Pacific Oceans encompass the largest
biogeographic region on the planet, the Indo-Pacific. It spans over half of the
Earth's circumference and includes the exclusive economic zones of over 50
nations and territories. The Indo-Pacific is also home to our world's most
diverse marine environments. The enormity and diversity of the Indo-Pacific
poses tremendous logistical, political and financial obstacles to individual
researchers and laboratories attempting to study the marine biology of the
region. Genetic methods can provide invaluable information for our understanding
of processes ranging from individual dispersal to the composition and assembly
of entire marine communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will: (1)
assemble a unique, open access database of population genetic data and
associated metadata that is compatible with the developing genomic and
biological diversity standards for data archiving, (2) facilitate open
communication and collaboration among researchers from across the region through
international workshops, virtual communication and a collaborative website, (3)
promote training in the use of genetic methodologies in ecology and evolution
for researchers from developing countries through these same venues, and (4) use
the assembled database to address fundamental questions about the evolution of
species and the reservoirs of genetic diversity in the Indo-Pacific. The network
will provide a model for international collaborative networks and genetic
databasing in biodiversity research that extends beyond the results of this
Research Coordination Network effort.