* 1457664
* GENSIPS 2014: Workshop on Genomic Signal Processing and Statistics
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Dongmei Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 11/30/2015
* USD 10,000.00

Computational systems biology is a multi-disciplinary research area that
combines biology, computer science, engineering and statistics. The goal of this
research area is to develop and apply computational methods for analyzing of
complex biological phenomena. The 2014 IEEE Workshop on Genomic Signal
Processing and Statistics (GENSIPS) aims to bring together expertise in biology,
computer science, signal processing, engineering and statistics, and provide a
forum to discuss challenges confronting the research community. GENSIPS'14
teamed up with the 2014 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information
Processing (GlobalSIP'14), a flagship conference in IEEE Signal Processing
Society that brings together 13 symposia and 2 workshops. GENSIPS is one of the
two workshops, and is synergistic to symposiums on algorithms, big data and
machine learning. Such a partnership is anticipated to foster collaborations and
interdisciplinary research ideas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The theme of GENSIPS-14 is going to be centered around computational
systems biology and signal processing. One major goal is to provide a forum for
addressing research problems at the forefront of this area, including next-
generation sequencing, integration of multi-modality genomics data, modeling of
regulatory and signaling networks, single-cell analysis, metagenomics, and
several other topics in this fast growing field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The partnership with GlobalSIP-14 attracts participations from the
signal processing society. To enable signal processing researcher to jump-start
in computational systems biology, GENSIPS-14 offers three tutorials on drug
effect prediction, single-cell analysis, and imaging informatics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another important mission of GENSIPS-14 is to promote the
participation of graduate students and post-doctoral researchers (especially
women and minority), and foster education and development of the next-generation
scientists in computational systems biology. GENSIPS-14 will provide travel
awards to encourage graduate students to participate. Specifically, 20-30% of
the awards will be allocated to encourage women and minority students to
participate and submit papers to GENSIPS-14.