* 1457306
* WiFiUS: Collaborative Research: Future Small-Cell Networks Using Reconfigurable Antennas
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Kapil Dandekar, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 01/31/2018
* USD 179,974.00

The future proliferation of wireless systems and services is dependent on the
design of flexible radio architectures that can adapt to the rapidly changing
wireless environment. Since usable spectrum is limited, and modulation and
coding techniques are approaching their Shannon capacity limitation, improving
capacity through increased spectrum reuse and interference mitigation has become
a high priority in future cellular networks. Industry leaders have focused on a
multi-tiered heterogeneous network structure, where small-cell (e.g., pico-cell,
femto-cell) base stations are deployed to meet capacity demand. Among the
technical challenges making full-scale deployment of small-cell base stations
possible, interference management still looms the largest. This project focuses
on providing wireless systems with the available hardware and algorithmic tools
to make intelligent decisions about antenna configuration for small-cell base
stations to mitigate interference and improve network capacity and coexistence
in a heterogeneous network environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
composed of three main research thrusts: i.) Algorithm and System Design; ii.)
Antenna and Transceiver Design; and iii.) Testbed Implementation. The first
focus is on the mathematical modeling and overall system design of small-cell
networks making use of reconfigurable antennas. A vital component of this
overall system design is the development of efficient and effective analytical
tools and algorithms for downlink transmission, focusing on directional network
design, algorithms for directionality selection, and base station user
association. The second thrust includes the development of practical
reconfigurable antennas and transceiver processing techniques for small-cell
base stations. The project team is adapting reconfigurable metamaterial and
alford loop antenna designs to provide new, compact reconfigurable antenna
architectures with both beam steering and variable beam width capabilities.
Using these new antenna technologies this research enhances direction of arrival
and digital pre-distortion techniques for enhanced small-cell uplink and
downlink. The cornerstone of this research is the design of a fully implemented,
programmable across-the-stack SDR platform with integrated reconfigurable
antennas. This project makes use of open-source technologies and will result in
the deployment of a fully functional cellular backbone system, consisting of
both macro-cell and small-cell base stations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
leverages collaboration between Drexel University and WPI, along with a strong
international collaboration with the University of Oulu, VTT Technical Research
Centre and Tampere University of Technology. This ongoing collaboration with
Finnish institutions continues to provide novel international research
experiences for undergraduate and graduate students as well as pilot testing for
dissemination of the developed testbed.