* 1457238
* Influence of Head and Eye Movements on Retinal Input and Early Neural Encoding
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Michele Rucci, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 09/30/2018
* USD 489,881.00

Humans are normally not aware that their eyes and head are always in motion.
Small involuntary head and eye movements continually occur in the periods
between voluntary relocations of gaze, even when attempting to maintain steady
gaze on a single point. These movements shift the stimulus on the retina in ways
that would be immediately visible had the motion originated from objects in the
scene rather than the observer's behavior. Building on a large body of recent
findings, this project investigates the hypothesis that fixational head and eye
movements are not motor instabilities, but part of a precisely controlled motor
strategy that facilitates the visual processing of fine spatial detail.
Elucidation of this hypothesis is important not only for advancing knowledge on
the fundamental mechanisms of visual perception, but also because it implies
that some visual acuity impairments may have unrecognized motor origins, and,
conversely, that motor disturbances may have unsuspected sensory consequences.
The research could have implications for the optimization of human visual
performance in situations of restricted head movement. Also, by shedding light
on how to achieve optimal sampling of visual information through coordinated
movement, the research could also have implications for the design of artificial
vision systems.

This project will follow an integrated theoretical and experimental approach,
which combines psychophysical experiments with human subjects, statistical
analysis of the stimulus on the retina, and modeling of neurons in the early
stages of the visual system to examine the joint consequences of head and eye
movements on the acquisition and encoding of fine spatial information.
Specifically, the investigators will measure fixational head and eye movements
during the normal execution of high-acuity visual tasks. They will study how
these movements interact, the degree of control involved in their interplay, and
the nature of this interplay. In parallel, the investigators will develop
quantitative predictions by reconstructing the visual input signals experienced
by the observers' retinas and by analyzing the impact of these signals on the
responses of computational models of neurons in the visual system. This synergy
of experimental and theoretical methods will result in new knowledge in the
fields of sensory perception and motor control. It will contribute critical
information on the joint characteristics of fixational head and eye movements,
their visual functions, and help in identifying the sensory-motor strategies by
which spatial information is represented in the brain.