* 1457588
* Collaborative Research: Shifting hotspots - How do consumer aggregations interact to influence resource heterogeneity and fluxes in streams?
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Keith Gido, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2019
* USD 282,080.00

This project will determine where and when short-lived fish and long-lived
mussel communities overlap (biological hotspot) and how this overlap affects the
amount and spread of nutrients in two rivers. Nutrients feed aquatic plants that
support riverine food webs, and it is hypothesized that animal aggregations can
influence nutrient pollution. Understanding how these types of biological
hotspots interact will further our knowledge of river function and provide
targets for river restoration. To understand the ecology of fish and mussel
hotspots in rivers, the investigators will use complementary approaches
including field monitoring, experiments, and mathematical modeling. In addition,
the PIs will train a post-doctoral researcher and undergraduate and graduate
students as well as organize outreach workshops for K-12 teachers to develop
programs associated with water quality and ecosystem
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ecological processes that occur at animal
aggregations (biogeochemical hotspots) are important for ecosystem health and
can help mitigate nutrient pollution. Animal aggregations create patches where
processes such as energy transfer and nutrient recycling are higher than outside
of patches. Long-lived freshwater mussels live buried in the sediment in
localized patches that serve as stable, long-term biogeochemical hotspots. In
contrast, where shorter-lived, fish occur depends on flow conditions in rivers.
Fish aggregations serve as mobile, widespread, short-term biogeochemical
hotspots. This project quantifies the spatial and temporal overlap and
interactions between mussel and fish aggregations in rivers. A field study will
quantify fish and mussel abundance under different flow conditions in two rivers
to determine patch size and location. A correlative field study will quantify
ecological services performed by mussel and fish aggregations under low and
higher flow conditions. Mesocosm experiments will use chemical techniques to
track the movement of nutrients from fish and mussel aggregates through the rest
of the food web. Lastly, computer models of ecosystem dynamics will be used to
scale from fish and mussel distribution and flow data generated in the small-
scale field study up to the whole river scale. A workshop will train teachers in
water quality activities they can use in their classrooms.