* 1457236
* Delineating the Roles of Rising CO2 and Temperature on Flowering Time across Pre-industrial through Future Conditions
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2022
* Joy Ward, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2022
* USD 681,231.00

Flowering time has a large influence on ecological and evolutionary processes of
plants. If flowering time is delayed, reproduction may be insufficient or may
fail if seed set is not achieved by the end of the growing season. In contrast,
if the transition to flowering is too rapid, the full length of the growing
season may not be utilized for optimizing reproduction. As a result, shifts in
flowering time can alter plant productivity, disrupt plant-pollinator
interactions, and affect food production in crops. Climate change is expected to
have major impacts on the flowering times of plants. While some species are
known to have flowered earlier over the last century in response to warming,
others may be more influenced by rising atmospheric carbon dioxide, or both
factors combined. Little is known about the mechanisms that drive elevated
carbon dioxide effects on flowering time. This may prove problematic, since over
half of plant species are known to exhibit major alterations in flowering time
when grown at elevated carbon dioxide levels predicted for 50 years into the
future. Such responses will have global implications since carbon dioxide is
rising across the planet. The overall goal of this research is to better
understand the linkages between growth, physiological, and molecular mechanisms
that control flowering time in response to both rising carbon dioxide and
temperature across contemporary through future time scales. The Principal
Investigator will help develop the new "Flower and Food Garden of Southwest
Middle School" in Lawrence, KS, which will be an educational garden where
students will apply current adaptation strategies in planting times under
climate change scenarios and will measure food production. This will enable
students to conduct hands-on research, analyze their own data, and report their
findings to the community. Moreover, these outreach efforts will help to develop
a more informed society on the effects of climate change on plants. These
efforts will also promote a stronger workforce that will enable strategies to
overcome the negative effects of climate change on food production through
increased understanding of plant mechanistic responses to the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to better
understand the linkages between growth, physiological, and molecular mechanisms
that control flowering time (FLT) in response to both rising [CO2] and
temperature across pre-industrial through future conditions. In preliminary
studies with field-collected genotypes of Arabidopsis thaliana, it was
determined that rising [CO2] was the main driver of accelerated FLTs between
preindustrial and modern conditions, while surprisingly, the addition of higher
temperature reduced or eliminated this response. These are among the first
results to delineate the effects of rising [CO2] and temperature that occurred
over the last century on FLT. Furthermore, between modern and future conditions,
high levels of variation were observed among genotypes for FLT responses, which
would have major ecological and evolutionary implications if represented in
other species. It is becoming increasingly clear that the influence of
increasing [CO2] and temperature on FLT is not simply due to effects on growth
rate. Rather, physiological responses and metabolite production can affect
signaling mechanisms that influence flowering gene expression and alter the
timing and size at which plants flower in response to climate change factors.
Therefore, the proposed research takes an integrative approach to determine how
the upstream effects of whole-plant growth, leaf-level physiology, and
metabolite production interact to influence downstream effects on flowering gene
expression and ultimately FLT in model plants and crops. Path analysis is used
to determine the causal pathways that are most likely influencing FLT in
response to [CO2] and temperature. Ultimately, the physiological, developmental,
and molecular understanding developed in this research will increase the ability
to predict FLT responses to contemporary and future changes in climate. The PI
has a strong track-record of mentoring undergraduate students, including those
from underrepresented populations, and this will continue throughout this
research.