* 1457278
* WiFiUS: Social Structure for Cooperative Mobile Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2015,10/31/2015
* Junshan Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 10/31/2015
* USD 270,000.00

To meet the rapidly growing demand of mobile data traffic, regulatory agencies
around the world are actively working on policies and regulations for dynamic
spectrum access that are mutually beneficial to the cognitive devices and the
licensed spectrum users of the under-utilized spectrum. One of the primary
contributors to the explosive mobile traffic growth is the rapid proliferation
of mobile social applications. One key observation is that, since mobile
networks are designed and deployed to meet the social needs of humans,
connections and behaviors of people in the social domain shape the ways in which
they access mobile services. With this insight, this project advocates a social-
aware approach to enable shared spectrum access, cooperative spectrum sensing
and intelligent device-to-device (D2D) communications, by leveraging the social
structure among mobile users. Such social trust-based cooperation among mobile
devices enables self-organizing networking, and has the potential to achieve
substantial gains in spectral efficiency and lead to significant increases in
network capacity. By combining theoretical studies with practical applications,
this project aims to integrate social elements into the design of cooperative
mobile networks, thereby accelerating the evolution of future mobile
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the common theme of exploiting the social
structure for cooperative mobile networking, this project is organized into four
well-coordinated thrusts: 1) Thrust I focuses on social recommendation-aided
dynamic spectrum access by exploring the collective wisdom of secondary users
for distributed spectrum sharing; 2) Thrust II investigates social-enhanced D2D
communications; 3) Thrust III designs and analyzes collaboration protocols among
secondary users; 4) Thrust IV studies social assisted information dissemination
in mobile networks. The proposed research is expected to enable a paradigm shift
from traditional approaches to social-aware approaches to enable shared spectrum
access, cooperative spectrum sensing and intelligent device-to-device (D2D)
communications, via exploiting the social structure among mobile users. The
broader impacts also include educational elements, such as promoting diversity
by providing research opportunities to woman and underrepresented students.