* 1457957
* ABI: Development: Cloud-based Identification and Visualization of Lateral Gene Transfers in Genome Data
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Julie Hotopp, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2019
* USD 705,331.00

All genomes accumulate mutations that are both beneficial and detrimental to the
organism. For example, mutations occur upon exposure to sun in the genome of
skin cells that can ultimately lead to the development of skin cancer. Mutations
range in size from single base pair alterations to massive insertions and
deletions that can span over a million base pairs. The best understood mutations
are those that involve alteration, insertion, or deletion of a single base pair,
where there are numerous tools for identifying and validating such changes. Yet
in many organisms, it is increasingly appreciated that large, even massive,
insertions of DNA can occur from other organisms, termed lateral gene transfer,
that have the potential to have a profound effect on the organism, either
detrimental or beneficial. For example, large insertional mutations led to the
transition of endosymbionts to organelles like mitochondria and chloroplasts.
This project seeks to improve tools previously developed to identify such
lateral gene transfers from genome sequencing data, and to make these tools
available to the research community after ensuring that they are more robust and
user friendly. The team has already used these tools to identify integration of
bacterial DNA into numerous animal genomes, including into human somatic cell
genomes of individuals with cancer, where such mutations may be oncogenic.
Making the tools available to more scientists should increase the understanding
of the occurrence and importance of such mutations in all organisms. In
addition, this proposal seeks to develop YouTube whiteboard videos to educate
the general public about these mutations, genomics, and the tools developed in
this proposal. The first of these videos can be found at:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PZG4qjVjJ70.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lateral gene
transfer (LGT, synonymous with horizontal gene transfer or HGT) is the movement
of DNA between diverse organisms. It is one form of insertional mutagenesis and
can be advantageous or deleterious. In bacteria, LGT has been implicated in
antibiotic resistance, pathogenesis, and bioremediation. While the greatest
focus has been on bacteria, it has become increasingly clear that it occurs in
eukaryotes as well. For example, our research focuses on interdomain LGT between
bacteria and Metazoans, which is increasingly described. This has led to the
hypothesis that that LGT may have contributed more to the evolution of
phenotypes in eukaryotes than previously assumed. However, there continue to be
barriers to detecting LGT, particularly in Metazoan genomes. The goal of this
project is to develop a bioinformatics resource in the form of a virtual machine
to aid in the detection of LGT. This tool can be used to detect LGT between any
suspected donor-recipient pair, including endosymbiont-host and organelle-host
pairs as well as organelle-organelle, bacteria-bacteria, and viral-host, to name
just a few. Such a tool could also be used by metagenomics researchers teasing
apart LGT from assembly artifacts, geneticists trying to identify the
integration site of a transposon following a selective screen, and for
identification of integration sites for known mobile elements. Essentially, this
tool can be used to detect the integration of novel DNA in any genome with some
knowledge about the donor and/or recipient genome. Most sequence analysis tools
have focused on SNPs or small insertions/deletions. The development of
bioinformatics tools to detect larger insertions is an area that has been under-
served and currently lacks robust bioinformatics tools. This proposal aims to
meet those needs. Ongoing results of the project can be found at:
http://lgt.igs.umaryland.edu/nsf_abi.