* 1457335
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Adaptive Significance of Genomic Variation in a Montane Insect
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2023
* Nathan Rank, Sonoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2023
* USD 450,059.00

As the Earth's climate becomes warmer and more variable, characteristics that
help organisms cope with stress will become increasingly important. This
research investigates beetles living at high elevation in the Sierra Nevada
mountains of California to study how variation in genes coding for proteins that
process energy and respond to stress affect metabolism and performance. The
research seeks to discover the contrasting roles of oxygen, which is necessary
to process metabolic fuel, and temperature, which changes the rate at which
these processes occur. It is a synthesis of genomics, physiology, and animal
natural history that will provide a unique opportunity to understand how
organisms cope with environmental change. It will provide insight into the
evolution of thermal plasticity and may unveil novel genes associated with
temperature and oxygen stress. The work will increase research opportunities for
students at two primarily undergraduate universities. Students will be trained
in experimental design and analysis, proposal and paper writing, and in the
presentation of research at scientific meetings, which will provide them with
marketable skills for the modern work environment. Educational materials will be
developed for K12 education, which illustrate the use of genomic tools for
answering scientific questions. Outreach events detailing the results of this
project will occur at public events in the San Francisco Bay Area and near field
sites in Inyo County, California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
and use genomic and transcriptomic tools to gain mechanistic insights into the
genetic basis of adaptation to temperature and atmospheric oxygen in the Sierra
willow leaf beetle Chrysomela aeneicollis. This research will test the
hypothesis that interactions between mitochondrial and nuclear genomes have
pervasive effects on gene expression that scale up to differences in metabolic
capacity and performance. To test this hypothesis, the stress response will be
investigated in larvae from populations that differ with respect to
mitochondrial and nuclear genetic background and that occur along a latitudinal
and steep altitudinal temperature gradients. Larvae will be reared at a high
elevation laboratory in chambers where oxygen level and temperature will be
manipulated. At the end of the growth period, larvae reared under these
different conditions will be exposed to different temperatures and running speed
measured. Genetic variation associated with fast and slow running speed after
stress will be identified using whole genome sequencing of individuals in the
upper and lower tails of the running speed distribution. Differences in
expression of genes of interest will be assessed using RNA sequencing for these
same individuals. Genes of interest (e.g. stress, hypoxia, central metabolism)
that have non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variation along
natural temperature or elevation gradients will be identified in whole genome
sequencing experiments and used to build 'SNP panels' in which larger numbers of
individuals can be screened. Rearing conditions described above will then be
used to generate larvae in which metabolic physiology will be examined.
Metabolic enzyme activity, mitochondrial respiration, oxidative damage and
thermal tolerance will be measured, SNP variation recorded, and differential
expression of genes of interest quantified using quantitative PCR. Taken
together, this research will reveal how mitochondrial and nuclear genomes
interact to cope with stress in a changing environment. The project will
establish a new international collaboration with world leading experts in insect
genomics from Stockholm University (Sweden). International collaborators will
help organize and lead a two-week hands-on workshop on genomics and
bioinformatics for undergraduate and Masters students from Santa Clara
University and Sonoma State University. Additionally, Masters students from
Sonoma State University will travel to Stockholm University to receive training
in genomics and bioinformatics. International activities and travel will be
supported by funds from the International Science and Engineering section of
NSF's Office of International and Integrative Activities.