* 1457630
* The genetic consequences of phenotypic loss: Transcriptomic and genome-wide analyses of pigmentation regression in cavefish.
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Joshua Gross, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/29/2020
* USD 531,182.00

Evolutionary change involves both the addition and loss of traits. Much
attention has been paid to those traits that are added over time, but far less
is known regarding the loss of traits. Cave-dwelling animals, such as the blind
Mexican cavefish, powerfully illustrate this phenomenon since they completely
lack eyes and pigmentation. This study applies cutting-edge genetic tools to
understand why traits are lost in nature, and will balance our understanding of
how evolution shapes and molds organisms to their environment, yielding the
enormous diversity found in nature. This project includes outreach activities to
engage the public with this remarkable creature. Through partnerships with local
schools and the Cincinnati Zoo, the Gross lab will introduce both students and
the broader community to this intriguing animal. Additionally, this research
project will provide training and research opportunities at the high school,
undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral levels. Further, this project will
continue to facilitate interactions with the international Astyanax research
community through collaborations and scientific meetings. This work will
therefore have positive societal impacts for the American public as well as the
international scientific community.

This project aims to uncover precise genetic changes underlying evolutionary
phenotypic loss. Parallel transcriptomic and genomic approaches will evaluate
genetic alterations (coding versus expression levels) implicated in pigmentation
loss in a powerful cave model system, Astyanax mexicanus. This freshwater fish
harbors two distinct morphotypes, an "ancestral" surface- and multiple "derived"
cave-dwelling forms. Some cave populations descended from an 'older' stock, and
some descended from a 'younger' stock of surface-dwelling ancestors. These
natural replicate experiments allow us to investigate how genetic changes are
impacted by diverse influences, such as the amount of time that has passed since
the colonization of a cave environment. Recently available genetic and genomic
resources now enable high-resolution studies of both known and unknown
pigmentation genes for structural, expression and functional analyses. This
project will inform how pleiotropy and the age of independent cave populations
influence the genetic changes accompanying trait loss. Ultimately, this work
will help clarify our understanding of the evolutionary mechanisms (selection
versus drift) leading to regression in the natural world.