* 1457913
* Estimating an Altruism Adjusted Measure of the Value of a Statistical Life
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Mark Long, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2016
* USD 168,062.00

This research project generates the first empirical estimate of Jones-Lee's
"Value of a Statistical Life" multiplier, which is a function of individuals'
marginal rate of substitution of own wealth for others' probability of survival
and marginal rate of substitution of own wealth for others' wealth. If people
are more "safety-focused" altruists (i.e., caring more for others' safety than
for others' wealth), then traditional benefit-cost analysis has undervalued life
as a result of ignoring altruism. Conversely, if people are more "wealth-
focused" altruists, then traditional benefit-cost analysis has overvalued life.
This research can greatly advance the knowledge about how and whether the value
placed on a "statistical" life needs to incorporate altruistic concerns. To
estimate these multipliers, the researchers created a stated-preference survey
that Knowledge Networks will administer to over 1,000 survey respondents. The
survey investigates altruism as a function of the other person's age and social
proximity (family, friends, co-workers, acquaintances, U.S. and foreign
strangers).

Many public policies impact citizens' longivity.In regulatory analyses of these
policies, benefit-cost analysts are used to estimate whether the benefits of
these policies outweigh their costs. This requires estimation of the value of a
life saved (or, alternatively, extended) as a result of the policy. Because the
federal government requires numerous regulatory policies to be evaluated each
year, it has a large stake in having an accurate measure for the "Value of a
Statistical Life" (VSL), the value used to measure the mortality-related
benefits or costs associated with a policy. Conventional methods for estimating
the VSL have used both revealed- and stated-preference data to evaluate an
individual's value of his or her own life. Current VSL estimates do not consider
the value that others may place on a person's life. Thus, these estimates may
under- or overestimate the total social value of this individual to all
concerned people once altruistic sentiments are included in the valuation. The
ultimate goal of the project is to produce evidence about whether altruistic
sentiments are likely to be important in estimating the VSL. If the VSL
multiplier turns out to be substantially greater than one (as suggested by the
pilot study results), then these results should cause public officials to
question their methods for evaluating policies. Undervaluing a life in benefit-
cost analyses could have large consequences in determining whether regulation
passes the benefit-cost test, and thus affect what public policies are adopted
or rejected.