* 1457368
* Mechanisms of Heat Shock Protein Regulation and Function in Muscles of a Model Teleost
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Eric Shelden, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 368,323.00

Muscle cells express a number of small stress responsive proteins called small
heat shock proteins that are known to be critical to cell survival, growth, and
repair. However, how these proteins accomplish their tasks is not understood.
Proposed studies will examine the regulation and function of these proteins in
muscle cells responding to low oxygen conditions that occur during injury,
exercise and hibernation. The work will be conducted using zebrafish larvae as a
model system because they can be used to study the organization and function of
fluorescently labeled proteins in living tissues. Data resulting from these
studies are expected to provide novel insight into the mechanisms underlying how
muscle cells respond to stress. Such insights have implications for
understanding or modifying the limits of muscle performance, engineering,
adaptation and repair in a wide variety of organisms. In addition to the new
information generated, the project will also benefit society by promoting
teaching, training and learning, and by broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups in science. Outreach educational workshops with area
high schools will be developed and strengthened through conducting hands-on
research projects with zebrafish larvae. Student conceptual understanding will
be assessed through the use of pre-and post-workshop evaluations. Opportunities
will also be created for high school students to visit and work in laboratories
of active investigators at Washington State University and the neighboring
University of Idaho. A summer internship will be provided annually to area high
school science teachers who will learn methods for zebrafish husbandry and
analysis of zebrafish embryonic development applicable to a K-12 classroom
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the studies is to test the
hypothesis that the heat shock inducible transcription factor, HSF1, regulates
expression of small heat shock proteins, which dynamically associate with
cytoskeletal filaments in a phosphorylation-dependent manner in hypoxic muscle
cells to preserve cytoskeletal integrity and muscle function. The proposal
includes three specific aims. First the role of HSF1 in regulating muscle
specific small heat shock protein expression in response to hypoxia will be
assessed. To accomplish this, the function of transcription factor HSF1 will be
manipulated and effects on hypoxia inducible small heat shock protein expression
analyzed. Mutagenesis of small heat shock protein promoters will also be
conducted to identify motifs required for hypoxia-induced expression. Second,
phosphorylation-dependent interaction kinetics of small heat shock proteins with
the cytoskeleton will be analyzed in hypoxic muscle cells. Mutagenesis of
serine/threonine residues will be conducted and effects on hypoxia inducible
phosphorylation established. Dynamic interactions of wild-type and
phosphorylation site mutant heat shock proteins with the cytoskeleton and each
other will be examined in control and hypoxic muscles. Finally, small heat shock
protein expression will be altered in muscles, and cytoarchitecture and function
of muscle cells responding to hypoxia will be assessed. To accomplish this aim,
zebrafish lines that over-, and under-express small heat shock proteins in
skeletal muscle will be created. Muscle cell architecture and function will be
assayed in larvae and adults under control conditions and after exposure to low
oxygen levels.