* 1457304
* Collaborative Research: Navigation and the Neural Integration of Multimodal Sensory Information in the Brain of an Arthropod
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Verner Bingman, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick Abbot
* 07/31/2021
* USD 270,000.00

The ability of many animals to navigate through their environment far exceeds
what humans are able to do without the help of technology. Exceptional
navigation is not limited to animals with large brains, like birds and mammals.
It can also be found in animals with simpler nervous systems. The tropical
amblypygid, a scorpion-like animal, is able to find its way home at night
through dense, tropical forest understory. The study of how different types of
sensory information (visual, chemical, tactile) are processed by amblypygids as
they solve navigation problems can reveal fundamental design properties of
simple nervous systems that are somehow capable of controlling complex, learned
behavior. These design properties can inspire engineering solutions applicable
to robotic and artificial intelligence systems. The study of charismatic
tropical amblypygids also serves as an alluring gateway for teachers to
introduce K-12 students to the importance of neuroscience for understanding how
organisms acquire and process information from their environment and how this
information influences learning and memory. To support engagement with K-12
students, their teachers and the general public, researchers supported by this
grant will develop internet-based educational materials in both English and
Spanish. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By conducting behavioral experiments that assess
amblypygid (Phrynus pseudoparvulus) movements after displacement from a home
refuge, researchers will assess the relative importance of visual, chemical and
mechanical information in supporting navigation. These experiments will either
involve manipulation of animal sense organs or the sensory cues in their
environment. The neurobiological work will focus on a brain area known as
"mushroom bodies", which are thought to support spatial memory. In parallel with
the behavioral work, researchers will explore the nervous system routes by which
information from different sensory stimuli is sent to the mushroom bodies.
Particular attention will be given to how the mushroom bodies "engineer" or
"integrate" the different sensory inputs. The integration of sensory inputs is
hypothesized to be necessary to support complex navigation and will likely have
applied potential for design of sophisticated artificial systems. Finally, the
importance of the mushroom bodies in navigation, and their capacity to combine
different sources of sensory information, will be tested under the same
conditions of the behavioral experiments noted above, except using animals whose
mushroom bodies are impaired.