* 1457209
* Differential Adaptation to Plant Toxins: The role of Chemically-mediated Selection in Reproductive Isolation between Mammalian Herbivores.
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2021
* Jack Hayes, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2021
* USD 646,787.00

One of the most fundamental ways that an animal interacts with its environment
is through its diet. Woodrats (or packrats) are known to specialize on
particularly toxic food plants in the wild. This project tests the hypothesis
that woodrats overcome certain plant toxins in their diet through a combination
of liver detoxification enzymes (biochemical catalysts) as well as through the
activity of their gut microbes. The hypothesis will be tested in a natural
setting where two species of woodrats come into contact with each other at a
sharp habitat transition. Each species is primarily found in one habitat or the
other, and appears to specialize on habitat-specific toxic plants. The project
will examine whether each species is uniquely adapted to the plant toxins in
their native habitat such that they would not be able to sustain themselves on
the diet available in the adjacent habitat. As such, these chemically-mediated
ecological adaptations may limit genetic exchange, or hybridization, between the
species and play an important role in maintaining their distinction. These
results will therefore expand understanding of biodiversity and its management
in nature. For herbivores, plant chemicals found in most of their food items
affect growth, health, and response to changes in diet. Thus, this research will
have relevance to production, improvement, and safety of mammalian animals used
as food by humans. This research will provide training for numerous students and
will allow expansion of a current high school education program wherein teachers
and their students participate in a week-long, hands on program focused on the
genetic basis of sensitivity in humans to the taste of particular
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to identify the mechanisms
underlying genotype-phenotype-environment interactions across a mammalian hybrid
zone that spans a sharp ecological boundary. The system entails two species of
woodrat (Neotoma) that hybridize across a sharp ecological transition but occupy
distinct habitats and maintain habitat-specific diets with distinct toxin
profiles. Woodrats often specialize on highly toxic food plants, but exposure to
novel plant toxins generates severe metabolic costs. The hypothesis tested is
that diet specialization and the cost of habitat/diet switching is the primary
selective force underlying the strong genotype-phenotype-environment
relationship in the woodrat system. Further, because strong selection against
hybrids during early stages of life, when individuals are transitioning to a
plant-based diet, has been demonstrated previously, another hypothesis to be
tested is that many hybrids may not be capable of metabolizing either parental
diet. To test these hypotheses, field studies and laboratory experiments will be
integrated to quantify the pattern (metabolomics, Aim 1), mechanisms (gene
expression and gut microbiome, Aim 2), and ecologically-relevant outcome
(performance, Aim 3) of diet-mediated selection. Exposure of various genotypic
classes (i.e. pure and hybrid woodrats) to habitat-specific diets will be
experimentally manipulated to establish patterns of metabolic processing of
these diets, identify the underlying liver gene expression and gut microbial
community profiles associated with exposure to these diets, and quantify the
energetic costs associated with consumption of these diets. The ecological and
evolutionary principles associated with this research in diet-based ecological
adaptation will be translated to augment current high school outreach programs
that focus on the genetic basis of sensitivity in humans to the taste of
particular chemicals.