* 1457023
* Collaborative Research: Ligule development in the proximal-distal axis of the maize leaf
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Sarah Hake, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 206,960.00

Alteration in plant architecture has been critically important during crop
domestication. Through generations of breeding to increase yield, crop plants
have been selected for a variety of branching patterns that change the number,
length or angle of branches. In maize, leaf angle has been an important
branching trait that has likely contributed to increasing corn yields. The angle
of the leaf is determined by the ligule region, which forms at the boundary
between the blade and sheath. The blade tilts back to absorb energy from the sun
while the sheath holds tight to the stem. This angle between the blade and
sheath is a heritable trait that can be modified through selection: decreased
angle makes plants more upright for more compact fields, whereas increased angle
optimizes the surface area of the blade for more energy capture. Thus,
understanding the basic molecular mechanisms involved in establishing the leaf
angle will provide new tools for manipulating maize architecture. This project
aims to clarify the complex network of factors that determine when and how the
ligule region forms. This project will first identify and characterize the
expression of genes that define the ligule boundary during the earliest stages
of development. Molecular, genetic and genomic methods will then be used to
investigate how the ligule region forms. The results will be shared with diverse
audiences including breeders, the scientific community and with students. To
that end, YouTube videos will be produced that describe the science of corn
development to a general audience and additional educational materials will be
generated for student classrooms. All resources will be made publically
available through lab websites and the maize community website
(http://www.maizegdb.org).

This project investigates how the ligular region is established as a defined
organ boundary in the undifferentiated leaf primordium. Previous work used the
anatomically distinct ligule as a site for transcriptome analysis: preligule,
preblade and presheath cells were clearly identified for laser capture followed
by RNA sequencing. Due to the specificity of capture, a collection of candidate
genes was identified that is uniquely and differentially expressed in the ligule
region. Shared expression patterns in other organ boundaries suggest that the
ligule reiterates the lateral organ initiation program that occurs at the shoot
apical meristem and at tassel branch boundaries. Thus, distinctly different
organ boundaries are hypothesized to share genes and use common mechanisms to
define and restrict developmental pathways. To test this hypothesis, gene
networks will be established for early stages of ligule development and
mechanisms of ligule initiation further investigated. The first specific aim is
to identify the earliest determinants of ligule formation by capturing cells
from the youngest accessible leaf primordia. Candidate genes will be prioritized
based on their expression in other ligule-specific mutants. The second aim
investigates three promising candidate gene pathways that support the role of
KNOTTED1 (KN1)-like homeobox transcription factors and partner proteins in
establishing the ligule boundary. Mutants will be analyzed in these genes for
ligule and branching phenotypes. The third aim tests the hypothesis that the
bZIP transcription factor LIGULELESS2 (LG2), bound by KN1, is involved in
positioning the blade/sheath boundary. Protein partners will be identified as
will down-stream targets to determine the role of LG2 in establishing the blade
sheath boundary.