* 1457123
* Function Tetraspanins and Tetraspanin-like Proteins in Plant Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Marisa Otegui, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 599,998.00

This project is aimed at understanding how signaling molecules that coexist at
the cell surface find each other to mediate cellular responses. Key proteins at
the cell surface need to be able to transiently interact with each other when
they encounter specific stimuli to trigger a response within the cell. How do
the signaling partners find each other in a sea of membrane lipids? A mechanism
that cells use to confine membrane proteins to specific domains in a continuous
membrane is the expression of proteins that are able to establish protein
networks or webs. Tetraspanins are evolutionarily-conserved proteins that
facilitate the formation of protein networks and establish signaling modules
involved in intercellular communication, cell proliferation, development, and
specific responses to biotic and abiotic stimuli. However, there is very little
experimental data on their exact molecular mechanisms and what physiological
roles they play in plants. This project will analyze the function of tetraspanin
and tetraspanin-like proteins in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana to
understand their molecular and physiological roles in vascular development, cell
proliferation, and responses to phytohormones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher and her group have identified a plant-specific protein family that
shares key structural and functional similarities with tetraspanins. In
Arabidopsis thaliana, one member of this family named VASCULAR COMPLEXITY AND
CONECTIVITY (VCC) controls vascular development. VCC interacts with TETRASPANIN
1 (TET1) and other signaling molecules involved in vasculature development and
localizes to the plasma membrane. The researcher proposes that tetraspanins, VCC
proteins, and likely other membrane associated proteins act in a combinatorial
manner to establish protein-network modules that contain different associations
of receptors and signaling components specific to different plant cell
types/tissues. In this context, the evolution of plant tetraspanin-like proteins
like the VCC family could have potentially increased the diversity and
specificity of protein signaling modules on membranes. This project will analyze
two plant tetraspanin signaling modules involved in very different processes.
One module is at the plasma membrane, consists of TET1, VCC, and the membrane-
associated protein OCTOPUS (OPS), and positively regulates vascular
differentiation in Arabidopsis embryos. The other module localizes to the
endoplasmic reticulum, contains TET6, and controls seed longevity, seed
responses to abscisic acid and oxidative stress during germination. The goals
are to identify what other structuring components (other tetraspanins, VCC, or
other TET-like proteins) and signaling molecules (e.g. receptors) are part of
these signaling modules, to determine what signaling/physiological events they
control, and to explore the function and composition of other tetraspanins and
VCC protein networks in Arabidopsis though genetic, proteomic, and molecular
approaches. This project will provide interdisciplinary training to a
postdoctoral fellow, a graduate student, and several undergraduate researchers
enrolled in UW-Madison or attending its summer REU program through the
Integrated Biological Sciences Summer Research Program. The proposed research
will also impact classroom education at the University of Wisconsin. The
Principal Investigator teaches three hands-on undergraduate and graduate courses
that require the completion of a research project in plant biology. In addition,
thirty students taking the Introduction to Engineering Design course at the UW-
Madison campus, will interact with the research team on this poroject and design
a device specially optimized to facilitate the imaging of plant membrane
proteins in intact Arabidopsis embryos and seedlings under controlled
environmental conditions.