* 1457227
* LTREB Renewal: Multiscale effects of climate variability and change on hydrologic regimes, ecosystem function, and community structure in a desert stream and its catchment
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Nancy Grimm, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

River and wetland ecosystems provide important ecosystem services that are
determined by climate, such as water for human uses and habitat support for fish
and wildlife. In southwestern deserts of the United States, years of extreme
drought often follow years of very wet conditions, thus it is impossible to
define river ecosystem services in terms of average conditions. In fact, high
variability is an apt descriptor of the hydrologic regimes for streams in this
region. In this project, researchers are using new statistical techniques that
describe hydrological regimes, coupled with long-term measurements of stream
structure and processes, to understand how shifts in climate and river discharge
regimes on many time scales will influence the ecosystem. The research will
focus on factors that explain why the abundance and distribution of wetland
plants and the degree of nitrogen limitation vary dramatically among years.
Also, the variation among years in patterns of change after spring floods - in
primary production, nutrient retention, and community composition (of
invertebrates and plants)- will be related to within- and among-year variation
in hydrology, to determine the impact of regimes on these successional patterns.
Finally, an interdisciplinary team of collaborators will reevaluate stream
ecosystem models and test new models using long-term data from this and other
desert streams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance synthesis of
long-term data from desert streams and advance understanding in ways that can
contribute to the general theory of stability of multiple ecosystem states. A
graduate student-led workshop will give students experience in using long-term
databases and foster collaborative interactions. Activities of a collaboratory
will expand the coupling of innovative hydrologic time-series analyses with
ecological data. The database for this well-known stream ecosystem will be
extended to more than 40 years and made available to the scientific and
management community, potentially informing management in a highly variable
environment where stressors of climate change and population growth are
converging.