* 1457805
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Iron Redox Dynamics in Carbon Losses from Tropical Forest Soils
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Whendee Silver, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2021
* USD 711,314.00

An understanding of how carbon and other elements are transformed in forests is
critical to sustaining and nurturing this important global natural resource. In
tropical forests, these transformations are likely to respond to variations in
climate, and in turn, cause feedbacks in the global climate system. In
particular, humid tropical forests cycle carbon more rapidly than any other
ecosystem on Earth. A consistently warm and wet climate promotes rapid plant
growth, as well as rapid decomposition of dead plant material. However, in their
wet, clay-rich soils, biological activity frequently consumes oxygen faster than
it is replaced by diffusion, temporarily creating regions of low oxygen
availability in the surface soils. Periods of low oxygen availability are
generally thought to enhance soil carbon storage by slowing the activity of
micro-organisms that consume dead plant matter. If oxygen availability
fluctuates, this may lead to more complex interactions. The proposed work will
lead to a better understanding of these linkages, help explain why tropical
forests have the highest global rates of soil carbon dioxide emissions, and
inform global models and predictions used by public policy makers. In addition,
the project will educate and train K-12 students and communicate scientific
findings to the public. Project leader Dr. Silver will develop and run annual
workshops on communicating climate change science together with local
collaborators in Puerto Rico. Both PIs will provide direct student instruction
including workshops with elementary students in California and internships for
students from Georgia high schools with lower college
attendance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to a better
understanding of the controls on carbon cycling in tropical forests by: (1)
determining the role of iron-redox cycling in organic matter decomposition; (2)
quantifying the importance of two novel biogeochemical processes in tropical
forests - abiotic iron oxidation coupled to carbon oxidation, and increased
dissolved organic carbon production from iron oxidation. Both of these processes
have the potential to contribute significantly to ecosystem carbon fluxes and to
alter our understanding of carbon dynamics in tropical ecosystems. Studies will
use a combination of laboratory, field experiments and modeling. Field
experiments will be conducted in the Luquillo Experimental Forest, Puerto Rico,
and will take advantage of an automated sensor network installed as part of the
NSF-funded Critical Zone Observatory, as well as related research that will form
the template from which to conduct experiments on the interactions of iron and
carbon biogeochemistry. Radiocarbon measurements will determine the relative age
of oxidized carbon, and 13C labeled substrates will be used to explore the
potential for iron oxidation to stimulate the decomposition of complex carbon
compounds. Structural equations and kinetic models will allow us to scale the
work to the ecosystem level. The conceptual and numerical models developed from
this research will address missing linkages between microscale redox processes
to ecosystem level carbon cycling across a range of forest soil conditions and
landscape positions. This work will help determine the potential sensitivity of
tropical forest biogeochemistry to changes in climate and associated redox
conditions, as well as feedbacks from soil carbon dynamics to atmospheric CO2.