* 1457257
* Plant Osmosensors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Zhen-Ming Pei, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Water is crucial to all aspects of plant growth, development and ecological
distribution, as well as agricultural production. Drought triggers osmotic-
stress signaling events in plants, which regulate the gene expression network
and subsequent physiological and developmental processes, reducing water loss.
Among these signaling events, the initial perception for osmotic stress is
poorly understood at the gene level. The project is designed to identify and
study the genes encoding sensors for drought/water as well as their regulatory
components in plants. In this project, the identification and examination of the
gene family of water sensors will not only further our understanding of how
plants sense water, but also provide potential genetic targets for engineering
drought resistant plants, such as crops, grasses and
trees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well established for over the last 20 years
that osmotic stress evokes a transient increase in cytosolic Ca2+ concentration
([Ca2+]i), which is thought to be involved in osmosensing. However, the
molecular nature of the corresponding osmosensing components remains largely
unknown. Using aequorin Ca2+ imaging-based unbiased forward genetic screens,
Arabidopsis mutants defective in osmotic stress-induced [Ca2+]i increases (oici)
were previously isolated, and one gene, OSCA1, was identified as the founding
member of a functionally novel and evolutionarily conserved family of channel
proteins. OSCA1 forms hyperosmolality-gated, non-selective cation channels with
Ca2+ permeability in the plasma membrane. Suppression of OSCA1 results in
attenuated osmotic signaling in stomatal movements and root growth, suggesting
that OSCA1 functions as an osmosensor in plants. In this project, the detailed
biophysical properties of OSCA1 channels will be determined (Aim 1). Then, 14
other OSCA1 homologs will be screened for their osmosensing activities (Aim 2),
and their physiological functions in drought stress and root hydrotropism will
be assessed (Aim 3). Finally, novel osmosensing-related components will be
isolated via fine-mapping of additional oici mutants (Aim 4). This project will
establish the Ca2+-mediated sensory machinery by which plants perceive water
availability in both external environments and internal tissues.