* 1457888
* RII Track-1: Arkansas Advancing and Supporting Science, Engineering, and Technology (ASSET) III - Multifunctional and Tunable Nanostructured Surfaces
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Min Zou, Arkansas Science & Technology Authority
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2021
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
(RII) Track-1 award establishes a Center for Advanced Surface Engineering (CASE)
which will engage several academic institutions and industries in Arkansas (AR).
An interdisciplinary team of researchers with expertise in physics, chemistry,
biology, engineering, and computational science will focus on engineering
material surfaces to address performance of machining/cutting tools, impermeable
packaging of food and selective filtering of contaminants, detection of
radiation and pollutants, and control of neural cell growth. CASE will prepare a
diverse future workforce with skills needed to strengthen AR industries in the
areas of manufacturing, forestry, agriculture oil &amp; gas, aerospace &amp;
defense, and healthcare. Continuing education workshops, certificate programs on
surface science and engineering, and education-level appropriate outreach
activities will be offered to train industry professionals, K-12 teachers and
students across AR. Existing statewide cyber-infrastructure will be used to
support research and expand education across the state to enhance technology-
based economic prosperity in AR. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on the design, fabrication,
and study of nanostructured surfaces that change color, self-sharpen, lubricate,
or change pore size as needed for specific applications. The project team will
explore a wide range of material surface innovations inspired by nature (for
example, lotus leaves for water repulsion, sea shells for their load bearing
capacity, and chameleons for changing skin color) and controlled by external
stimuli. Modeling and simulation based surface design will guide experiments and
provide fundamental understanding of meso- to nano-scale material behavior. The
project will leverage statewide research involving ten AR higher education
institutions to produce novel materials and a database of their properties,
which can be shared with industries to accelerate product innovations. CASE
researchers will educate graduate, undergraduate, and high school students,
prepare curricular materials to train industry professionals, and develop a
cross-institutional certificate program in surface science and engineering.