* 1457307
* Workshop: The Emerging Policy and Ethics of Human Robot Interaction; Portland, Oregon - March, 2015
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Laurel Riek, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 24,510.00

General Audience Summary

This workshop aims to bring together multiple stakeholder groups to anticipate
and grapple with significant normative, legal, and policy questions concerning
robots in human social environments. Such robots are likely to have substantial
impacts on daily life in the near future, meaning that now is the time for
researchers in the social sciences and robotics, industry leaders, and
government experts to begin drafting ethical and policy guidelines for a new era
that is on the horizon. The primary goal of this workshop is to do so in a
balanced, integrative way that serves to promote mutual education and grounding.
The expected product is a working consensus document for the professional
community that will be shared broadly. Invited panelists will include senior
women and others from underrepresented groups, including engineers with
disabilities. Students from underrepresented groups will be encouraged to
participate through travel grants. Citizen journalism of the event will be
implemented by live tweeting, and questions from remote participants will be
fielded, to enable even more widespread participation.

Technical Summary

The workshop will focus on several topics of high relevance concerning policy
and ethical issues within the context of human-robot interaction; key topics
include healthcare, morphology, and autonomy. With regards to healthcare, robots
are deployed in therapeutic settings with vulnerable populations; for example,
to help treat children with developmental disabilities, to encourage pro-social
behavior among older adults, and to assist people with daily living tasks, such
as bathing, manipulation, mobility. Such uses raise substantial concerns
regarding client privacy and human caregiver displacement. With regards to
morphology, there are concerns that increasingly anthropomorphic robots not only
convey inaccurate expectations to people about robot capabilities, but may also
be unethical when treating vulnerable populations; people with cognitive
disabilities may be vulnerable to psychological manipulation, such as exploiting
emotional attachments to swindle users. With regards to autonomy, control
handoff to robots puts the burden of ethical and policy considerations on
designers. As a result, the management of liability and risk via insurance (for
example) would need to be re-calibrated.