* 1457720
* Collaborative Research: Landscape heterogeneity modulates the sensitivity of forested ecosystems to climate
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jia Hu, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Schade
* 07/31/2018
* USD 339,897.00

The frequency, duration and severity of droughts are increasing across the
western United States and are affecting the growth of trees in forests. However,
predicting how the growth of specific forests will respond is difficult,
especially in mountainous areas of the west that are characterized as having
steep gradients in climate related to complex local topography. For example, the
topography across a western landscape can affect the availability of water and
light for the growth of trees and other plants, and the growth responses will
depend on specific physiological attributes that vary highly across tree
species. The main objective of this study is to link three factors (variability
in climate, the physical characteristics of watersheds, and the physiology of
vegetation) in order to better understand and predict forest productivity across
mountainous landscapes of the west using model study sites in Montana and
Oregon. The study will increase participation of underrepresented minorities in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics through development of K-12
lesson plans and science kits for rural schools across Montana. The study will
also be carried out in collaboration with the Montana Climate Office to more
effectively disseminate results to stakeholders and decision makers in the
western United States related to natural resource management and
stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists, forest managers and decision
makers must be prepared to understand, respond and adapt to the effects of a
changing climate. This project will lead to improved predictions of how forests
will respond to changes in climate in the future by more clearly linking the
physical characteristics of mountain landscapes and the physiological attributes
of trees in spatially explicit computer models of forest productivity. The
methods to be used include a range of hydrological, tree physiological, and
isotopic measurements, all nested within large-scale satellite remote sensing
estimates of forest productivity. This project will merge concepts and methods
from the fields of ecology and hydrology to provide a more comprehensive
understanding of vegetation sensitivity to climate as related to its position in
the landscape.