* 1457890
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: The PEcAn Project: A Community Platform for Ecological Forecasting
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Kenton McHenry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2021
* USD 343,277.00

Computer simulations play an essential role in ecological research, the
management of national forests and other public and private land resources, and
projections of climate change impacts on ecosystem services at the local, state,
national, and international level. However, at the moment, there are a number of
barriers slowing the pace of model improvement and reducing their wider use.
First, the software for using each model is unique and does not communicate well
with other models. Second, because each model is unique, the tools to manage
data going into models, analyze models, and visualize results are not shared. In
this project PEcAn (Predictive Ecosystem Analyzer) is being developed to provide
a common set of software tools for researchers and land managers to effectively
work with multiple ecosystem models and data. Web technologies will be used to
allow distant modeling teams to share information, work together, and better use
public and private cloud and supercomputing resources. Other tools will be
developed to identify model errors and combine new and existing applications
into workflows to make ecological research more efficient, better forecast
ecosystem services, and support evidence-based decision making. The PEcAn team
will also develop training tools for new users and work with the scientific
community to add more models to PEcAn. PEcAn will make ecological research more
transparent, repeatable, and accountable.

PEcAn is an open-source ecoinformatics system designed for ecologists with a
range of modeling backgrounds to be able to better and more easily parameterize,
run, analyze, and assimilate data into ecosystem models at local and regional
scales. This project will expand the PEcAn user community, incorporate more
models, and develop tools that are more intuitive and accessible. Further, the
project intends to transform tools for managing the flows of information into
and out of ecosystem models into a resilient, scalable, and distributed peer-to-
peer network for managing the flow of this information among modeling teams and
with the broader community. To support a larger number of models, data
processing workflows will be improved and tools will be developed for multi-
model visualization and benchmarking. Applications that distribute analyses
across the PEcAn network, cloud, and high-performance computing environments
will be used to better understand model structural error using data mining
approaches. Models will benchmarked over a range of environmental conditions,
allowing model improvement to be tracked and users to select the best models for
different applications in an informed manner. Finally, PEcAn tools will be
combined into customizable workflows for real-time synthesis, forecasting, and
decision support. By allowing modelers to focus on science rather than
informatics, and allowing ecologists to easily compare their data to models,
PEcAn will greatly accelerate the pace of model improvement and hypothesis
testing. These activities are essential for improving ecosystem models and
reducing uncertainty of the impacts of climate change on ecosystems and carbon
cycle-climate feedbacks. Project information and results are available at
http://pecanproject.org while project computer code is available at
https://github.com/pecanproject.