* 1457099
* A Study of Computer-Mediated Evidence in Cases of Human Rights Violations
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Eden Medina, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2018
* USD 224,171.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is a case
study of computer technologies and forensic science of an episode that shaped
the pursuit of truth and justice in Chile in the aftermath of human rights
crimes. It will use historical methods to study how government officials,
members of multiple scientific communities, and the citizens affected by human
rights crimes made use of technology to make knowledge of an uncertain past
definitive. The Chilean government attempted to advance public knowledge of the
3000 disappearances and murders that were committed during the repressive
government of General Augusto Pinochet (1973-1990) by using computer imaging
technology to identify the victims as part of the subsequent administration's
efforts towards reconciliation. Computers and the images they produce have the
power to persuade by creating representations that are perceived as objective.
However, the precise meaning of these representations is subject to debate, even
within relevant scientific communities. The proposed research provides an
opportunity to study such kinds of data and practices in detail to see what they
say about truth, memory, and power relationships. The investigator will
disseminate her research results broadly in both English and in Spanish, and
using open-access repositories, to provide important insights about human
practices behind the creation of computer-generated forms of evidence, the
effectiveness of government responses to human rights atrocities, and the role
of science and technology in national processes of truth and justice. The
proposed research will advance discovery and understanding while promoting
teaching, training, and learning through the involvement of undergraduate and
graduate students in the project and the creation of a new class on computer
technology and human rights. To cultivate international exchange and form new
research networks, the investigator will involve a Chilean graduate student in
the research process and mentor his/her professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research examines the use of computer-assisted craniofacial
superimposition, then a promising but controversial technique, to identify the
bodies exhumed from an anonymous mass grave. Chilean forensic scientists used
this method to identify most of the exhumed bodies, offer closure to relatives
of the deceased, and advance government efforts toward truth and reconciliation.
However, it later became known that these practices had resulted in the
misidentification of nearly 40% of the bodies exhumed. By studying the
relationship of particular forms of computer technology and forensic science to
law, reconciliation, and justice, the proposed research will offer new knowledge
about how nations address histories of mass atrocity and the effects these
actions have on the broader citizenry. It also illuminates the ramifications of
taking technologies for granted as purveyors of objectivity and truth in the
context of human rights and the potential repercussions for historical processes
and the lives of those most affected by human rights crimes. It will result in a
rich historical study of the Chilean case and will use this study to develop
analytical frameworks and methodological tools for thinking more broadly about
technology in the domain of human rights work.