* 1457690
* Collaborative Research: The impacts of the distribution of phenotypic effects and the distribution of pleiotropic costs on the genetics of natural adaptations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Pelin Volkan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2020
* USD 370,642.00

Genes do not operate alone. They function as parts of large gene networks that
work together to produce the organism traits we observe (phenotypes). However,
not all genes contribute equally to a network and some genes may contribute to
multiple traits. This difference among genes suggests that some genetic changes
may have more impact than others; changes in a gene that has a large role in
several traits presumably has more effect than changing a gene with a relatively
minor role in a single trait. In general, large effect changes are thought to be
bad for an organism. However, when that organism faces a strong evolutionary
challenge, for example, an exposure to a pesticide or drug, eating a new food,
encountering a pathogen, these large effect changes may be the only hope for its
survival. This research will test hypotheses concerning the nature and
predictability of evolving adaptive phenotypes by examining the phenotypic costs
of genes having varying degrees of network interaction. This project will also
provide hands-on training for students from underrepresented groups in key
molecular and evolutionary concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests
the hypothesis that some genes, such as those that are central in networks, may
be genetic 'hotspots' of trait evolution. To test this idea, this project uses
the well-described fruit fly (Drosophila) olfactory system as a model genetic
network. In flies, as with humans, the olfactory system evolves rapidly and is
directly tied to some adaptations. Cutting edge genomic sequencing, analysis of
chemosensory gene evolution, and ultrafine scale morphological analysis will be
used to test whether adaptive ecological shifts are predictably associated with
particular types of changes in the olfactory system. These predictions will then
be tested on olfactory related phenotypes using the powerful genetic tools
available in Drosophila.