* 1457369
* The impact of symbiotic nitrogen fixation on plant defense, herbivores and higher trophic levels
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Daniel Ballhorn, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2019
* USD 412,795.00

Belowground nitrogen (N2)-fixing bacteria (rhizobia) are of high ecological and
economic importance, yet their role in aboveground food webs is virtually
unexplored. To functionally disentangle the complex ecological effects of
rhizobia, this project will use multiple rhizobial strains in combination with
different host plants, wild lima bean (Fabaceae: Phaseolus lunatus) and wild pea
(Fabaceae: Leptospron adenanthum). In the laboratory, these plant-rhizobia
systems will be experimentally exposed to varying CO2 and nitrogen
availabilities. Both plant species show fundamentally different chemical
defenses against herbivores. While P. lunatus has an efficient nitrogen-based
defense (via cyanogenesis), L. adenanthum invests in carbon-based defense (via
phenolics). In addition to these direct defenses, both plants show an array of
indirect defenses (extrafloral nectar and herbivore-induced volatiles) which act
through the attraction of carnivorous arthropods. The project will provide an
integrated picture of the effects of rhizobia on plant traits, plant-associated
organisms of different trophic levels and the impact of variable abiotic
conditions on these associations. As plant-microbe-arthropod interactions are
relevant for multiple disciplines including chemical ecology, evolutionary
biology, global change biology, conservation biology, agriculture and soil
sciences, this research will have broad impact. In particular, in times of
rapidly changing environments, the value in better understanding the mechanisms
controlling natural and agricultural ecosystems cannot be overestimated. As part
of this project, one graduate student and several undergraduates will be trained
and opportunities for school teachers and K-12 students to participate in the
research will be provided in weekly lessons and a three-week summer field
course.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will assess bottom-up effects of
rhizobia on generalist and specialist insect herbivores of different feeding
guilds, as well as on parasitoid and predatory arthropods. Furthermore,
different levels of rhizobial N2-fixation will be considered as rhizobia differ
in quality as plant mutualists. While mutualistic rhizobia strains reciprocate,
cheating rhizobia reside in root nodules and function as carbon sinks, but
provide no nitrogen, and thus reduce the net fitness benefit for the pant host.
Beyond lab studies, costs and benefits of the rhizobial symbiosis will be
explored in a natural habitat of both plant species (Costa Rica). Specifically,
the following questions will be addressed: 1. What are the independent and
interacting effects of rhizobial strain, soil nitrogen and ambient carbon
dioxide (CO2) on plant traits? 2. How do rhizobia-mediated plant traits affect
insect herbivores and carnivores? 3. What are the ecological benefits and
defense-associated costs of the rhizobial symbiosis in a mutualist-cheater
continuum in nature? Spectrophotometric assays, GC-MS (gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry) and LC-MS (liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry), will be used
to analyze plant defensive and nutritive compounds. Plant resource allocation to
rhizobia and effects of different nitrogen fixation rates will be quantified
using isotope labeling techniques (15N) and N2 depletion studies with Argon
chambers (setups in which atmospheric N2 is replaced with Argon). Effects of
rhizobia-mediated plant traits on insect herbivores and carnivores will be
studied with feeding and olfactometer choice trials. Accompanying field studies
will serve to evaluate the effects of rhizobial strain and N2-fixation rate on
multiple plant defense traits in nature and to test for the predicted bottom-up
effects of rhizobia on arthropod herbivores and carnivores in the natural
ecosystem.