* 1457992
* CompCog: Modeling syntactic priming in language production according to corpus data
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2016
* David Reitter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 12/31/2016
* USD 75,000.00

How do humans learn, understand, and produce language? What are the mental
representations necessary to compose natural-sounding sentences? Addressing such
fundamental questions from cognitive linguistics is key to improving second-
language learning in a nation that is becoming increasingly linguistically
diverse, and to develop better natural-language computer interfaces. This
project follows a big-data approach in that it looks at adaptation between
speakers and authors in recorded conversations and large text databases in order
to infer mental representations. It follows the basic idea that adaptation
indicates the presence of such mental structures. With this methodology, the
researchers will use large text datasets as a keyhole into the human mind. They
will create an unbiased and largely automatic way to evaluate computational
models that describe how the mind achieves fast, fluent, near-perfect language
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop a
psycholinguistic, computational model that spells out precisely the steps and
representations necessary for language production. The models can be compared
and improved incrementally because they are tested on large-scale language data.
This project will develop a cognitive model to describe alignment in language
production as found in natural dialogue in speech corpora. As a basis for
alignment at the structural level, it will explain and predict syntactic
"priming" effects: E.g., "The linguist gave the lab keys to his student" primes
a listener to mirror the sentence structure with "The student showed his results
to the editor" (target), rather than "... showed the editor his results". The
model will simulate language production with general cognitive operations
studied by cognitive psychology, such as cue-based memory retrieval. It will
account for key characteristics of priming, including rapid decay, long-term
persistence and convergence, lexical boost effects, and interference sensitivity
to intervening sentences. The model will be based on a cognitive framework,
ACT-R, thereby integrating language processing with general quantitative and
computational accounts of memory. A broad-coverage, lexicalized syntax formalism
is used to account for real-life language data.