* 1457431
* CAP: Innovating Data-driven Methodologies for Documenting and Studying Informal Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Stephen Uzzo, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 01/31/2018
* USD 99,968.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Capacity-
building (CAP) projects increase the ability of researchers to understand how
such technology should be designed and used in the future and supports new
capacity in allowing researchers to answer questions about how people learn, how
to foster or assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. This project
supports a workshop in which experts in museums, informal learning, complex
systems, and data science collaborate with technologists to examine what types
of technologies could help track how learners behave, and learn, in museums and
other informal learning locations. The workshops would lead to a written
document summarizing what is known about how to track learners for these
purposes, and would help spark new collaborations leading to new approaches to
these problems. Ethics would be a core theme, and experts in ethics would help
ensure that all approaches explored would respect the privacy of museumgoers and
other learners. The intellectual merit of this project is to advance the state
of the art on how we track what learners do in museums, and the broader impact
would be to make it easier to design museums and other learning environments to
support learners, and to allow more rigorous assessment of learning behavior in
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct a three-day workshop
leading to an edited volume on technology-enabled visitor metrics in museums and
other science and technology centers. The leadership team includes expertise in
learning sciences, computer science, interaction design, complex systems, and
informal science education, and the workshop will additionally be supported by
an advisory committee including experts in educational performance assessment
and psychometrics, learning analytics, cross-cultural and cross-setting
sociocultural learning theory, and educational policy. Workshop invitees will be
recruited to include participants from several categories, including learning
sciences, data sciences and learning analytics, informal science education and
museum design, ubiquitous and pervasive computing, and data ethics. An embedded
evaluation will interview participants after the workshops to gauge whether the
meeting spurred new research collaborations.