* 1457541
* RCN: Enabling comparative studies of the process and products of sexual selection in a genomic context
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Michael Braun, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 03/31/2022
* USD 499,901.00

This Research Coordination Network facilitates new interdisciplinary research
collaborations that will advance our understanding of the genomic underpinnings
of evolutionary processes important in shaping the ecology, physiology, behavior
and diversification of organisms. The network brings together pioneers in the
application of genomic approaches, researchers with long-term ecological and
behavioral data, software developers and information management specialists to
enrich, share, and connect large-scale data sets that provide the foundation for
tackling fundamental questions of how organismal traits evolve. Products of this
effort include an open-access data repository, a publically available genome
browser, and a model of how diverse teams of scientists can collaborate to
transform independent research across disciplines into a synthetic enterprise
that will provide answers to significant biological questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Coordination Network is designed to address
the evolutionary implications of sexual selection from the level of the genome,
to physiology and behavior, to the ecosystem using manakins as a model system.
These birds inhabit tropical forests, exhibit extraordinary physical and
behavioral adaptations and are readily amenable for study. The network unites
researchers across many disciplines to engage in a community-wide effort to
enrich genomic resources through functional annotation, develop mechanisms to
connect related but heterogeneous data, and apply these resources to understand
the complex relationships between genomes and environment that produce form and
function in living organisms. The network operates through annual meetings,
workshops, working groups, and lab exchanges to develop shared genomic
resources, an open-access data repository, synthetic papers and proposals, and
new educational and research tools.