* 1457128
* Cloud Droplet Evolution and Thermal Radiation
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* M. Brewster, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/29/2020
* USD 368,287.00

Water in the atmosphere plays a crucial role in Earth's radiation budget in all
three phases. Water vapor is Earth's primary greenhouse gas; clouds play a major
role in Earth's radiative energy balance. Yet there remain significant
uncertainties in the understanding of water's radiative roles in the atmosphere.
This uncertainty shows up prominently in cloud-radiation interactions. Some
researchers have suggested there are significant missing pieces of fundamental
physics regarding clouds and thermal radiation. The need to understand better
the effect of increasing amounts of water in the atmosphere and the implications
of missing pieces of cloud-radiation physics are the primary motivations for
this project.

The objective of this project is to establish a better understanding of the role
of thermal radiation in warm cloud droplet evolution: stability, evaporation,
and condensation growth. Lab measurements will focus on radiation-augmented
cloud droplet condensation growth and evaporation. Two separate, complementary
laboratory devices are planned: a steady, isobaric flow process with radiative
cooling/condensation and an unsteady, batch process with adiabatic expansion
cooling followed by radiative heating/evaporation. Theoretical development and
validation will be done for both droplet radiative properties and radiation-
augmented mass transfer to obtain mathematical models for interpreting lab data
and for microphysical and larger scale cloud simulations. Both measurements and
modeling will be used to provide validation for and better understanding of the
role of thermal radiation in cloud droplet evolution.

Intellectual Merit: This study has intellectual merits at levels ranging from
fundamental, scientifically oriented to product oriented. New knowledge will be
generated about radiative- and phase-transitions for the most important thermal
regulating substance on the planet. The findings will impact fundamental
questions in cloud physics and atmospheric radiation: uncertain cloud albedos,
uncertain aerosol properties, "anomalous" shortwave radiation absorption,
anomalous longwave emission, water-vapor continuum absorption and emission, and
the problem of cloud droplet stability in radiative and thermodynamic
environments that are constantly changing. Remote sensing products and data
retrieval will be impacted if this project can exploit spectral changes in
condensing IR emission induced by phase-transition radiation to sense the onset
of drizzle earlier and more reliably.

Broader Impacts: This study will also have broader impacts, ranging from
individuals to society at-large. At the individual level this study will most
immediately affect the education and career of a PhD graduate student whose
aspirations are to become a professor and as part of his graduate training wants
to return to his HBCU masters-degree institution and make presentations on
research findings and experience in graduate school. Locally, workshops will be
conducted for K-12 students on water properties, phase-change heat transfer, and
global climate change in which inexpensive atmospheric radiation and cloud-
formation monitors will be built and tested. This study will also have a broader
educational impact by being incorporated into the graduate curriculum at the
University of Illinois as a design project.

At a larger, societal level this study will also have far-reaching impact. The
radiative phase-transition findings obtained herein will allow a better
fundamental understanding of cloud microphysics and may open a door to improved
global climate understanding as well as numerical weather prediction. By
exploring the connections between "anomalous" infrared water radiation, the
water-vapor continuum, and vapor-condensed phase transition, this study is
potentially transformative in changing the way atmospheric radiation is modeled.
The ultimate broad impact of this project will be a more informed society with a
more accurate understanding of the fundamental thermophysical properties of
Earth's primary thermal regulating fluid and principal greenhouse substance:
water.