* 1457531
* LTREB RENEWAL: The population dynamics of forest understory invasion: mechanistic experiments with generalist herbivores, natives, and invaders
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Susan Kalisz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2022
* USD 569,821.00

Invasive species threaten the integrity of native ecosystems and cause billions
of dollars in economic losses in the US annually. This long-term project will
identify the mechanisms that allow some species to be invasive, and some
communities to be invaded, while others are not. It is an exciting example of a
public-scientist partnership in research and management, as the investigator
works collaboratively with local and regional officials on the conservation of
their natural areas, outreach to public visitors of these areas, and developing
and assessing a virtual field trip that engages middle school students who are
unable to visit the research site directly. The project will continue to provide
training for undergraduate and graduate students, with a particular emphasis on
recruiting students from groups under-represented in field ecology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Phase II of a decadal project to
understand the population- and community-level dynamics of invasion by garlic
mustard. The investigator will collect vital rate data on seven focal species,
including three native herbaceous perennials that are highly palatable to deer,
two native herbaceous perennials unpalatable to deer, a native winter annual,
and the highly invasive garlic mustard. A Life Table Response Experiment will
include two fully crossed treatments: plots are either open or fenced to exclude
deer, and plots divided between garlic mustard presence and its removal.
Demographic matrix projection analyses and Integral Projection Models analyses
will be used to project population growth rates and the long-term fates of focal
species under the deer and invader scenarios generated by the experiment.
Demographic analyses will be complemented by experiments exploring the
hypothesized mechanisms of invasion success. Results from Phase I of this
project indicated that chemicals released by garlic mustard suppress
physiological function and carbon storage of the focal natives by disrupting the
native plant-mycorrhizal mutualism. In Phase II, additional data on the
physiological status of plants the four treatments will be compared.
Instantaneous photosynthetic and transpiration rates, stomatal conductance and
fluorometric measurements of focal plants will provide insights into carbon
stress as a mechanism of native decline and invader domination.