* 1457697
* Predation, Competition, and Establishment Dynamics within an Insular Adaptive Radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Robert Pringle, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2021
* USD 882,925.00

Adaptive radiation occurs when a single species invades a new environment (for
example, an island) and subsequently diversifies into many species, each
specialized to thrive in a particular segment of that new environment. Current
understanding of adaptive radiation emphasizes the importance of resource
scarcity and competition as the engine of diversification; in contrast, the role
of predators in promoting or inhibiting such rapid bursts of evolution is
largely unknown. This research will lead to better understanding of how
competition and predation interact to (a) determine whether closely related
species can coexist (a prerequisite for adaptive radiation), and (b) shape the
subsequent evolutionary trajectories of those species. This experiment will
improve science relevant to invasive-species management, which in in the
national interest. This project also involves innovations in STEM education that
will strengthen the scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Competition for
limiting resources has long been thought to be the primary driver of adaptive
radiation, and is the foundation for existing theory, but predation may play an
equally important role in mediating species coexistence and diversification
within adaptive radiations. This project focuses on the classic Anolis lizard
adaptive radiation, using whole-ecosystem manipulations on 16 small Caribbean
islands to assess how predation by curly-tailed lizards (Leiocephalus carinatus)
affects competitive interactions between an established resident lizard species
(Anolis sagrei) and experimentally introduced populations of a more arboreal
lizard species (Anolis smaragdinus). Population trends, behavioral responses,
diet composition, and genetic and morphological changes of all three lizard
populations will be monitored. Molecular diet analysis (including isotopic
analyses), radio-telemetry, and genomics (RAD-tag and RADseq sequencing) will be
used to quantify variables, which will be tested for interaction and differences
using standard and Bayesian statistical methods. Broader impacts include
illumination of mechanisms underlying the success or failure of invading
populations on islands, and the development of an undergraduate course combining
interdisciplinary (including humanities) and field-based approaches.