* 1457346
* Evolutionary genetics of a cosmopolitan generalist herbivore
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Richard Clark, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2019
* USD 437,355.00

To counteract grazing by animal herbivores, plants use a large array of defenses
that include the production of toxic compounds. In turn, herbivores exploit
diverse strategies to overcome these plant defenses. As herbivores have profound
impacts on natural plant communities, and are one of the major sources of crop
loss in agriculture, understanding the genetic basis and strategies for how
herbivores adapt to feed on plant hosts is of ecological and agricultural
relevance. The objective of this research is to characterize the genetic
underpinnings of the interaction between the two-spotted spider mite herbivore
and different plant hosts. This mite species is well known as a generalist
herbivore, meaning that it can feed on many plant species, including more than a
hundred crop plants. The research will further our understanding of the extent
to which given strains of generalist herbivores can persist equally well on
diverse plant hosts, or alternatively may be specialized to more specific
subsets of plant species. Furthermore, the research will characterize which
genes and alleles, including ones that impact variation in gene expression
regulation, are important for the life history of this generalist herbivore.
Outcomes of the research will include specific insights into forces shaping
genetic variation in generalist herbivores relevant to human welfare, and the
work will more broadly inform studies in diverse organisms that aim to elucidate
the genetic basis of adaptation to changing environments. The research will also
train K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish the research objectives, mite strains from diverse geographical
locations and host plants will be collected. Using high-throughput DNA
sequencing, the genomes of the strains will subsequently be determined to
describe genetic variation. Molecular signatures of selection will then be
assessed for genes associated with, for example, the metabolism of plant toxins.
Complementing these studies of DNA variation, high-throughput transcriptome
sequencing will also be performed to assess the possibility that variation in
the regulation of these genes underlies establishment on different hosts.
Finally, genetic crosses, followed by sequencing of resulting populations
selected on different plant hosts, will be carried out to identify specific
genes and alleles underlying host-plant adaptation.