* 1457206
* The Neuronal Basis of Tutor Song Memory
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Todd Roberts, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2021
* USD 639,804.00

Learning by observation and through social interaction is common in humans and
other animals. Yet, the neural circuits involved in this complex form of
learning are still poorly understood. The goal of this research is identify the
brain circuits involved in learning from social experiences. This research is
challenging because it requires methods for monitoring and manipulating neural
circuit activity during social interactions, and ideally, during interactions
that result in quantifiable changes in behavior. Songbirds and humans are among
the very few animals that learn their vocalizations (song or speech) by
imitating their parents or other social models. Juvenile songbirds memorize the
song of an adult model through social experiences and use this memory to
accurately imitate this song later in life. The PI is using optical methods for
manipulating neural circuit activity in juvenile songbirds as they memorize the
song of an adult model in order to identify the brain regions involved in this
complex form of learning. Because the brain circuits involved in song and speech
are analogous, this research can provide fundamental insights into the neural
basis for complex human behavior, such as speech learning and social
communication. Further, through designed outreach programs this research will
help increase the quality of science education in the Dallas/Fort Worth region.
The Principal Investigator and staff in his laboratory are working to train
middle school and high school science teachers, and high school students through
hands on systems neuroscience research. This training involves analytical,
behavioral and biological methods as well as cutting edge behavioral and genetic
methods.

Juvenile songbirds memorize the song of an adult model through social
experiences and use this memory to accurately imitate this song later in life.
The Principal Investigator has developed behavioral, and optogenetic methods for
manipulating neural circuit activity in juvenile songbirds as they memorize the
song of an adult model, thus providing the necessary methods to dissect the
brain circuit involved in learning from social experience. This research will
test if the memory of a vocal model is stored in motor circuits involved in
producing the learned vocal behavior, as suggested by mirror neuron models of
speech and language learning, or in auditory circuits, as suggested by auditory
template models. Using optogenetic inhibition of neural activity in the juvenile
brain, this research will test the necessity of individual cell types in the
encoding of tutor song memory.