* 1457282
* Evolution of Mucosal B Cell Immunity: Novel Roles of IgT+ B Cells in the Control of Host-pathogen Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Jerri Bartholomew, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2019
* USD 632,000.00

The mucosal surfaces of vertebrates such as the gut and mouth are inhabited by
resident bacteria and also continuously exposed to invading microbes. Throughout
evolution, specific types of antibodies have become specialized to protect such
mucosal sites. In mammals and birds, immunoglobulin A (IgA) predominates at
mucosal surfaces, whereas IgG and IgM provide systemic protection. While fish
were thought to be devoid of antibodies dedicated to defend mucosal areas
throughout the body, fish with true bones (teleost fish) have been recently
found to contain an antibody molecule that is specialized to defend for the skin
and gut areas. However, very little is still known about the function of this
molecule and the cells producing it. This project proposes further studies on
this area which will bring new insights into the evolution of mucosal immunity
and its role in host-pathogen interactions in primitive vertebrates. Mucosal
areas of fish, including the gut, skin and gills, represent the main areas
through which pathogens infect these species. On a broader level beyond new
basic scientific knowledge, these studies will benefit society by contributing
to the aquaculture and fishing industries. By better understanding how fish
defend these mucosal surfaces better tools to combat fish diseases can be
developed.

Until recently it was thought that mucosal immunoglobulins evolved from tetrapod
species. Breaking this paradigm, trout IgT was shown to be an immunoglobulin
specialized in gut mucosal immunity and concurrently, a new B cell subset was
described uniquely expressing IgT. These findings have led to hypothesize a key
role for IgT in mucosal immunity supported by the large numbers of IgT+ B cells
that accumulate at sites of infection in both the gut and the skin that are
pathogen-specific immunoglobulin (IgT) responses. Curiously, the IgT+ B cells
express the highest levels of IL-10 of any other leukocyte. IL-10 is a key anti-
inflammatory cytokine. Based on the unanticipated high IL-10 producing capacity
of IgT+ B cells, it is now hypothesized that these cells play novel
immunoregulatory functions in both mucosal and systemic organs upon pathogenic
challenge. As these cells are crucial for producing pathogen-specific mucosal
IgT responses, it is also hypothesized that IgT+ B cells play a pivotal role in
the control and/or clearance of pathogens in mucosal surfaces. Utilizing a novel
IgT+ B cell-depletion fish model, the project presents aims to assess the
mechanistic basis of the inflammatory and regulatory responses in the depleted
fish upon pathogenic challenge. The pathogens chosen for this purpose infect
either skin only, gut only or produce systemic infections. Thus the
investigators will be able to evaluate the IgT+ B cell contribution to pathogen
control and clearance in animals infected with the pathogens and they will use
illumina high throughput transcriptome sequencing analysis following infection.
These combined approaches will illuminate the role of IgT positive B cells in
teleost fish with differing pathogenic challenges.