* 1457061
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Tolerance to Severe Water Stress in Animals
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Steven Hand, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2020
* USD 500,420.00

Water availability has pronounced influences on animal activity and distribution
patterns. Drying due to evaporative water loss is the most common mechanism for
dehydration, and it is a universal problem confronting terrestrial animals. The
majority of animal species do not tolerate severe water stress. This research
will address precise mechanisms that protect animals during water stress at
levels from the molecular to the organismal. Understanding these protective
mechanisms may have translational application for broad scientific communities.
For example, the ability for scientists working with important genetic models to
prolong the storage of young animal stages by imposing desiccation would be of
practical benefit for maintaining these animals more economically. The advantage
would extend to national stock centers and teaching laboratories. Engineering
desiccation tolerance in dehydration-sensitive organisms is complex, but could
provide possibilities for dry storage of valuable live organisms that may be
difficult and expensive to maintain in laboratory culture. Further, the
biomedical implications of some findings could be significant. Storage of dried
cells would increase the availability of replacement cells for many clinical
applications and in regenerative medicine. Educationally, the project will
facilitate the training of graduate students and undergraduates from a wide
diversity of backgrounds. Outreach activities planned as part of the project
will contribute to the general education of international scientists (including
researchers in biotechnology from the private sector, National Laboratory
scientists, and academic faculty wishing to acquire new skills).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research will evaluate the impact on desiccation
tolerance of multiple Late Embryogenesis Abundant (LEA) proteins originating
from anhydrobiotic embryos of the brine shrimp Artemia franciscana. The project
will refine and expand the understanding of how LEA proteins promote
stabilization of targeted biological structures at various hydration states
along a continuum from full hydration to water contents of 2% or less.
Hypotheses will be tested with isolated macromolecules, liposomes, insect cells
lines, and larvae of Drosophila melanogaster. One novel hypothesis is that the
function displayed by individual LEA proteins is multifaceted depending upon the
severity of desiccation. Such functional plasticity for individual LEA proteins
would represent a new paradigm for protection of biological structures as
hydration state varies. A new LEA protein from A. franciscana (AfrLEA6), with
high sequence homology to a plant LEA protein recently linked to long-term
protection against desiccation damage, has been cloned, sequenced and expressed.
AfrLEA6 will be stably transfected into insect cell lines to explore whether
this protein will extend long-term desiccation tolerance, in the presence and
absence of other co-transfected LEA proteins and stabilizing sugars. Finally,
fly lines of Drosophila melanogaster will be created that transgenically express
multiple LEA proteins. Because larval stages of D. melanogaster naturally
contain high endogenous levels of trehalose (a sugar known to provide protection
synergistically with LEA proteins), larvae will be used to test for improved
tolerance to drying in this species that is generally desiccation-sensitive and
does not contain LEA genes in its genome.