* 1457325
* Collaborative Research: Dinosaur Jaw Muscle Evolution and the Origins of Avian Cranial Kinesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Julian Davis, University of Southern Indiana
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 07/31/2018
* USD 164,063.00

Next to feathers and flight, movements between bones of the skull (cranial
kinesis) is the most recognizable evolutionary adaptation of birds and a
textbook example of musculoskeletal biomechanics used in classrooms worldwide.
However, the origins of this innovation remain trapped within the dinosaur-bird
fossil record. The researchers supported by this award will explore the
biomechanical evolution of the avian head using 3D anatomical and computational
modeling of fossil and living dinosaurs. This project will create
interdisciplinary collaborations of paleontologists, comparative biomechanists
and engineers. 3D models, discoveries and other data will be used to train K-12
students and teachers in mid-Missouri as well as young investigators in
comparative biomechanics and avian evolution. This project integrates anatomy,
biomechanics, paleobiology, engineering, and computer science and will train a
postdoctoral researcher, graduate, and undergraduate students through REU
support and summer internships. Mid-Missourian and Appalachian teachers will be
trained in STEM topics related to avian anatomy, biomechanics and evolution
through immersive, embedded lab internships and workshops through the Inside
Dinosaurs experience at University of Missouri and the Visible Interactive
Dinosaur (VID) at Ohio University. Public outreach will occur through Missouri's
Dinosaurs &amp; Cavemen science exposition and VID avenues. 3D models of skulls
and muscles will be made available as interactive web modules for education and
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Cranial kinesis among archosaurs is a classic
example of a key innovation in vertebrate evolution, resulting in enhanced
cranial dexterity, extreme dietary flexibility, and the subsequent adaptive
radiations of crown-clade birds. During the evolutionary transition from
dinosaurs to birds, jaw muscles shifted positions, bony connections were lost,
and intracranial joints became increasingly flexible. Studies supported by this
award will analyze the evolution of jaw muscle forces within the cranium of non-
avian and avian dinosaurs using novel 3D computational methods. These findings
will allow the estimation of intracranial joint loading during feeding in
extinct taxa and explore the evolution of individual jaw muscles in cranial
function. The results will be integrated with neuroanatomical data to uncover
the coevolutionary relationships between the brain and feeding apparatus. New 3D
models of the dinosaur feeding apparatus will provide the template for numerous
future studies of cranial functional morphology in other vertebrates. This work
will complement and provide the necessary foundation for multi-body dynamic
models of vertebrate feeding, will provide guidance for material properties
testing and XROMM analysis, chondral modeling of cranial skeletal tissues, and
will develop 3D datasets that can be used to test patterns of cranial modularity
and skull function. Results from the studies will be presented at scientific
meetings and published in peer-reviewed journals.