* 1457060
* WiFiUS: Collaborative Research: Data-Guided Resource Management for Dense Heterogeneous Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 01/31/2017
* USD 193,333.00

The emerging paradigm of dense heterogeneous wireless networks (HetNet), while
essential to meeting the explosive growth of wireless traffic, poses unseen
challenges to classical cellular network design principles. In traditional
cellular systems, spectrum and resource management are often based on the
assumption of static and regular topology/traffic patterns. Further, each cell
operates with an orthogonal set of resources and requires little inter-cell
coordination. However, such traditional approaches are out-dated and inefficient
in dense HetNets:the proliferation of small-size cells makes the network
topology and traffic characteristics highly irregular and varying; and tighter
coordination across cells becomes a necessity when users traverse many small-
cells frequently. Thus, there is an acute need to re-examine fundamental ways to
design HetNets that can (i) quickly adapt to irregular topology and changing
load patterns, and (ii) manage cell coordination at scale with minimal overhead
to achieve robust and dependable application-level performance.

To address this open challenge, this WiFiUS project develops new framework,
architecture and algorithms for adaptive, efficient, and dependable spectrum
management and resource allocation in dense heterogeneous cellular networks.
First, the project team develops a new hypercell architecture that views a
macro-cell and the overlapping small-cells as a single logical entity. This new
architecture allows hypercells to acquire a global view of the
load/channel/mobility/application patterns across multiple base-cells, thereby
enabling more effective and dynamic multi-cell coordination at scale.
Furthermore, the team develops a data-guided operational framework that exploits
both provider-collected and user-contributed data to address the inherent
complexity of dynamic multi-cell coordination. Based on historical data, this
approach migrates higher-complexity computations to offline, and thus achieves
high spectrum efficiency and user QoE with low-overhead. The US/Finland team
brings together a wide range of wireless expertise from physical layer design to
network resource management. Having a successful collaboration record, the team
carries out joint research activities in the following three aspects: 1) data
collection and traffic pattern identification; 2) data-guided spectrum
management and base-station cooperation; and 3) hypercell link adaptation,
measurement, and resource management.

The success of the project has a broad impact on the wireless communications
industry by addressing multiple timely and critical challenges that arise from
the exponential growth of cellular traffic. The project outcomes will also
provide important insights into big-data mining and learning for cellular
resource management. The results from this work will be widely disseminated
through journal/conference publications, and be incorporated into undergraduate
and graduate education endeavors.