* 1457741
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Evolution of color variation in Hawaiian damselflies: causal links for an ecological selection hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Idelle Cooper, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2019
* USD 132,000.00

Colors of male and female animals can be strikingly different, a condition
usually explained by the advantages provided in attracting mates. However, the
sexes may vary over a wide spectrum, from very different in color to identical,
and in some species one sex can vary across typically male or female colors.
This study tests whether colorful pigments function not as a visual mating
signal, but rather as antioxidant protection against damaging effects of UV
radiation. The researchers extend their past research documenting the
spectacular variation in color in endemic Hawaiian damselflies, including the
discovery that sexual and population variation in color is correlated with each
sex's solar exposure, which varies substantially across different island
habitats. Undergraduate students at both RUI institutions will assist in
research and in developing curricular materials and an exhibition that explores
color in nature, both scientifically and artistically. This project contributes
to our understanding of genotype to phenotype mapping and tests a novel
hypothesis about pigmentation and antioxidant function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will (1) identify how body color is correlated with UV exposure,
which varies with sex and species-specific microhabitats; (2) test whether
sexual selection can explain the habitat and color correlations; (3) connect
color variation with survivorship in different habitats, and (4) identify
pigment chemical identity and confirm its antioxidant function across many
species of the radiation. A direct test of the pigment's antioxidant function
provides a new perspective on the causes of variation between species and sexes,
and sets the stage for future studies on color variation, including its genetic
basis, its role in crypsis, and the role of selection on color vs. gene flow in
species diversification.