* 1457148
* Collaborative Research: Evolutionary Origins of Chiton Shell-eyes: Integrating Structure, Function, and Gene Expression within a Phylogenetic Context
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniel Speiser, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 454,624.00

Fundamental questions in biology include: How do complex traits, such as eyes,
evolve through changes in underlying sub-components? What are the transitional
steps in function that link simple light-sensitive structures and complex image-
forming eyes? The studies supported by this award use chitons (Mollusca:
Polyplacophora) in an integrative research approach to ask how and why eyes
evolve. Specifically, the proposal addresses: 1) changes in genotype associated
with the origin of new light-interacting structures and 2) relationships between
new light-interacting structures and new light-influenced behaviors. Integrative
research on chitons will help advance the field of biomaterials. Studying the
aragonite lenses of chitons will help researchers learn how animals build
precisely shaped structures through the process of biomineralization. Studying
the origin of eyes in chitons will also help counter popular misconceptions
about evolution by demonstrating how complex traits evolve through stepwise
processes. Undergraduate and graduate training, as well as public outreach
efforts are also integrated into this project.

The research objectives for this award follow the unique sensory organs
(aesthetes) embedded in chiton shell plates: photoreceptors, eyespots, and eyes
(with aragonite lenses). Specifically, the award supports studies to: (1)
Identify the molecular components responsible for light-detection in eyeless
chitons and establish the visually-influenced behaviors displayed by these
animals; (2) Characterize the pigments and pigment-producing genes associated
with the eyespots of certain chitons and establish the light-influenced
behaviors unique to these species; and (3) Investigate the molecular components
that confer spatial vision in chitons with eyes and identify genes that may be
associated with the development of their aragonite lenses. Results from the
studies will be published in peer-reviewed journals and disseminated at
scientific meetings.