* 1457997
* Scholars in Math and Science: A Program to Improve Recruitment and Retention of Students in the Biological Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Erika Iyengar, Muhlenberg College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 03/31/2020
* USD 607,786.00

Muhlenberg College has received an NSF Scholarships for Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) award for a project entitled The Scholars
in Math and Science (SIMS) program. SIMS will target academically talented and
economically disadvantaged students who enter college seeking a major within the
biological sciences. Two cohorts of 8 students each will be recruited: the first
cohort will receive scholarships of $9,500/year for 4 years, and the second will
receive scholarships of $9,500/year for 3 years. The proposal is building upon
successful program elements of a previous STEM grant that included enhanced
recruitment and academic support. Through this program, Muhlenberg College will
promote a robust and diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program
elements new to this project are being designed to develop academic and science
skills, create a learning community that lasts from freshman to senior year, and
develop student leadership through activities on campus and in public outreach.
The project will improve student support services including forming learning
communities, providing special classes and sections to get students past hurdle
classes, instituting peer-led learning, and providing long-term mentors. SIMS
will increase the leadership roles of scholars, improving their science process
skills, encouraging participation in research, and improving recruitment and
financial support for low income and otherwise underrepresented groups. SIMS
assessment and evaluation will be comprehensive and ongoing and include both
quantitative and qualitative instruments and measures from the literature. The
project external evaluator is using both formative and summative evaluations to
assess student mathematics readiness, skills development, ability to understand
and communicate key principles in biology, progress to degree, and graduation
rates. Particular emphasis will be placed on the surveys to assess and
continually improve the elements of the program that are focused on student
success. The data will inform our understanding of effective practices that
support the persistence to graduation of students underrepresented in STEM
disciplines.