* 1457748
* Evolution of dispersal and pollination in ecologically dominant grasses
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Elizabeth Kellogg, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 03/31/2019
* USD 639,217.00

The tallgrass prairie of North America is an iconic landscape, central to
America history. The grasses from which the prairie takes its name are close
relatives of those that make up the vast grasslands of eastern Africa. The
grasses provide food for livestock and wild animals, and habitat for birds; they
also pull carbon from the atmosphere and bury it deep in the ground where it
supports beneficial microbes that make the rich soil on which American
agriculture depends. This project is a collaboration between research scientists
at the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center in St. Louis, Missouri,
undergraduates at Principia College in Elsah, Illinois, and colleagues in
eastern Africa, and is aimed at unraveling the ways the grasses spread their
pollen, how they provide their seeds with carbon, and how the seeds are
dispersed across the landscape. This information will tell us how the grasslands
will respond in the face of current disturbance such as fire, urbanization, and
conversion to farmland, and future disturbances caused by a changing climate.

This project focuses on three major grass genera, Andropogon, Schizachyrium, and
Hyparrhenia, plus a few smaller related genera, that together include some 250
species many of which are ecological dominants. Researchers will first use DNA
sequences to uncover the phylogenetic history of the group, and then use that
history to trace how the seed-bearing portions of the plant have changed over
evolutionary time and how they correlate with climate, fire, and moisture. The
seeds in these plants do not simply drop off the plant. Instead they are
released as part of a complex dispersal structure that includes pieces of floral
stalks and leaf-like bracts. The dispersal structure varies between species in
size, presence or absence of hairs, presence of male and female flowers, and
presence or absence of awns (hygroscopic extensions of bracts). The structure
may be an adaptation for seed dispersal, for the control of germination in
particular soil types, or for resistance to fire. However, the same structures
may also help with pollination. In addition, many parts of the dispersal
structure are green during development, and may provide photosynthate for the
developing seed. Thus the structure could be selected for functions at three
different life history stages: pollination, grain filling, and dispersal. This
project will use both a historical phylogenetic approach and an experimental
approach to test the current function of the dispersal structure. The dispersal
structure studied here is much like that of sorghum, sugarcane and Miscanthus,
so the data will apply to those crops as well as to the major grassland species.