* 1457500
* Collaborative Research: Linking biotic interactions and environmental change to understand range dynamics of montane mammals over the past century
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Rebecca Terry, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2020
* USD 408,573.00

Human-based activities are rapidly changing natural environments on local to
global scales, calling into question the persistence of ecosystems as habitats
shift and species ranges collapse or move across the landscape. Species range
shift predictions are routinely based on the direct impacts of climate change
alone. But this approach is widely acknowledged as overly simplistic, excluding
consideration of other abiotic and biotic factors. Understanding the complex
interplay between environmental change and local ecological processes is needed
to improve predictions. Paired modern and historical datasets provide a means by
which suites of interacting factors affecting past range responses can be
modeled and validated over multiple ecological and spatial and temporal scales.
This project integrates community ecology, biogeography and biogeochemistry to
address the impact of a century of environmental change on small mammals in the
Great Basin, a highly threatened bioregion in North America. This project
underscores the value of museum collections as ecological archives and will
develop a new interactive multi-media exhibit at the Natural History Museum of
Utah to highlight new uses for old specimens in ecology and conservation.
Finally, this project supports women in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM), as well as the interdisciplinary training of undergraduate
and graduate students and a post-doctoral researcher.

Using paired survey data (80+ yrs separation) in Great Basin mountains, this
project will determine what factors have mediated range boundary changes of
small mammals. Alternate hypotheses will be evaluated regarding how the direct
and indirect effects of resource use, species interactions, landcover, and
climate change at the local scale have shaped landscape-scale species range
dynamics. This mechanistic understanding will be developed within and across
time periods, and results synthesized to identify the traits and contexts that
heighten a species' sensitivity to environmental change. Structural equation
modeling will investigate direct and indirect pathways through which biotic and
abiotic factors affect species occurrence and abundance at local sites and range
dynamics at landscape scale. Species distribution models will be used to
hindcast past species ranges in altered climates. Stable isotope analysis will
be used to infer differences in diet and habitat use over time, between mountain
ranges, and in the presence/absence of competitors. Mammal stable isotope
analyses will be done with museum specimens. This project will facilitate the
training of a post-doctoral researcher and students as well as a museum outreach
exhibit. The methods and findings will be highly generalizable to other groups
and systems and will generate robust and transferrable predictions of how
species and communities are likely to respond to future climate and land-use
scenarios. Consequently, project results will be directly relevant to
conservation and management regarding the role of biotic interactions and
resource requirements in mediating responses to environmental change.