* 1457418
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Technologies to Enable High Volume, Extreme Ultraviolet Manufacturing of Integrated Circuits
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Supriya Jaiswal, Astrileux Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2020
* USD 1,148,154.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project are to accelerate the arrival of next
generation computing technology creating faster, smaller more powerful mobile
devices, renewing the expected technological pace of development set by Moore's
law, and to enable global access to next generation electronics. The technology
developed here will enable new extreme ultraviolet lithography in semiconductor
manufacturing. The developments will promote learning, understanding and
capability in commercialization and scalability of nanotechnology engineering.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to evaluate
the feasibility of new extreme ultraviolet (EUV) technologies which enable high
volume manufacture of Integrated Circuits at 14nm and smaller. Currently capital
equipment manufacturers are facing significant challenges in meeting the
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors requirements for high volume
manufacturing of integrated circuit chips. This has caused severe ramifications
to chipmakers on the success of next generation IC manufacturing and fabrication
facility costs. Successful results from the work proposed would represent
notable progress in high volume manufacturing using EUV capital equipment. The
intellectual merit of this proposed work forms the basis of new state of the art
industry architecture designed for volume manufacturing; a pursuit that would
subsequently encourage new markets and applications using next generation
technology overcoming cost challenges in high volume manufacturing processes.