* 1457291
* Impact of selection pressure for social behavior on canid brain evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Marc Kent, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2019
* USD 532,390.00

This project will investigate features of neural system organization that can be
linked to altered social behavior, including reduced or increased aggression.
Two species of canids, experimentally domesticated silver foxes (Vulpes vulpes)
and domestic dogs (Canis familiaris), have been selectively bred by humans for
altered social behavior. These behavioral changes occurred alongside a
restricted set of genetic changes, creating an unparalleled opportunity to link
the evolution of behavioral characteristics (phenotypes) to neural phenotypes.
Recent technological advancements enable detailed, non-invasive studies of brain
anatomy at relatively low cost. This project will take advantage of these
innovations to create high-resolution three-dimensional (3D) brain maps using
structural magnetic resonance imaging, diffusion tensor imaging, and digitized
histology. Expected products of this research include: (1) identification of
features of neural organization that are linked to reduced or increased
sociality or aggression, expected to be generalizable to other species, (2) the
production of online fox and dog brain atlases that will be publicly available
as a research tool for the general scientific community, (3) training
opportunities for young scientists, and (4) outreach efforts using blog and
social media posts for the general public. Because dogs are a "common
denominator" across various cultures, this research has a unique opportunity to
be personally relevant and compelling to people from all walks of society, and
to enhance public appreciation for science.

Both experimentally-domesticated foxes and domestic dogs are distinguished from
their wild forebears by altered social approach-avoidance behavior. Previous
research in rodents and primates, and the researchers' own preliminary data,
allow for the formation of well-grounded hypotheses about neural adaptations
that result from selection pressure on social approach-avoidance behavior.
Specifically, this project will investigate limbic and fronto-limbic systems
governing social behavior and response selection. In order to identify features
of neural system organization associated with altered social behavior, whole-
brain white and gray matter organization will be compared (a) between various
breeds of domestic dogs, each tested for social approach-avoidance/aggression
behavior, and (b) between strains of foxes bred for social avoidance behavior,
which react aggressively to social contact, versus foxes bred for social
approach behavior, which are tame and friendly like dogs, versus wild type
foxes. Whole-brain MRI and DTI images will be collected using 3.0 and 9.4 Tesla
MRI scanners. Histology images will be digitally scanned and aligned to MRI
images. Analyses will include voxel-based morphometry, tract-based spatial
statistics, probabilistic tractography, and k-means connectivity-based
parcellation. The research will advance knowledge about how evolution modified
brain organization in response to selection for social approach and avoidance.