* 1457265
* Collaborative Research: Linking Causes of Variation in the Amphibian Skin Microbiome with Consequences for Disease Risk
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Roland Knapp, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2020
* USD 306,075.00

Animals have communities of microbes (bacteria, viruses, fungi) living in and on
their bodies. These microbial communities are referred to as symbiotic microbial
communities, or the microbiome. Symbiotic microbial communities are increasingly
recognized as important players in the health of humans and animals. Symbiotic
microbes may be important to animal (host) health by affecting host response to
disease-causing organisms (pathogens). This project aims to understand how the
microbiome affects disease resistance while studying chytridiomycosis, a
devastating disease of amphibians (frogs, toads and salamanders) caused by the
pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (abbreviated Bd). Bd is a fungus that
infects the skin of amphibians and can cause potentially-lethal
chytridiomycosis. The Sierra Nevada yellow-legged frog (Rana sierrae) is in
danger of extinction and Bd is one of the most serious threats to this frog. Bd
has caused massive die-offs of entire populations of R. sierrae. However,
certain populations of R. sierrae appear to be somewhat resistant to lethal
chytridiomycosis. Understanding why these resistant populations are able to
survive despite Bd infection may be critical for efforts to conserve the
species. It is possible that the skin microbiome contributes to disease
resistance, however definitive evidence is lacking. This project will address
three core questions: (1) To what extent does the R. sierrae skin microbiome
contribute to disease resistance? (2) Does microbiome composition (i.e., the
microbial species that make up the microbiome) affect the stability of the
microbiome when frogs become infected with Bd? This may be important to
understanding continued functionality of the microbiome when the host is
threatened by infectious diseases. (3) How do host and environmental differences
affect microbiome assembly? In other words, what are the forces that lead to
differences in the microbiome of different frogs or populations, or within an
individual frog at different times? This may reveal underlying causes that shape
functional variation attributed to the microbiome, such as differences in
disease resistance. In summary, this work will advance understanding of how host
and environment determine microbiome composition and how this in turn may shape
microbiome function and stability. Understanding of these processes is relevant
to strategies for protecting threatened amphibians. More broadly, understanding
how the R. sierrae microbiome interacts with Bd can provide insights into
microbiome-pathogen interactions and management of infectious disease in other
animals and humans.

Symbiotic microbial communities are increasingly recognized as important players
in the development and health of multicellular organisms. Several studies have
found that disease caused by pathogenic microbes is associated with changes in
the composition of the microbiome of the host compared with the microflora of
healthy individuals, but it has often been difficult to determine cause and
effect: the observed correlation may indicate that particular microbiome
assemblages confer disease resistance, or that pathogen infection disrupts and
alters the microbiome. This project aims to understand the role of the amphibian
skin-associated bacterial community (skin microbiome) in mediating resistance to
the fungal pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. The project will test if
microbiome differences exist between disease-resistant and -susceptible hosts,
suggestive of a protective role in nature. Importantly, this work will further
clarify the causal relationship between pathogen and microbiome by testing if
experimental alteration of the microbiome leads to changes in disease
resistance, or if instead pathogen infection alters the microbiome. This study
also aims to understand what determines the phylogenetic and functional
composition of the microbiome, a question that is fundamental to understanding
the root of microbiome-associated differences in disease resistance. Field
surveys will be used to quantify the degree to which host genetic variation and
environmental factors are associated with the phylogenetic and functional
composition of the skin microbiome sampled from wild frogs, while experimental
manipulations will clearly show cause and effect in these relationships.
Mathematical models will be developed to identify ecological mechanisms that
potentially drive variation in microbial community composition. Finally,
predictive models of microbial community dynamics under conditions of
disturbance (such as pathogen infection) will be developed, integrating
community assembly and disease resistance concepts.