* 1457439
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Phylogenomics of Cypridinidae (Ostracoda): Evolutionary origins of bioluminescence and complex behavioral displays
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Gretchen Gerrish, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2019
* USD 374,714.00

How complex traits and behaviors originate and diversify during evolution is a
major question in biology. Bioluminescence, the production of light by living
organisms, occurs in many different animal taxa. Marine ostracods, tiny shrimp-
like crustaceans, use light for both avoiding predators and for behavioral
displays. Over 64 bioluminescent flashing patterns have been observed throughout
the Caribbean but only one third of the species have been collected and
described scientifically. The proposed research will bring together a group of
collaborators from institutions in Wisconsin and California to investigate the
diversity of bioluminescent ostracods in the Caribbean and address how
bioluminescence and complex behavioral displays have evolved within the group.
Research will involve students and faculty at multiple stages in their careers,
archivists of digital and morphological materials, and members of the science
education media. The timing of this research is especially crucial as the
assembled team of researchers includes two emeritus experts on bioluminescent
ostracods who will participate in field collections and taxonomy workshops. The
products of this research will include a diverse group of newly trained
undergraduate and graduate students, a large comprehensive data set of newly
described species that will be shared publically through museum and online
curation, advancement in the bioinformatic analysis of transcriptome DNA and
behavioral traits, and a better understanding of the link between genetics and
complex trait evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project by
researchers at the University of Wisconsin - La Crosse, California State
University - Los Angeles, and University of California - Santa Barbara will use
a diverse set of complimentary techniques to investigate phylogenetic
relationships within Cypridinidae and the evolution of bioluminescence and
complex behavioral displays. Specific aims are: 1) to reconstruct a new data
rich phylogeny of Cypridinidae based on transcriptome datasets from 71 different
species, 2) calculate divergence times and diversification rates within the
group, 3) test for correlation between bioluminescent behavioral displays and
diversification rates, and 4) investigate the molecular evolution of luciferase,
the protein that catalyzes the light reaction. Understanding the biochemical
origins and properties of luminescent chemicals is important because cypridinid
luciferases are widely used as reporter genes in molecular biology and medicine.