* 1457029
* Population consequences of sexually dimorphic responses in a plant species to ongoing and experimental changes in climate
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Kailen Mooney, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 01/31/2021
* USD 287,235.00

Predicting how a population of organisms will respond to changes in the climate
they experience requires understanding how small-scale changes in ecological
processes translate to patterns at broad scales. Most studies of biological
responses to environmental change have either documented the natural pattern of
whole-species response to past change or, alternatively, the effects of
experimentally manipulated environment on the performance of a few individuals.
The former approach benefits from its realism, but is too coarse to elucidate
the physiological responses underlying the response to changes in climate. The
latter approach demonstrates these mechanisms in detail, but does so at small
spatial scales and under artificially simplified experimental conditions. This
study seeks to bridge these two approaches, studying the responses of the plant
Valeriana edulis to climatic variation at field sites in the Colorado Rockies.
Individuals of this species have separate sexes (i.e. are either male or female)
and the sexes respond differently to changes in climate. The researchers will
investigate how these variable, individual-level responses to climate scale up
to determine population dynamics and species persistence. This work will be
conducted at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL) using historic and
contemporary demographic data to compare the effects of a changing climate over
space (an 1800 m elevational gradient), between experimental manipulations
(warming and snow removal), and over time (40 year record). This study also
provides opportunities for education and outreach through undergraduate and
graduate scientific training, citizen science initiatives, and through the
development of web-based curricula in collaboration with the
RMBL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research asks whether the sex-mediated
physiological response of males and females in dioecious species to changes in
climate can skew population structure (sex ratios) with resultant demographic
consequences. The researchers will construct size- and sex-structured
demographic models using historic and contemporary data on vital rates, mating
functions, water use efficiency and primary (seed) sex ratio for populations
under (1) historic climate, (2) contemporary climate over the species' elevation
range, and (3) experimental warming and snow removal. Using model selection and
life table response experiment analyses, this study assesses the overall
consequences of spatial (1800 m elevation), temporal (past vs. present) and
manipulated (present vs. simulated future) variation in climate for population
performance, as well as the specific contribution of (and physiological basis
to) climate-skewed sex ratios.