* 1457305
* Evolutionary Rewiring of a Developmental Gene Regulatory Network
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Gregory Wray, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This project examines how changes in gene regulation contribute to modifications
in key life history traits, such as fecundity, lifespan, and age-specific
mortality. Knowing more about how life history traits vary within populations,
and how they change over evolutionary time will elucidate fundamental biological
processes. The approach involves a detailed analysis of gene interactions during
key stages of the life cycle in three species of sea urchins. The experiments
involve manipulating the operation of key regulatory genes with known functions
during the early phase of the life cycle. The impact of these experimental
manipulations will then be assayed using several 'big data' approaches that
measure the expression of tens of thousands of genes and thousands of proteins
and metabolites during subsequent stages of the life history. These results will
reveal how differences in the function of key genes impact the function of other
genes, thereby influencing anatomy and health. The broader impacts from this
project fall into four areas. First, the novel computational methods for
analysis of the very large gene expression datasets will have broad utility for
basic and applied research. Second, the large datasets will be made freely
available to other researchers who work with the same species. Third, there will
be significant contributions to the training young scientists, including
undergraduate and graduate students. Finally, this project will extend an
innovative educational outreach program to middle school students developed by
the PI in partnership with the North Carolina Museum of
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to identify
evolutionary changes in a well defined gene regulatory network (GRN) that
contribute to an ecologically significant shift in developmental mode from
planktotrophic (feeding) to lecithotrophic (nonfeeding) larvae in sea urchins.
The project is identifing maternal changes underlying GRN activation and egg
provisioning, and identify zygotic changes in GRN sub-circuits and assess their
impact on larval traits. Changes in the energy content of eggs are essential for
the evolution of lecithotrophy. The eggs of H. erythrogramma are larger than
those of H. tuberculata and other planktotrophs and are packed with prominent
lipid droplets. Interestingly, the amount of vitellogenin (yolk protein) per egg
is not elevated, but triglycerides and long chain fatty acids are vastly more
abundant. Thus, this project focuses on changes in lipid metabolism that may
have contributed to the evolution of lecithotrophy in H. erythrogramma to
identify specific metabolites that support lecithotrophic development and to
understand how those changes might have evolved.