* 1457711
* Developing Students' Troubleshooting Skills in Energy Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Daniel Schmidt, Lone Star College System College District
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 10/31/2016
* USD 430,291.00

PARTNERING INSTITUTIONS: Northern Oklahoma College, Sowela Technical Community
College, Houston Community College, Bismarck State College, and the University
of Alaska&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;The
Northern Oklahoma College and partners across five states are developing
problem-based equipment, process, and systems troubleshooting instructional
modules for various energy degree programs. The goal of the team is increasing
students' knowledge and enhancing their demonstrated skills in troubleshooting;
with the objective of improving safety, impact on the environment, and
efficiency in the energy industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, there
have been a number of accidents during the past few years as evidenced by the
investigative studies conducted by the U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard
Investigation Board (CSB). A recent scan within the broader energy industry
revealed incidents in the oil and gas, power generation, ethanol production, and
biodiesel production sectors. Thus, the ability to enhance troubleshooting
skills is needed for the nation to develop a highly competent energy workforce,
maintain the consistent production of energy, lessen the dependence on foreign
energy sources and contribute to the security and safety of the energy
facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to this need, the partnership is
designing, developing and implementing 18 generic equipment scenarios and 16
process/system-specific troubleshooting instructional modules for energy
technicians that can either be: 1) used as stand-alone modules or 2) integrated
into a capstone course for college students. The modules are providing students
with an opportunity to acquire relevant troubleshooting knowledge and skills
that prepare them to handle process upsets while working in the energy industry.
Furthermore, students are able to showcase their acquired troubleshooting skills
during a simulator competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
SIGNIFICANCE &lt;br/&gt;This effort is having a significant impact by: (1)
providing professional development for subject matter experts from colleges and
industry to ensure competency in designing/developing instructional materials
and teaching troubleshooting modules; (2) promoting national security and energy
independence by providing a highly skilled and educated energy technician
workforce; and (3) disseminating insights on students' critical thinking and
troubleshooting skills to the education community. The project's influence
covers a large geographical area; while the developed modules can be easily used
in community college settings as well as industrial in-house training programs.