* 1457645
* Collaborative Research: Adaptation Across Latitude and Altitude: Genomics, Morphology, and Physiology of Montane Bumble Bees
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Jeffrey Lozier, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2019
* USD 582,576.00

Understanding the ways in which species cope with environmental variability is
of fundamental importance in evolutionary biology and has implications for
predicting organismal responses to global change. Adaptation to environmental
variation can be inferred by examining physiological and genetic variation
across a broad range of environments, but spatial, physical, or environmental
barriers to dispersal also influence the distribution of such characteristics.
Species that occur across latitude and elevation gradients present unique
advantages for teasing apart how different evolutionary forces interact with
environmental variation to shape morphological, physiological, and genetic
diversity. This project will investigate physiological and genomic responses to
environmental variation in montane bumblebees. In light of evidence for
pollinator declines and widespread expectations for future environmental
changes, results will simultaneously address questions about evolutionary
adaptation, and yield advancements to predict impacts of climate and migration
barriers on a key pollinator group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
combine measurements of physiology and morphology with next-generation genomic
DNA sequencing in wild and laboratory reared populations sampled across
California, Oregon, and Washington to produce several lines of evidence for
adaptation to abiotic gradients. Questions to be addressed include: (1) Does
variation in body and wing morphology across latitude and altitude match
predicted responses to pressures on thermoregulation and flight? (2) Do latitude
and altitude drive genetic change through dispersal limitations, or do genes
exhibit signatures of environmental adaptation? (3) Do laboratory bees reared
from latitude and altitude extremes exhibit differences in flight physiology and
gene expression regulation in laboratory flight challenges?