* 1457614
* SG: Understanding local controls on wood decomposition in a regional context
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Mark Bradford, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2019
* USD 157,801.00

A critical determinant of the carbon balance of forests is the rate at which
dead wood decays. This is determined by the rate at which dead wood is formed
and the rate at which it breaks down, or decomposes. Dead wood is also a hotspot
for other nutrients to accumulate and it is a home for many species of animals,
plants and microbes. Because trees contain a lot of carbon, our understanding of
how the carbon cycle might be changing requires a better understanding of the
wood decomposition process. With that in mind, this project will decompose logs
from five common US tree species across a gradient spanning northeastern to
southeastern US temperate forests. Potential controls on wood decomposition
rates will be manipulated experimentally, such as the density of dead wood and
the types of wood-decomposing fungi growing on the logs. Other factors, such as
soil nutrient content, temperature and moisture will be monitored. The tree logs
will be collected after a year of decay in the field and brought into the
laboratory to assess their decomposition extent and associated wood-decaying
fungi. The data will then be analyzed to determine wood decomposition rates
under the different conditions. Information from this project will be used to
refine predictions of carbon-cycle changes and the effects of environmental
change on forests. The results will also provide guidance to the forest industry
on management of dead wood stocks in forest.The importance of natural wood decay
will be communicated through a collaborative effort with the Peabody Museum of
Natural History, by creating "living" dead wood exhibits for public display and
use in educating visiting middle-school students. The project will also train
both graduate and undergraduate students in research, and will work with high-
school summer interns from groups of students that are underrepresented in
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the processes governing the
decomposition of dead wood is essential for forest management, especially to
mitigate negative effects of declining dead wood stocks on forest productivity,
biodiversity and carbon storage. Controls on decomposition of leaf litter are
better resolved, with climate and litter quality considered predominant
regulators of decomposition rates at global and regional scales. These factors
also regulate decomposition of dead wood, but additional unidentified controls
mean that wood decomposition rates at regional scales are hard to predict with
reasonable certainty. The objective of this work is to identify important,
additional controls, which can then be used to formulate and parameterize carbon
cycle models, where wood decomposition is a critical uncertainty. In single site
studies, the primary factor affecting wood decomposition rates appears to be
fungal community structure. Indeed, the species, strain and interactions of
wood-rot fungi are strong determinants of decay rates. In particular, those
fungi that aggregate their hyphae into thick mycelial cords are considered
dominant agents of decomposition. These hyphal-aggregating fungi are termed non-
unit-restricted fungi because their mycelia proliferate and interconnect
discrete pieces of wood. The connectivity confers a strong competitive
advantage, allowing fungi to rapidly colonize dead wood by accessing a broad
suite of nutrient sources. As such, the working hypothesis of our project is:
The decomposition of downed dead wood proceeds rapidly when non-unit restricted
wood-rot fungi can colonize efficiently. A primary control on colonization, and
hence fungal-mediated decomposition rates, is the proximity and abundance of
coarse woody material (CWM). The working hypothesis will be tested with
observational transects and common-garden experiments across five sites spanning
a regional climate gradient in eastern US temperate forests. Transect studies
will assess the decomposition of logs of five tree species, across pronounced
microclimate gradients, either next to or away from natural CWM. Four common
gardens at each site will comprise zero, medium and high levels of CWM, crossed
with replicates that use plastic edging to disrupt foraging by non-unit
restricted fungi. Competing hypotheses to explain the observed patterns of
decomposition will be evaluated using field and laboratory assays estimating
abiotic factors and the functional abilities of the decomposer communities. The
project will engage high school students through an internship program, where
graduating students who have college offers to pursue STEM majors, and who are
from backgrounds under-represented in higher education, will pursue a paid,
summer research position. The goal is to help redress the low (10%) college
matriculation rate of this group. The project will also involve training at the
graduate and undergraduate levels. Lastly, public outreach to 6th graders will
be developed in collaboration with the Peabody Museum of Natural History, to
expand their educational toolkit for school-visit programs, and to promote
public interest in fungi, CWM and decomposition.