* 1457044
* Collaborative Research: Evolution of Systems Biology Underlying Fruiting Body Development in Fungi
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Jeffrey Townsend, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 03/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

Fungi are important pathogens of agricultural crops and humans, as well as
beneficial root associates maintaining the health of our forests. Most fungi
lack the ability to actively move. Instead, they grow vegetatively as hyphae,
then spread from one location to another using spores that are carried by the
wind. This project compares and contrasts the development of fruiting bodies of
fungi that thrive in different environments, examining how fruiting body
structure has adapted to a variety of environments. The project will identify
genes that are responsible for adaptation of fungal fruiting bodies to different
environments. The resulting understanding of fruiting body structure will yield
basic science for novel control mechanisms that curtail the survival and
dispersal of pathogenic spores. The proposed project will reach beyond the
advancement of fundamental scientific research to benefit society by building on
a successful outreach program that supports an environmental venture of fungal
fruiting body cultivation at local urban high schools in New York City and
Philadelphia. In addition, the project will bring fungal biology curricula to
local students, addressing the Michigan state third grade standards, and to the
MSU 4H Children's Garden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shifts in gene
expression underlie the interaction of developmental processes that drive the
differentiation of tissues and the evolution of new morphologies in
multicellular organisms. However, studies of how emergent properties of these
interactions lead to novel, complex phenotypes that elucidate the evolutionary
processes of developmental mechanisms are challenging in complex organisms.
Fungi in the Phylum Ascomycota, a group that includes numerous important plant
and animal pathogens, provide model systems for these studies as they are easily
manipulated, develop fruiting structures with a few well-characterized tissue
types on common media, and have genomic resources that enable comparative and
functional analyses. The proposed research will use comparative transcriptional
profiling and functional characterization coupled with phenotypic analyses to
reveal developmental mechanisms underlying several key morphologies of fungal
fruiting bodies, and to reveal the evolutionary processes by which these
morphological innovations arose and diverged across a set of fungi. The research
will reveal the genetic basis of a greater scope of morphological features of
functional importance, associated with niche adaptation, for fungal fruiting
bodies in the expanded six genera, and identify the roles and interactions of
transcription factors in the evolution of the fruiting body development in two
model species, F. graminearum and N. crassa. As the first systems biological
analysis of developmental divergence in fungi, this research will provide an
insightful comparison to well-known examples of developmental systems in
microbes, plants, and animals. By studying these diverse multicellular systems,
we gain a better understanding of the constraints and potentialities that shape
developmental biology.