* 1457000
* IOS: Acclimation to Hypoxia in Deer Mice
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Kimberly Hammond, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 458,039.00

Deer mice inhabit the broadest altitudinal distribution of any North American
mammal, from below sea level (Death Valley) to above 4000 m where hypoxic
conditions are the norm and the deer mice must adapt their physiology to satisfy
oxygen demand. It appears from recent research that previously described
hemoglobin/genetic adaptations exert very modest effects on oxygen acquisition
and are insufficient alone to explain the success and activity levels of deer
mice at high altitude. Deer mice also display changes in organ sizes (e.g.,
heart, lung) that vary along the altitude gradient and are correlated with
improved aerobic performance necessary for high levels of activity. This project
will investigate the extent to which changes in lung size and function
contribute to the observed increases in activity in adult mice acclimated to
high altitude. Students will participate in all data collection aspects of the
proposed research and contribute to the development of educational modules for
undergraduate classes and outreach efforts to the public and citizen science
workshops in the Southern California region. Results from the study will be
further disseminated through publication in peer-reviewed journals and
presentations at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data from
the principle investigator's lab suggests that the capacity of the lung to
deliver oxygen at high altitude is the first critical limit in the oxygen
cascade and that, in deer mice, the lung has the capacity to remodel to meet
that demand. Such pulmonary plasticity would be highly adaptive if species are
moving upward in elevation as the climate becomes warmer. This project will
therefore test the hypothesis that some animals have the capacity to remodel
lung architecture and optimize function throughout their lives. Changes in the
cardio-pulmonary tissues between the high- and low-altitude acclimated mice will
be assessed through histologic and physiologic assays. Modified gas composition
will be used in direct respirometry tests of lung performance in control
(normoxic) and altitude-acclimated animals. Lung volume, alveolar surface area,
capillary density and blood gas composition will be tested to determine the
extent to which organ size, architecture, and composition changes contribute to
high altitude acclimation. Results from this study will inform our understanding
of how small mammal populations that are forced to move to higher altitudes and
harsh or variable conditions as a result of climate change will cope with their
relocation.