* 1457581
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Phylogenomics of Anthozoa (Cnidaria): new approaches to long-standing problems
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Estefania Rodriguez, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2021
* USD 207,814.00

Worldwide, humans and countless other species are dependent on coral reefs for
shelter, sustenance and livelihoods. Increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide is
causing the world's oceans to become warmer and more acidic, a chemical change
that may prevent corals from forming calcium carbonate skeletons. The fossil
record indicates, however, that some groups of corals have survived similar
environmental crises in past geological eras, and that changes in ocean
chemistry may result in the evolution of different types of skeletons or of
corals that lack skeletons. Understanding these past evolutionary transitions
and the environmental conditions under which they occurred may help scientists
predict the responses of today's reef-building corals to future climate change.
This collaborative project between researchers from Harvey Mudd College, a
Principally Undergraduate Institution, and the American Museum of Natural
History will investigate the evolution of calcium carbonate skeletons in
Anthozoa (corals, sea anemones, and relatives). They will first generate an
extensive time-calibrated molecular phylogeny of the group and then use this
evolutionary framework to study the evolution of skeletal characters. Students
from groups underrepresented in the sciences will participate in this research
through the PI's mentoring of undergraduates at the minority-serving New York
City College of Technology, and the Scripps College Academy, a program for high
school girls in the Los Angeles area. The project will also generate diverse
outreach materials for a public display on corals at the American Museum of
Natural History.

Although previous molecular phylogenetic studies have found strong support for
relationships among some orders of Anthozoa, key regions of the tree remain
poorly resolved, impeding efforts to understand character evolution within the
group. By first sequencing complete genomes from eight distantly related taxa of
Anthozoa researchers will then design a set of Ultra-Conserved Elements (UCEs)
that can be used throughout Anthozoa. UCE sequences will then be generated for
192 Anthozoa species spanning diversity within the group to generate the first
phylogenomic estimate of relationships within the group. The researchers will
then use this phylogenetic tree and a diverse set of comparative methods to
infer the direction, timing and paleoclimatic correlates of evolutionary
transitions in skeletogenesis and other traits within the clade that have
allowed anthozoans to engineer the largest biological structures on the planet.