* 1457859
* Scholarships to Enhance Southern New Jersey High-Tech Workforce
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Linda Head, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2020
* USD 612,823.00

The Scholarships to Enhance Southern New Jersey High-Tech Workforce at Rowan
University provides scholarships for academically talented students in financial
need who are pursing bachelor's degrees in engineering. The project is a
multidisciplinary collaboration of the five engineering departments of the
College of Engineering at Rowan. The scholarship program supports full-time
students who meet financial need and academic merit criteria. A total of 30
scholarships are planned over a five-year period. The program allows Rowan to
offer scholarships to directly address an area of national concern: the shortage
of US graduates trained in STEM related fields. Scholarships for academically
strong engineering students, who may not otherwise be able to afford college,
have an impact on the number of engineering graduates prepared to help national,
regional, and local companies. Talented engineering graduates will directly
impact the Southern New Jersey high-tech workforce and help the US to compete
and innovate in a global economy.

This effort to enhance the Southern New Jersey high-tech workforce builds on
resources available at Rowan University. The project utilizes Rowan's
Engineering Learning Community (ELC). The ELC is modeled after research-based
best practices for living and learning communities, which have been shown to
enhance academic achievement, retention and educational attainment, especially
for first year students. The ELC students pursue their academic curriculum with
a blended co-curriculum involving a theme, concept, or common subject matter
while living together in a reserved part of a residence hall. ELC faculty
members and upper-level ELC students provide mentoring. Assessment and
evaluation will provide insight into the retention benefits of student
scholarships, living and learning communities, in-dorm student
mentoring/tutoring, and faculty mentoring/advising. Lessons learned and
effective practices that emerge from the program evaluation data will be
disseminated widely to the engineering education community and help enlarge the
knowledge base regarding attributes and practices of successful scholarship
programs of this type.