* 1457675
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Impacts of Ice Storms on Forest Ecosystems of the Northeastern United States
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Charles Driscoll, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2020
* USD 1,219,862.00

Ice storms are powerful winter weather events common to temperate and boreal
forest regions worldwide. These storms are capable of catastrophic short-term
ecological and socio-economic impacts on forest ecosystems due to branch
breakage and toppling of trees under heavy ice loads. Their legacy can also
persist over the longer-term through changes in forest productivity and species
composition; the virulence of forest pests and pathogens; and increased risk of
fire due to greater fire fuel loads. Despite their influential role in shaping
forest ecosystems, knowledge of ice storms and their impacts remains limited.
The temporally and spatially unpredictable nature of ice storms has largely
confined past investigations to case studies following major storms. The
severity of ice storms in the northeastern United States, Eastern Canada and
elsewhere has heightened the need for greater clarity on the role of these
storms in shaping future forests. Scientists at the Hubbard Brook Experimental
Forest in NH will conduct a multi-faceted program of research that includes a
novel ice storm manipulation experiment, long-term field data, and climate and
ecosystem modeling. This research will provide the scientific community, land
managers and the concerned public greater insight on the impacts of these
powerful, and extreme winter weather events on the ecosystem dynamics of
northern hardwood forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrated program of
research is built on a foundation of previous work at Hubbard Brook and the
region, including a pilot ice storm experiment conducted in 2012; a significant
body of research on the forest ecosystem response to the severe "Ice Storm of
1998"; and a new set of historical climate reconstructions which allow for the
quantification of the meteorological conditions that lead to ice storms.
Specifically, the investigators will: (i) develop high-resolution global climate
model simulations to evaluate the severity, frequency and extent of ice storms
under future changing climate; (ii) evaluate short-term (2-3 year) ecosystem
response to four different intensities and two frequencies of experimental ice
events; (iii) evaluate longer-term (17+ years) response of forest vegetation to
the 1998 storm; (iv) use results from the experiment and the long term
observations to refine an established forest ecosystem biogeochemical model to
simulate ice-storm disturbance; and (v) use the results from the high-resolution
climate simulations to drive the improved biogeochemical model to project future
ice storm impacts on ecosystem fluxes and pools of carbon and nitrogen in a
northern hardwood forest. This research will be integrated with broader impacts
involving: (i) the use of sensor technology to engage STEM students with
disabilities in the study; (ii) a dialog on the impacts of ice storms with local
stakeholders; (iii) the production of a video on the making of an ice storm and
relevance to extreme events and climate change; and (iv) undergraduate, graduate
and post-doctoral training.