* 1457794
* Collaborative Research: Linking microbial diversity, gene expression, and the transformation of terrestrial organic matter in major U.S. rivers
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* George Aiken, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2020
* USD 825,981.00

Rivers and streams are the major conduits for transporting of Earth's carbon
from the land to the oceans. Much of the carbon is in a dissolved organic form,
and it serves as food for aquatic microorganisms. The challenge is that the
chemical diversity of dissolved organic carbon is very great, and the genetic
diversity of aquatic microbes is also immense. Accordingly, this project will
use state-of-the art genomic methods to study the diversity and specific
functions of these microorganisms. The results will fill a critical gap in
understanding the specific metabolic capabilities of these microbes and how they
carry out the key ecosystem function of transforming and metabolizing highly
complex, riverborne dissolved organic carbon. The data that will be collected
are important for predicting the impacts of land-use change, nutrient use, and
shifting climate on freshwater quality across the USA. The research involves a
collaboration with the Yale Peabody Museum Evolution program for inner-city New
Haven high-school students to train interns and develop an interactive museum
exhibit on U.S. rivers. The project will also train a postdoctoral researcher,
and undergraduate and graduate students, including members of underrepresented
groups in science.

The goal of the project is to describe interactions and feedbacks between
watershed diversity, microbial functional diversity, and dissolved organic
matter (DOM) chemistry in 36 large U.S. rivers, and to experimentally link gene
expression with DOM degradation in five of them (the Altamaha, Columbia,
Mississippi, St. Lawrence and Yukon). River sampling will be conducted in
collaboration with a U.S. Geological Survey stream network. This research will
address the concept that microbial genetic mechanisms in river ecosystems are
closely linked to climate and landscape features that control river
environmental conditions, particularly DOM quality. This concept implies that
microbial function is shaped by DOM composition, climate, and river chemistry.
These shaping forces alter the functional genetic capabilities required for
competitive success within riverine microbial communities, and, thus, drive
shifts in functional gene expression and phylogenetic composition, that, in
turn, increase the efficiency of DOM metabolism and biogeochemical processes.
Three hypotheses are to be tested: (1) the functional genetic composition and
gene expression patterns of riverine microbial communities are correlated with
the composition of riverine DOM; (2) community gene expression patterns vary
predictably in response to shifts in the available forms of DOM; and, (3) the
composition of riverine bacterial communities correlates with the composition of
riverine DOM over space and time, and varies with watershed-specific climatic
factors. The first hypothesis will be addressed with an empirical study of
microbial community gene content (metagenomics), gene expression
(metatranscriptomics), and DOM diversity (high-resolution analytical chemistry)
during four seasons in five rivers that encompass a broad range of DOM
composition. The second hypothesis will be addressed with an experimental study
to identify active organisms and genes expressed by freshwater microbial
metabolism. The third hypothesis will be addressed with an empirical study of
microbes, DOM, and river chemistry in 36 major U.S. rivers. Statistical
approaches being developed through a Microsoft-sponsored international working
group (BioGeoChemistry Data System) will be applied to link microbial and DOM
data.