* 1457333
* Collaborative Research: Testing eco-evolutionary trophic cascades in aquatic ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Eric Palkovacs, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2019
* USD 276,244.00

Changes to predator communities are occurring on a global scale. Because top
predators can exert strong pressures on other species in a community, it is
important to understand the consequences of their losses or gains. Will re-
introduction of wolves alter current elk or moose populations? Will the loss of
marine predators cause fish communities to collapse? These expectations often
generate controversy. This project tests how evolutionary responses of prey to
their predators might alter commonly-expected results of cascading effects
within food chains. Predation, trophic cascades, and evolution are features of
all natural ecosystems. Understanding how these processes interact is
fundamental to interpreting past ecosystem changes and to predicting future
changes. The results from this study will directly inform many of the
controversies attending management of large predators. High school teachers and
undergraduate students with teaching aspirations will be introduced to the
ecological relevance of evolution through hands-on involvement in the research.
This teacher training program will target teachers and students from
traditionally underrepresented groups who work, or plan to work, in high needs
schools with diverse and underprivileged students.

The study of eco-evolutionary dynamics considers how ongoing evolution interacts
with ecological interactions to shape population, community and ecosystem
processes. Intriguing case studies suggest the effects of contemporary evolution
on ecology can be large, but this area of research lacks theory that would
extend its general importance. This research serves as a potential general
application of the broader synthetic theory of eco-evolutionary dynamics through
study of trophic cascades. It will provide an initial test of the requisite
conditions of eco-evolutionary trophic cascades and quantitatively compare the
magnitude and pattern of their effects to those of classical density- and
behaviorally-mediated trophic cascades to understand their importance. Field
surveys, manipulative experiments, and common garden experiments will be
integrated to test the following predictions: 1) prey feeding traits in wild
populations differ predictably in response to predator presence or absence, 2)
feeding trait differences are heritable, 3) heritable differences in prey traits
affect the density and species composition of prey resources, and 4) effects on
prey resources cascade down food chains to influence primary producers. These
conditions will be tested using recently introduced populations of Western
mosquitofish inhabiting ponds with or without predatory largemouth bass.
Mosquitofish are a classic system for studying both trophic cascades and
contemporary evolution, and preliminary evidence supports evolutionary trade-
offs between predator avoidance and resource competition. Numerous wild
populations, small body size, short life span, and easy husbandry make this
species well suited for the combined field and laboratory assays required for
this research.