* 1457040
* Function and Regulation of Leptin in Mediating Stress-induced Energy Expenditure
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Russell Borski, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 631,098.00

Leptin is an important hormone involved in a wide range of physiological
processes. Despite a wealth of literature regarding the role of leptin in
regulating energy expenditure in mammals, much less is known about the metabolic
functions in other vertebrates. To better understand the evolution of this
important hormone, the studies supported by this award will identify the
metabolic action(s) and regulation of two leptin paralogs (Leptin A and Leptin
B) in the tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus), a well-established endocrine and
osmoregulatory model. The project will assess the metabolic and endocrine
responses associated with stress-induced leptin signaling, functionally evaluate
the metabolic effects of two leptins, and identify mechanisms which elicit the
leptin response. Further, these studies will evaluate regulatory interactions of
leptin with other stress-induced metabolic hormones (e.g. catecholamines,
glucocorticoids) as part of the integrated endocrine stress response. In
addition to advancing knowledge of leptin biology and control of metabolism in
vertebrates, the project will incorporate graduate, undergraduate and high
school students in research activities with a focus on developing an
understanding of experimental designs, whole animal physiology, molecular and
cell biology and endocrinology. The Principal Investigator will also work with
the Science House at NCSU, and the NC Mathematics and Science Education Network
Pre-College Program, to enhance K-12 STEM education and the recruitment of
under-represented students into life sciences programs. A second outreach
component will be provided through the Nature Research Center at the NC Museum
of Natural Sciences (Daily Planet Broadcast) to develop teaching modules to
foster greater public interest in science and the biology of fishes. Studies of
stress related energy expenditure in tilapia, one of the fastest growing food
sectors and a prominent source of animal protein worldwide, can improve
management practices for culturing this fish and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make two key advances toward
understanding leptin biology in vertebrates. First, using a comparative teleost
model a detailed understanding of the function(s) of leptin in regulating
metabolism in ectotherms will be provided. Secondly, these studies will
establish a critical role for leptin in mediating stress responses. These
studies will determine the function and regulation of multiple leptins in
teleost fishes. Moreover, examination of two leptin paralogs may reveal sub- or
neo-functionalization of a major cytokine hormone following the teleostean (3R)
genome duplication event, providing an important case study for understanding
divergent gene fates. Collectively, these studies will provide a fundamental
link between leptin, metabolism and catabolic stress in vertebrates. Results
from the studies will be disseminated through publication in peer-reviewed
journals and through presentations at scientific meetings.