* 1457804
* Collaborative Research: Developing integrated trait-based scaling theory to predict community change and forest function in light of global change
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Van Savage, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2019
* USD 200,264.00

Tropical forests store an enormous amount of carbon, with the Amazon alone
accounting for 10% of the Earth's primary productivity. Changes in tropical
forest productivity in response to drought are an important feedback in the
carbon cycle; yet, we currently have a very incomplete understanding of how
biomass, productivity, and species composition of these forests respond to
changes in temperature and water availability. This project will take a new
approach to understanding tropical forest drought responses by focusing on the
relationships between plant functional traits, metabolic scaling theory, and
climate drivers. Functional traits are easily measureable metrics that allow us
to better predict plant growth, reproduction, and forest change. Metabolic
scaling theory describes the relationships between the size of an organism, its
growth rate, and temperature. This project will attempt to significantly advance
our understanding of how tropical ecosystems respond to changes in temperature
and precipitation. Researchers will use scaling theory to provide a predictive
framework that links forest responses to drought with well understood plant
traits measured using novel ground and remote sensing technology.

This project will assess changes in productivity in response to drought, as well
as tree mortality and forest dieback. This will be accomplished using both field
measurements as well as pre-existing LIDAR and hyperspectral remote sensing data
from forests across an elevation gradient in the Peruvian Amazon. Specifically,
researchers will use a suite of plant functional traits to provide detailed, 3D
maps of forest canopy structure and the spatial distribution of traits. The
novel scaling theory developed with these data (Trait Driver Theory, TDT) will
then be used to predict ecosystem function from changes in trait distributions
over time in response to drought. The project will also involve a field
experiment to simulate drought with throughfall collectors to help parameterize
TDT model functions. The TDT results will also be compared to predictions from
the ecosystem demography model ED2. Model code, images, and algorithms will be
made available in public repositories, and any new plant functional trait data
will be added to global databases. The project will provide training for several
post-doctoral researchers, undergraduate students, and K-12 science teachers and
will use the GEM Network Geoweb Portal for outreach to the general public.