* 1457371
* Using replicated empirical networks to understand drivers of ecosystem structure and stability
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Kevin Lafferty, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2020
* USD 547,149.00

Science still does not understand the basic drivers of ecosystem structure
(e.g., complexity) or how an ecosystem's structure affects its ability to resist
disturbance. Understanding these relationships is necessary for predicting the
response of ecosystems to many kinds of disruption (e.g. species extinction,
invasion, habitat loss). This conceptual shortcoming thus prevents the efficient
use of scarce conservation resources by limiting our ability to identify and
conserve systems most sensitive to human disturbance. By comparing ecosystem
structure across a series of islands that vary in ecosystem size and
productivity - this project will examine the extent to which these basic
properties drive ecosystem structure and how that structure determines ecosystem
stability. This work should lead to broad management insight on the importance
of environmental characteristics in determining the impact of species removals
and invasions. This project will train multiple graduate students,
undergraduates, and a postdoctoral researcher, with a focus on underrepresented
groups. Furthermore, through partnerships with the university Kids in Nature
program, the researchers will also engage grade school children, and train
elementary school teachers in ecology and invasive species.

Ecological complexity makes it difficult to identify general patterns in nature,
such as community stability. To understand what drives stability, one could
measure changes in systems over time across environmental gradients. Another
approach has been to consider how system structure affects community stability.
However, it is unlikely that structure and environmental gradients are
independent, because environmental factors might alter system structure as well
as their stability. To understand how ecosystem size and productivity influences
ecosystem stability, 23 high-resolution food-webs from a series of Pacific
islets that vary independently in size and productivity will be assembled and
compared. A suite of mathematical modeling approaches will then create
predictions for how variation in food-web structure affects food-web stability.
These model-generated predictions of stability will then be tested against
observed changes in food-web structure before and after the removal of a common
omnivore, the rat (Rattus rattus). These results can then be used to evaluate
the relative importance of ecosystem size, productivity, and food-web structure,
in predicting system stability. Cumulatively, these efforts will help identify
not only how environmental characteristics structure communities but also the
extent to which they drive system-level responses to perturbation.