* 1457860
* Collaborative Research: Calibration of a new approach to reconstruct ancient bottom water oxygen levels
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Bruce Corliss, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2017
* USD 30,404.00

Changes in dissolved oxygen availability strongly influence biological and
geochemical processes in marine systems. However, marine oxygen concentrations
often co-vary with other environmental factors, such as organic carbon flux,
confounding paleoceanographic proxies for dissolved oxygen concentration in most
deep-sea settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project, involving
researchers and students from Indiana State University and Duke University,
seeks to develop a proxy for bottom-water oxygen levels based on the shell
morphology of benthic foraminifera. The research will include a sea-going
expedition off San Diego, CA, to collect samples. The researchers will use
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and image analysis tools for quantitative
analysis of both archived and newly collected samples to calibrate the
relationship between dissolved oxygen and pore densities of living epifaunal
deep sea taxa. Specifically, they will determine: 1) how sensitive pore density
is to small changes in oxygenation, 2) how pore characteristics change within
and across obvious taxonomic boundaries, and 3) the range of dissolved oxygen
that is best for each species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding supports students
at both institutions, including their participation on the cruise. The research
team will also develop a cruise blog that will be featured in an interactive
exhibit at Indiana State University.