* 1457361
* Interseismic Slip Deficit at the Edge of a Locked Patch: Shumagin Islands, Alaska
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Michael West, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2019
* USD 353,902.00

Alaska is a premier location for studying what controls variations in seismic
activity along a margin where tectonic plates converge. This is because the
width of the seismic zone is known to differ between segments along the Alaskan
subduction zone. The Alaska Peninsula segment includes the transition from a
wide, locked region on the plate interface to a dominantly creeping section. The
fact that a chain of islands&lt;br/&gt;runs across this segment provides an
ideal setting for measuring deformation, and these data will be used to
determine the distribution of recent slip (or lack thereof) along the plate
boundary fault. This is the first time that a detailed view of how the
seismogenic zone varies from a locked to a creeping section will be obtained.
The findings will inform assessment of earthquake and tsunami hazards, both in
relation to the Alaska Peninsula and along the US west coast due to trans-
Pacific tsunamis. Investigators will conduct public lectures and work with a
teacher in the school district of the local community of Sand Point, Alaska, in
the Shumagin Islands. Lesson materials will be developed on the topics of
earthquakes and tsunamis in Alaska, subduction and its impact on their local
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GPS measurements will be made at sites that
have not been surveyed since the 1990s, providing new highly precise plate
velocities. Most of the sites have been measured once, and the new measurements
will come &gt;20 years after the first, resulting in velocity uncertainties that
should be &lt;0.5 mm/yr. These data will be used to estimate the distribution of
locked and creeping parts of the plate interface fault, and spatial changes in
the seismogenic zone will be compared with spatial changes in seismicity and
properties of the&lt;br/&gt;downgoing plate. Results will address how abrupt the
along-strike transition is, from the wide locked region of the Semidi segment to
the much narrower and/or creep-dominated locked region of the Shumagin segment.
The structure within the partially locked region of the Shumagin segment will be
addressed through modeling. The study will also investigate potential
correlation between observed slip variations and features on the overriding or
downgoing plates, the reflection character of the plate interface itself,
seismicity patterns, or other geologic observations.&lt;br/&gt;