* 1457624
* Comparative biogeography and diversification of birds on Madagascar
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* James Cheverud, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2019
* USD 690,702.00

Islands are natural laboratories for studying the evolutionary and ecological
processes of how species colonize and diversify in novel environments. The
island of Madagascar is a biodiversity hotspot that is renowned for its
distinctive avifauna -- an exceptional diversity of bird species found nowhere
else. This project uses Madagascar as a model to address a fundamental question
in biology: why some groups become much more diverse than others over time. The
current bird fauna of Madagascar is the result of several independent
colonizations from surrounding regions over historical time. Despite arriving in
Madagascar millions of years ago, only half the native lineages have
subsequently speciated within this large island. This project will focus on a
comprehensive investigation of the poorly-studied bird diversity on Madagascar
to determine what causes some groups to diversify while others fail to speciate.
The study will produce a more accurate assessment of species diversity and
diversification patterns, which is crucial for subsequent conservation measures
in this highly threatened landscape. This project will promote international
collaborations, education and training from high-school to postdoctoral stages,
conservation policy, and public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a
strong collaboration of international scientists of diverse backgrounds and
expertise, this project will examine all 43 endemic terrestrial avian lineages,
including 14 independent radiations, using phylogenetic, biogeographic, and
phenotypic data. This study has three main objectives. First, a robust
foundation of systematic and biogeographic information for Malagasy avian
lineages and their close relatives will be developed to provide more accurate
assessments of species diversity within Madagascar, as well as insight into the
timing and routes of colonizations. Second, analyses of how and why lineages
change in ecology and morphology upon colonization of novel environments will be
conducted. These analyses will include large-scale characterization of
morphology, plumage, and climatic niche across Malagasy endemic species and
their continental relatives to determine the importance of shared and clade-
specific evolutionary responses to common environmental settings. Third,
predictability of within-island speciation and adaptive radiation will be
determined. The research will investigate the probability of radiation after
colonization as a function of numerous predictors, including evolutionary
lability of trophic morphology, environmental tolerance, and the intrinsic
"speciation potential" of individual clades. This project is a novel approach
towards a comprehensive analysis of a biota and has broad implications for
understanding the disparity in species richness across the evolutionary tree of
life.