* 1457954
* Immigrants, Entrepreneurs, and Urban Redevelopment in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Sookhee Oh, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 03/31/2019
* USD 137,314.00

Ethnic enclaves are no longer socially isolated from the mainstream economy and
may hold the key to reversing the economic decline of urban areas or aggravating
social inequality within the metropolis. Even so, research on the economic
development of U.S. immigration gateways and ?global cities? has paid scant
attention to how new immigrant elites in these enclaves mobilize transnational
capital and work in collaboration with public officials and economic development
organizations to promote land intensification and development in economically-
stagnant neighborhoods. This research examines the emergence of pro-growth
coalitions made up of immigrant entrepreneurs, political leaders, large-scale
developers, and transnational investors from the Pacific Rim that have built
their fortunes around luxury condos, office buildings, high-end restaurants, and
other profitable ventures in fast-growing ethnic enclave economies. It will
evaluate how such economic development ties in with the commercialization of
culture, the privatization and fortressing of public spaces, environmental
damage, heightened segregation between the rich and the poor, and impacts on
workers and residents, The study involves an intensive case study of two highly-
developed ethnic enclave economies in the Korean entrepreneurial center of
Koreatown and the Chinese core of Monterey Park, Los Angeles--both of which have
experienced rapid growth and (re)development as a result of their ties to the
global economy. The findings will inform local government officials and
policymakers regarding working with immigrant leaders on issues of economic
development and devising strategies for balanced growth to reduce
overdevelopment, environmental damage and interracial conflict.

The main objective of this project is to identify the main characteristics of
the immigrant elite, their strategies for promoting their agenda to the local
government, and the resulting impact on social relations and inequality in a
racially-diverse metropolis. Data come from 120 semi-structured interviews with
the major leaders for and against development, including transnational agents,
local elite, public and quasi-public authorities, community-based organizations,
and residents/ activists. Data also include census and other secondary
materials, which describe the steady progression of enclave growth, the
political characteristics and influence of residents and businesses, and the
demographic backdrop for gentrification, displacement and potential neighborhood
conflicts. The findings will advance understanding of the politics of land use,
investment and development which are increasingly linked to economies beyond
U.S. borders as a result of real estate investment from overseas, and how this
can delocalize decision-making processes away from municipal governments and
complicate local growth control efforts.

&#8195;