* 1457631
* Affording Opportunities for Sustained Success of STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Donald Ott, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* John Jackman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 638,676.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at the University of Akron in
Akron, Ohio will provide scholarships to science, mathematics, engineering, or
technology (STEM) students with demonstrated financial need and academic talent.
These scholars will pursue bachelor's degrees in the fields of Biomedical
Engineering, Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Civil Engineering,
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Biology, Mathematics, Chemistry or Geology.
Students from Appalachia, the most economically disadvantaged area in Ohio, will
be actively recruited. Through the program, scholarship recipients will develop
personal and professional skills to ensure that they will be successful in the
workplace. The program allows the University of Akron to offer scholarships to
directly address an area of national concern: maintaining US competitiveness in
high technology industries. Scholarships for academically strong students, who
may not otherwise be able to afford college, will increase the number of
graduates prepared to support national, regional, and local companies. The
success of the program will produce a well-trained workforce that will
contribute to the economic growth of Ohio and the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will provide a range of student support
activities including a STEM-specific learning community, cohort specific
laboratories, a team building educational event, cohort specific academic
advising and mentoring; and research specific course opportunities for
scholarship recipients. These collective support and programmatic activities
will increase the retention and graduation rates of students. Each student will
have both an academic advisor and STEM faculty advisor. In the first two years,
a learning community will be used to facilitate interaction between students
during both the academic year and a weeklong laboratory and team building
activity. During their junior year, students will meet in a one-credit course to
plan an interdisciplinary design project, as well as receive career planning and
advising. The scholars' projects will be completed in a one-credit course during
the senior year. Projects will address a biotechnology or environmental
application. Assessment and evaluation will provide insight into the retention
benefits of student scholarships, career development activities, and faculty
mentoring and advising. Lessons learned and effective practices that emerge from
the program evaluation data will be disseminated widely to the STEM education
community and help increase widespread understanding of the attributes and
practices of successful student scholarship and support programs.