* 1457017
* OPUS: Biogeochemistry of Amazonian Terrestrial Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Eric Davidson, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2018
* USD 196,822.00

Deforestation, agricultural expansion and climate change are significant threats
to the integrity of ecosystems in the Amazon Basin of South America. The effects
of these changes on the cycling of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and other
chemical elements that are essential nutrients for plant and animal life
determine how fast vegetation regrows after forests are disturbed, the degree to
which various agricultural practices are sustainable, the amounts and types of
greenhouse gases that are emitted from soils, and the amount of pollution in
groundwater and rivers. Over the last 22 years, the principal investigator of
this project has worked with scientists and students from many countries on
specific research projects in different parts of the Amazon Basin. Early work
showed how important the cycling of soil nutrients is for sustaining cattle
pastures with few surviving trees in them, for young re-growing forests, and for
older (less disturbed) forests. A big experiment was then conducted where some
rain was diverted from an older forest, with the results showing how important
water availability is, even in places where it otherwise seems so abundant.
Finally, the focus of the most recent research has been on the impacts of more
intensive agriculture in the soy and corn cropping systems that have
increasingly replaced forests in some parts of the Amazon, along with the role
that fire plays in the degradation of forests in the southern part of the Basin.
Changes in the Amazon are large scale and rapid, which presents both challenges
and opportunities for research. The current project is designed specifically to
try and link all of the prior research of the investigator in this region for
addressing two main questions. First, how do the relative amounts of carbon,
nitrogen and phosphorus affect plant growth and the sustainable management of
forests, cattle pastures and crop systems across the Amazon Basin? Second, what
combinations of these land uses are the most sustainable and how might this
change as the climate changes and fire becomes more widespread, as is predicted?
In addition to a peer-reviewed monograph for scientific audiences, the
investigate will write a book about the importance of nutrient cycling for the
sustainability management of Amazonian forests and farms that is intended for a
non-specialist audience and will be published in English, Portuguese and
Spanish. The book will use real examples of cattle ranching, small-holder
farming, large-scale farming, and various types of forest management across the
climate gradients of the Amazon Basin, weaving together narratives and data for
each.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major focus of this effort is the identification of
circumstances where deforestation, farming and fire affect the balance of soil
available nitrogen and phosphorus and their relative importance for plant growth
and carbon storage in highly contrasting, but representative, ecosystems.
Variation in the ratios of carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus is the presumed key
that will be pursued. As agriculture and beef production intensify, management
of nutrients will become increasingly important and challenging across the
entire region. This project will synthesize data and study results from the past
quarter century that are central to addressing this issue. The investigator is
in a unique position to provide accessible, reliable, important and enjoyable
reading for a wide audience on the topics of natural resource management,
environmental science and sustainability in the Amazon.