* 1457865
* Improving Undergraduate Engineering Education through Student-Centered, Active and Cooperative Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Ning Fang, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 03/31/2021
* USD 624,642.00

The Improving Undergraduate Engineering Education through Student-Centered,
Active and Cooperative Learning project at Utah State University involves a
multi-fold plan to increase the number, diversity, and quality of engineers
entering the workforce. The project will provide four-year scholarships to 26
undergraduate students majoring in Mechanical Engineering, Aerospace
Engineering, Civil Engineering, and Environmental Engineering. The project
responds to the President's Council on Jobs and Competitiveness' call for more
engineers to meet the nation's technological workforce needs. The scholarships
will allow talented and financially needy students to reduce the time spent
working to cover tuition and expenses and devote time to study and other
activities beneficial to students' ability to graduate and enter the engineering
profession. To broaden participation, the project will include recruitment
through entities which target economically disadvantaged students and
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Informed by recommendations from
the National Research Council's "How People Learn" study, the program will
institute learning communities, organized between two departments led by faculty
mentors. The program will take advantage of existing student educational support
and professional development services including: supplemental instruction
(tutoring &amp; peer study groups), undergraduate research, field trips,
internships and co-ops, and career counseling. Further, they will increase use
of research-proven instructional practices (such as problem-based learning and
project-based learning) in several engineering classes to enhance the learning
environment for all students, not just program scholars. The program will offer
seminars to College of Engineering faculty to promote adoption of research-
proven pedagogies and improve teaching and learning in all six College
departments. Formative and summative evaluation will be performed by an external
evaluator. The project will provide information on program outcomes and lessons
learned from the project to the K-16 STEM education community nationwide by
dissemination through journals, conferences, and web resources.