* 1457943
* COSMOS: Creating Opportunities in Science and Mathematics for Occidental Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Scott Bogue, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 07/31/2021
* USD 726,791.00

The United States faces a national need for a significant increase of the number
of American scientists in the workforce. This NSF Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Occidental College
will address this need and contribute to the national effort to produce more
STEM graduates by providing financial, academic, and personal support to
academically-talented and financially needy students majoring in the STEM fields
of Biology, Biochemistry, Chemistry, Cognitive Science, Geology, Mathematics and
Physics. The COSMOS project (Creating Opportunities in Science and Mathematics
for Occidental Students) will support three annual cohorts of eight sophomore
students who are academically talented but in financial need with scholarship
awards of up to $8,000 each per year. The primary focal points of COSMOS are
recruitment, retention and leadership development of students who major and
graduate in the aforementioned STEM disciplines. The COSMOS program will
increase opportunities for these students to enter the STEM workforce as leaders
by enhancing the academic, advising and research infrastructures to mentor
students at the institution from their first year as undergraduates through
graduation. COSMOS leverages federal funds to support students and broaden
participation in high-impact practices at Occidental such as summer
undergraduate research opportunities, a first-year seminar course in STEM
content, supplemental instruction, community outreach and active mentoring by
specially selected and trained faculty and student
peers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COSMOS initiatives will work in concert with
existing and strengthened support services at Occidental. The investigators will
research and assess the effectiveness of the various components of the project,
considered individually and working in combination with each other. Their
findings will add to the overall knowledge base of STEM education and will help
create a national model leading to productive student intervention strategies,
which can be shared with and replicated at other institutions. The
investigations will provide new insights related to understanding and improving
successes of underrepresented and/or low income students, thereby broadening
participation by expanding diversity in STEM fields, especially at liberal arts
colleges. COSMOS has a robust evaluation plan with formative and summative
components, organized around a clear logic model and implemented by an
independent evaluator. There are multiple articulated metrics, outcomes and
quantifiable data that will be used to measure overall success of COSMOS in
increasing the number and diversity of academically talented and financially
disadvantage majors and graduates in STEM fields at Occidental College.