* 1457134
* Scholars Award:   Calculating the American Way: Computing Productivity in Transatlantic Relations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Corinna Schlombs, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 90,114.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
transatlantic transfers of US productivity technology and culture from the 1920s
to the 1960s with a focus on their adaption in Germany. To better understand the
role of US capitalism in transatlantic relations, it examines how productivity
shaped the labor-management relations that characterize modern industrialized
nations. The results of this research will eventually be published in a book
that will provide an historical perspective to questions concerning economic
competitiveness. It will promote a deeper understanding of the historical,
cultural, and political roots of the liberal and social economic systems on
either side of the Atlantic, and it will assess their relative strengths and
weaknesses. The results will serve to shed light on current issues, such as how
labor standards around the globe affect national competitiveness. The PI will
present the results of her research at academic conferences, and she will seek
to contribute to a better public understanding of the role of science and
technology in transatlantic relations through public lectures as a Speaker in
the Humanities program of the New York Council for the Humanities, and through
the placement of op-ed articles in the local and national press.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this
project is located at the intersection of science and technology studies and the
histories of computing, business and foreign relations. As such, it is well
positioned to examine the modes of circulation of productivity ideas and
technologies across the Atlantic, from the individual endeavors before WWII to
the government-mediated programs after the war. Doing so will contribute to a
better understanding of why, despite increasing globalization, heterogeneity
persists among western industrialized countries. It will contribute to a new
chronology of the histories of computing and technology by integrating the
decades before and after WWII; instead of assuming that World War II was a
watershed moment, this project traces political, cultural and technical
continuities and changes from the prewar to the postwar period. The project will
also link together a diversity of actors including government officers,
corporate executives and engineers, labor advisors and trade union delegates on
both sides of the Atlantic. In doing so, it will reveal a complex web of public
and private diplomacy, and it will provide new insights into how the circulation
of productivity technology shaped mutual perceptions of social and industrial
relations on either side of the Atlantic.