* 1457753
* Functional, Genomic, and Evolutionary Analysis of Chemical Courtship Signals in Euglossine Bees
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Santiago Ramirez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2020
* USD 735,887.00

Approximately 80% of flowering plants on Earth exhibit adaptations for
pollination by insects, mostly bees, and thus the majority of terrestrial
ecosystems depend on bee pollination services. Like most insects, bees rely more
on chemical signals than on any other sensory modality to locate and identify
mates. Understanding how bees use chemicals to communicate with each other, and
how they detect and encode plant-derived volatile chemicals, is critical for
studying and protecting valuable pollination services. Euglossine bees include
some of the most important wild insect pollinators of tropical America. Male
euglossine bees do not produce their own pheromones, but instead gather and
accumulate chemical compounds from plants to subsequently present to females
during courtship display. Male-gathered chemical signals are divergent among
closely related species, suggesting that they play a key role in the maintenance
and formation of new species. This project investigates how euglossine bees use
chemical compounds to locate and identify genetically compatible mates, and aims
to characterize the genetic mechanisms of chemical sensory detection and
encoding. Teasing apart the evolution and function of chemical signaling in
economically important bee species will help us understand and ultimately
preserve the vital functions these animals provide to society.

Most insects rely on chemical signals (semiochemicals) to gain precise
information on the location, identity, and quality of potential mates. Despite
the importance of semiochemicals across the insect phylogeny, the mechanisms
that control signal chemistry and signal detection remain poorly understood.
Moreover, whether insect semiochemicals mediate reproductive isolation,
speciation, and lineage diversification remains surprisingly unexplored given
the vast diversity and ecological dominance of insects on Earth. Euglossine bees
do not produce their own pheromones, but instead gather and accumulate compounds
from orchid flowers, fungi, and other resources. This project aims to (1)
describe the diversity of semiochemical phenotypes across the phylogeny of
euglossine bees, (2) investigate whether and how divergent selection on
chemosensory traits mediates reproductive isolation, and (3) characterize the
genomic architecture and functional diversity of olfactory receptor genes
expressed in antennae of related species of euglossine bees. The research will
integrate diverse techniques from multiple disciplines, including behavioral
ecology, chemical ecology, population genetics, functional genomics, and
neuroethology to answer specific questions about the genetic basis, function,
and evolution of chemosensory communication.