* 1457650
* Collaborative Research: Does a transition in nitrogen fixation strategy explain the latitudinal distribution of nitrogen-fixing trees?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2020
* Steven Perakis, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2020
* USD 972,488.00

Nitrogen (N) is a necessary nutrient for plant growth. Although the atmosphere
mainly consists of nitrogen gas (N2), this form of N is extremely stable. Most
plants can't directly access N2 and their rate of growth is limited by the
presence of available N in the soil. Therefore, some species of trees have
evolved a symbiosis with a special class of bacteria that fix atmospheric N2 and
convert it into a plant available form. These N-fixing trees have abundant
access to N, but there is a cost to this symbiotic association: these trees
provide carbon to bacteria and therefore sacrifice some of their own growth to
maintain the symbiosis. As a result, N-fixing trees comprise only a small
proportion of tree species on earth. In theory, N fixation is only advantageous
in ecosystems that have very limited amounts of N in the soil. N-limited forests
tend to be more common at high latitudes than at lower latitudes (the tropics
and subtropics), but curiously, N-fixing trees are actually most common at lower
latitudes. In fact, N-fixing trees are ten times less abundant at higher
latitudes than at lower latitudes. Why is this the case? This proposal will test
a potential explanation. The "differential regulation hypothesis" states that
variation in the degree to which N-fixing trees regulate N fixation can explain
the pattern. N-fixing trees that rapidly adjust N-fixation to meet N demand
should be more abundant, as is the case in lower-latitude forests. In contrast,
species that cannot regulate N-fixation should be less abundant, as observed in
higher-latitude forests. This project will measure the extent to which the
regulation of N-fixation actually varies across latitudes, as well as the
metabolic costs of regulating N-fixation and the relationship of these costs to
temperature. The results will provide a long sought after explanation for the
distribution of N-fixing trees on earth, which is an essential component of the
growth of forests worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve a
field experiment in forests at different latitudes as well as two greenhouse
experiments. The field experiment will fertilize forests with labeled N to vary
the degree of N limitation and measure the regulation of N fixation in the
field. The experimental locations are Oregon (with Alnus rubra), New York (with
Robinia pseudoacacia), and Hawaii (with Morella faya, Casuarina equisetifolia,
Acacia koa, and Sophora chrysophylla) and span the latitudinal threshold for
N-fixing tree abundance (35Â° N). There are two major types of N fixing symbioses
(actinorhizal and rhizobial) and the field sites were chosen to capture both.
The greenhouse experiments will test a larger number of species and involve more
highly controlled conditions. The greenhouse experiments will also evaluate how
quickly plants can regulate N fixation. The experiments and laboratory analyses
will involve participation of Title 1 high school students as well as
undergraduate and graduate students in New York, California and Oregon.