* 1457846
* Testing UV-B radiation as a proposed driver behind the end-Permian biotic crisis
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,10/31/2020
* Cynthia Looy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 10/31/2020
* USD 193,454.00

The ozone layer plays a vital role in intercepting harmful solar ultraviolet-B
radiation (UV-B) from reaching Earth's surface. However, its effectiveness in
doing so has fluctuated in the past and little is known of the impacts of a
thinning ozone layer on vegetation. Anticipating potential consequences in the
future depends on understanding time intervals with heightened UV stress in the
past. The largest mass extinction in history at the end of the Permian Period
(~252 million years ago) may have been one of these time intervals. Plant fossil
records from this crisis show two odd features worldwide. Many pollen grains
produced by vanishing woodland seed plants were malformed, and proliferating
herbaceous plants (lycopsids) spread their spores frequently as unseparated
clusters of four. Heightened UV exposure is hypothesized to have caused these
abnormalities. Compounds produced by the largest volcanic province in history,
the Siberian Traps, likely caused prolonged or frequent deterioration of the
ozone shield. In this study researchers will test if high UV-B radiation levels
could indeed explain the abnormalities and extinction patterns in plants
observed during the end-Permian biotic crisis. This research is important to
society because it will assess whether future activities weakening the ozone
layer could destabilize forest ecosystems through reproductive failure of
economically important groups of plants. Outreach from this work will raise
public awareness of environmental changes in the past through developing a
publicly accessible educational exhibit and web-module on ecosystems and
extinctions of the Paleozoic Era.

Using growth chamber and germination experiments, the researchers will determine
whether elevated UV-B exposure triggers similar malformations in pollen and
spores as observed in the fossil record, and whether this may lead to
contrasting reproductive success between the tested living relatives of plant
groups impacted by the crisis. They hypothesize high levels of UV-B will have a
negative effect on conifer reproduction, but not severely affect fertility in
lycopsids. In addition, they will also investigate whether UV-induced
developmental responses appeared during times of active volcanism at its very
source. For this, they will analyze end-Permian fossil pollen and spore
assemblages from sediments within the Siberian Traps. Using observations in
combination with a contemporary ecological experimental approach is a novel
approach which will test an important hypothesis in paleoecology and may lend
insight into species response under contemporary abiotic stressors.