* 1457702
* Floristic inventory of a neglected biodiversity hotspot: Myanmar's Northern Forest Complex
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Wayne Law, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2021
* USD 675,000.00

Myanmar's Northern Forest complex hosts the largest remaining tracts of primary
forest in mainland Southeast Asia. The area is recognized as a biodiversity
hotspot with an estimated 6,000 species of which 1,500 species are estimated to
exist nowhere else. However, this poorly known and botanically important region
has been largely closed off to researchers for the past 75 years so the true
extent of plant diversity has yet to be established. This project will conduct
the first intensive botanical inventory of the Hkakaborazi-Hponganrazi region
since the early 20th century and fill a major gap in the understanding of
Southeast Asian plant diversity. Researchers from New York Botanical Garden,
Wildlife Conservation Society, Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh, and the Myanmar
Forest Department will sample broadly throughout the Hkakaborazi-Hponganrazi
region at different times of the year to maximize chances of collecting rare or
narrowly endemic species. Resulting collection and distribution data will be
provided directly to the Myanmar Forest Department for use in planning decisions
within the region. The project will also improve international scientific
infrastructure and collaboration by training botanists and foresters in field
and herbarium techniques and by improving research capacity in Myanmar's Forest
Research Institute herbarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All collected specimens will
be digitized, databased, georeferenced and their data will be made available on
the internet through an open-access Myanmar flora web portal. A taxonomic
checklist of the vascular plant species of Hkakaborazi-Hponganrazi will also be
produced. Collections made as a part of this project will stimulate taxonomic
research on the Myanmar flora by research specialists and support molecular
phylogenetic and ecological studies. Specimen data will also provide the
baseline information required to make planning decisions affecting the Northern
Forest Complex ecosystem, and facilitate broad scale analyses of plant diversity
patterns within Southeast Asia.