* 1457800
* Disentangling the roles of mutation and selection in the evolution of host-repression of transposable elements
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2022
* Erin Kelleher, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/28/2022
* USD 721,094.00

Transposable elements (TEs) are parasites that are found in the DNA of almost
all organisms. They are considered to be selfish genetic elements because they
use host machinery to make copies of themselves and then manage to get these
copies pasted around the host's genome. Because TEs are transmitted from parent
to offspring, they play an important role in genome evolution. They dramatically
expand the size of genomes, rearrange DNA within and among chromosomes, and
modify the activity of individual genes. However, TE infection also harms the
host by mutating, disrupting, and disorganizing DNA. As a consequence, TE
movement can cause host sterility and is associated with the onset and
progression of multiple cancers. Teasing apart the mechanisms of TE regulation,
therefore, is of fundamental importance for human health. Additionally, the
fertility costs of TE infection presents a potential strategy for biological
control of disease vectors, agricultural pests, and invasive species. However,
we know virtually nothing about how TEs adapt or evolve within a host or how a
host evolves in response to TE invasion. This research project takes advantage
of a new TE invasion into an experimental line of fruit flies and allows for an
unprecendented exploration into the evolutionary interactions between a
transposable element and a host.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the
manifold impact of TEs on their hosts, our understanding of how the host-genome
responds to infection remains extremely limited. This research will use the
well-characterized historical invasion of the Drosophila melanogaster genome by
the P-element DNA transposon as a model to examine the evolution of host
repression. The recent occurrence of this invasion, as well as the preservation
of ancestral genetic variation in laboratory strains, provides an unparalleled
opportunity to examine host repression at the three most critical time points:
just before invasion, during invasion, and just after invasion. It also provides
the opportunity to deconstruct this evolutionary process in the laboratory and
to interpret outcomes in natural populations. Specifically, this project will:
1) Characterize standing genetic variation in permissiveness of P-element
transposition in a genetic model of the ancestral D. melanogaster population
(just before invasion); 2) Define the mutational and selective processes that
lead to the evolution of repression during invasion of experimental populations
by transpositionally active P-elements; 3) Uncover the contributions of standing
genetic variation, de novo mutation, and selection to the evolution of host
repression in extant natural populations (just after invasion).