* 1457114
* Are micronutrients important in structuring plant and herbivore communities? A test in coastal tallgrass prairies.
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Chelse Prather, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 03/31/2017
* USD 546,598.00

Understanding what controls herbivore communities is important because of the
role that they play in the food web, by eating plants as well as serving as food
for higher trophic levels. In addition, many herbivores are pests that eat
agricultural plants or compete with livestock for food in rangelands. Past
research has focused on three factors that might control herbivore communities:
1) the total amount of plant material available for them to eat, 2) the number
of different types of plants available for them to eat, and 3) how much nitrogen
and phosphorus (two important nutrients known to be important to herbivore
growth) is available in plant material. However, knowing these three things
about a particular location has not proved to be enough information to allow
scientists to accurately predict how many and what type of herbivores will be
present. Recent research has suggested the possibility that other micronutrients
such as calcium, potassium, and sodium may help explain how herbivore
communities are structured. In the past, scientists thought that these other
nutrients were common enough in all plants that they would not affect
herbivores. This research will test the hypothesis that some of these
micronutrients help to determine the identity and densities of herbivore
communities. If this hypothesis is supported, it will suggest novel explanations
for what controls herbivore abundance and species composition, which may be
helpful for agricultural applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil micronutrients
may benefit or harm herbivores directly (by affecting plant food quality) or
indirectly (by altering plant community composition). Preliminary data from a
coastal tallgrass prairie in Texas showed that foliar micronutrients were better
predictors of herbivore community structure than were plant biomass, diversity
or macronutrients, and that soil micronutrient concentration affected feeding of
grasshoppers when host plant identity was held constant. This project will
support a large, multi-factorial field experiment in a coastal tallgrass prairie
located south of Houston that will rigorously test the importance of
micronutrients in mediating herbivore abundance and diversity, and determine if
the importance of micronutrients 1) depends on macronutrients and 2) varies
among herbivore feeding modes and guilds. Complementary mesocosm and laboratory
experiments will test potential mechanisms of micronutrient effects; that is,
whether micronutrients affect herbivores directly or indirectly. This study will
be the first to manipulate macro- and micronutrients in concert for
understanding insect community structure, and will do so in the field at an
unprecedented scale.