* 1457735
* The Phylogeny and Evolution of Cetacea: Resolution of Rapid Radiations and a Molecular Blueprint for Modern Whales, Dolphins, and Porpoises
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Mark Springer, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 03/31/2020
* USD 614,789.00

The evolutionary origin of Cetacea (whales, dolphins, and porpoises) in the
Eocene, &gt;50 million years ago, ranks among the best-documented
macroevolutionary transitions. To non-scientists, this move from a terrestrial
habitat to a committed aquatic lifestyle might seem improbable, yet the
wholesale changes in anatomy required for this transformation are recorded in
the fossil record. With the advent of genomics, it is now possible to study this
remarkable evolutionary change at the molecular level. In this project,
researchers will document the genetic basis of traits that were altered in the
evolutionary genesis of these secondarily aquatic mammals and trace the
molecular changes that produced a modern whale. In this project, researchers
will train a postdoctoral scholar, graduate students, and multiple undergraduate
interns at UC Riverside, a minority serving institution. The ethnically diverse
makeup of UC Riverside provides an opportunity to bring cutting edge research to
students who are historically underrepresented in science. Results from the
research also will be incorporated into coursework and provide content for
museum displays focused on evolutionary principles. Grant participants,
including students, will collaborate with staff at the San Diego Natural History
Museum to relate exciting research breakthroughs in a revitalized 'Fossil
Mysteries' exhibit with bilingual educational modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
Cetacea, standard phylogenetic analyses of fossil and molecular data have been
used to reconstruct major phenotypic transformations in the group, with fossils
providing signposts that place key evolutionary innovations relative to Earth
history. Yet, despite ongoing phylogenetic studies based on large datasets, a
fully resolved reconstruction of cetacean evolution has been elusive. The
researchers propose a three-pronged approach to an enhanced study of cetacean
evolutionary history that will utilize &gt;500 genes to: 1) compare alternate
approaches to the reconstruction of species trees using a robust sample of
genetic data, 2) resolve problematic systematic relationships within Delphinidae
(oceanic dolphins), Phocoenidae (porpoises), and Balaenopteroidea (rorquals and
gray whale), 3) synthesize a phylogenomic blueprint for modern cetaceans. Exon
capture and next generation sequencing methods will be employed to rapidly
characterize candidate loci that represent genes predicted to have undergone
adaptive or degenerative change. The researchers will target genes that are
critical for behavioral and anatomical features that are highly derived in the
group, including loci implicated in vision, hearing, olfaction, deep diving,
aging, tooth development, baleen formation, and brain size. The end result will
be the first, detailed, genomic characterization of a major macroevolutionary
transition that is also documented by extensive fossil evidence.