* 1457837
* Interactive effects of fragmentation and keystone species loss on the structure of a tropical pollination network
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* W. John Kress, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2020
* USD 649,814.00

Pollination is essential to human well-being, as well as fundamental to
maintenance of biological diversity. Research showing large-scale declines of
plants and pollinators highlights the concern that pollination services are at
risk; the problem arises in part because plant habitat is increasingly
fragmented into unconnected patches that pollinators may not be able to reach.
However, the pollinators and their plants are interrelated in a network of
shared plant species and pollinators and so the functions of hosts and
pollinator have redundancy. Fragmentation and loss of native habitats is
associated with pollinator declines, but according to theoretical models, the
structure of pollination networks is expected to make them generally resilient
to change because of the redundancy. However, if plant species that are depended
upon by many pollinator species (i.e., "keystone species") are lost, pollination
webs may be more vulnerable, resulting in sudden network collapse. This research
will address two overarching questions: (1) What are the consequences of
keystone plant decline and extinction to the broader pollination network? (2)
Can landscape connectivity and consequent greater pollinator movement across
patches buffer pollination networks against network collapse? The research
itself promotes the progress of science and has implications for national
welfare given its potential contributions to the maintenance of pollinator
species diversity. Additionally, this work will continue to capitalize on the
charisma and diversity of tropical hummingbirds to transmit ideas about the
importance of the conservation of pollination services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous NSF-funded work has shown that the movement of
hummingbird pollinators is strongly restricted by landscape fragmentation, which
results in pollen limitation and subsequent regeneration failure in a common
keystone forest herb (Heliconia tortuosa). Under the network collapse
hypothesis, reduced H. tortuosa densities will limit nectar resource
availability thereby decreasing pollinator visitation to fragments and resulting
in eventual network collapse. In this instance, landscape connectivity will
decrease the minimum number Heliconia required to maintain network structure.
Under the robust network hypothesis, the behavioral plasticity of pollinators
will confer resistance to the network, even if some plant and hub pollinators
are missing or at low abundance. H. tortuosa will be removed from isolated and
connected forest fragments to determine whether altered densities of this
species affects (a) hummingbird movement, (b) plant reproduction and genetic
diversity, and (c) the structure of the pollination network. Hummingbird
movement will be quantified for all species in the network using Radio-Frequency
Identification Devices (RFID). This method will enable observations of the
entire hummingbird pollinator community at an unprecedented temporal resolution
(seconds) and spatial scale. Broader impacts will include educational and
outreach efforts that include substantial media coverage; international citizen
science; educational games and student-driven data collection that meet Next
Generation Science Standards; and public education efforts.