* 1457737
* Combined impacts of temperature and trophic cascades in mountain lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Jonathan Shurin, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2018
* USD 502,639.00

The supply of energy and nutrients and the numbers of predatory or herbivorous
animals play important roles in ecosystems that may be magnified or dampened by
changes in temperature or precipitation due to climate change. Such interactions
between climate and ecological processes are challenging to disentangle because
of gradual, long-term responses of organisms through evolution or migration.
Future climate change that alters the roles of nutrients and predators may
compromise the capacity of ecosystems to provide valuable services to society.
Uncertainty about how climate change alters ecological interactions presents a
great challenge to forecasting the future state of the earth's ecosystems. This
project examines how freshwater organisms and ecosystems in California mountain
lakes change with temperature and the presence of trout that have been stocked
for fishing. Fish strongly affect their prey and alter the flow of materials
between lakes, the land and the atmosphere. Using mesocosm experiments and whole
lake surveys, this project will study the interactive effects of fish and
temperature on lake biogeochemical processes. In addition, the researchers will
study how evolutionary responses by lake organisms to environmental changes
might buffer populations, allowing them to persist in a changing environment.
Results from this project will aid in understanding how lake ecosystems respond
to changing climate and predator abundance, and whether lake ecosystems can
continue to function in ways that are important in the environment and for
society in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effects of climate and predation on
lake ecosystems have so far been studied in isolation. This project examines the
impact of non-native predatory fish (trout) on the structure of lake ecosystems
along an elevational (1200m to 3300m) thermal cline in the Sierra Nevada
mountains. Interspecific and intraspecific morphological trait variation of
important zooplankton taxa will also be studied to determine the cumulative
impacts of predators and warming along a natural cline. In addition, the
researchers will test the interactive effects of trophic cascades and
temperature on system metabolism, processing of organic matter and carbon flux
between lakes and the atmosphere. A field mesocosm transplant experiments will
test the hypothesis that a history of selection by fish and high temperatures
buffers communities against warming and trophic cascades through a combination
of ecological and evolutionary processes. Undergraduate and graduate students
and a postdoctoral researcher will be trained through this grant. Results from
this project have direct applications to water resource management in a changing
climate, and the researchers will share project findings with a variety of
agencies, including the National Park Service.