* 1457956
* Increasing Access to the Biological Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Bernadette Connors, Dominican University New York
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 11/30/2020
* USD 592,688.00

The Increasing Access to the Biological Sciences project will support 14
academically talented, financially challenged students to complete a
baccalaureate degree in the Biological Sciences at Dominican College of
Blauvelt. In addition, this project will provide a variety of resources proven
to ensure student success and reduce attrition rates among STEM majors. A unique
partnership between the College, area high schools, and the region's industrial
sectors will be fostered through the implementation of this project. Through
this cooperation, the project will expand awareness of the career opportunities
in these fields among students, parents, and teachers. Decreasing the time to
degree, while simultaneously placing scholars in a variety of research
environments, will also have a positive impact on recruitment of other talented
students to Dominican College. It is expected that the project will catalyze
change in the culture of the Science Department among both the students,
faculty, and community-at-large. The project will fund two cohorts, the first
year comprised of six students, the second comprised of eight students, for up
to $10,000 each year. The direct results of this support will be an increase in
the number of students who successfully complete their undergraduate degree in
Biology in four years, and increase the number of students entering STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical merit of the project relies on the
strong academic and social structures and activities available to strengthen
student cohorts and foster their success. These include opportunities for
training to be laboratory mentors for high school students, participation in
active research projects and internships with the college's industrial partners.
Scholars will be supported by team members from numerous departments at
Dominican College who are fully dedicated to student success. Progress will be
determined using surveys which identify issues that could help or hinder a
student's chances of completing their degree. A tracking system will be utilized
to coordinate among faculty regarding performance in all of the participants'
classes. The project activities are expected to promote skills in creative,
logical and independent thinking, communication, analysis, and assembling,
synthesizing and presenting scientific knowledge. Various events and activities
will be organized to create a learning community among the scholars, with
inclusion of non-scholars, to foster a change in the culture within the Biology
program. The project also provides opportunities for intellectual collaboration
between Dominican College and industry, while providing a high quality education
in the Biological Sciences. Assessment of the efficacy of these different
activities will help contribute to expanding the knowledge base regarding the
circumstances under which scholarship projects of this type are successful.