* 1457138
* Knowledge from the Margins Conference; East Lansing, MI - August 18-19, 2015
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Logan Williams, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

General Audience Summary

This conference brings together an interdisciplinary group of scholars, policy
professionals, activists, and community members. It will focus on knowledge that
is produced by individuals and groups that are largely marginalized in society.
The primary goal of the conference is to place the notion of justice back on the
intellectual agenda of STS researchers, and prompt them to address pertinent
issues including participation and innovation by marginalized groups, and the
politics of stigma and exclusion, in the production of scientific inquiry.
Conference activities will include keynote presentations by leading scholars and
young scholars in the interdisciplinary field of science and technology studies,
and by policy professionals and community activists. Other conference activities
will include an interactive workshop to promote interactive engagement between
STS scholars and policy audiences, and a reflexive exercise that will provide
participants with concrete, actionable ideas to take away with them. The
Michigan State University Libraries digital repository will archive videos,
photos, and papers from the conference as an open-access resource for the
public.

Technical Summary

This interdisciplinary conference will bring together an exciting mix of
scholars, policy professionals, community leaders, and others on the campus of
Michigan State University. It will be inclusive yet definitive in its focus on
knowledge produced by (or about) people and institutions that are marginalized
in society (e.g., laypersons, non-profit organizations, low-income people, K-12
classrooms, indigenous or non-Western people, senior citizens, member
associations, racial and ethnic minorities, females, disabled people, and
others). The conference participants will focus on elaborating the theoretical
insights from a number of overlapping conceptual categories including voices of
marginal communities, ignorance-making, stigma and the codification of
scientific inquiry, activist training, sustainability activism, and policy-
relevant research. Stressing the production of knowledge by marginalized groups
and individuals will enhance connections between STS research and questions of
social justice, environmental racism, and public health; it will also result in
bringing to the fore practical facets of STS theorizing.