* 1457074
* NDN Community Meeting September 2014
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Jeffrey Burke, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2015
* USD 29,675.00

The Named Data Network (NDN) project team will hold the First NDN Community
Meeting (NDNComm) on September 4-5, 2014, on the campus of the University of
California-Los Angeles (UCLA). The NDN project is one of three Future Internet
Architectures-Next Phase (FIA-NP) projects funded by NSF. This meeting is
organized in response to growing interest from the broader networking community
participating in the NDN architectural design, testbed building, platform
implementation, and application development. The planning for this workshop has
been directly influenced by academic, industry, and government sector interest
in the NDN project, and intentions from a wide range of parties to contribute
more productively to, and influence its, evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental goal of the meeting is to engage the broader community in NDN
development, and more specifically to achieve the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. Elaborate on the current state of the NDN software
platform and supporting libraries and applications.&lt;br/&gt;2. Describe the
state of current operational NDN testbed, and the procedures of
participation.&lt;br/&gt;3. Debate existing and proposed functionality to
support security and privacy at different layers of the
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;4. Share examples of educational use of NDN, including
tutorial material, and provide an opportunity for interested members of the
community to engage in hands-on-training to use NDN software or testbed
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;5. Provide a forum to guide the evolution of the NDN
architecture, key implementation artifacts including APIs, and facilitate
feedback proposing potential protocol design changes based on implementation and
deployment experience.&lt;br/&gt;6. Discuss a vision/roadmap for the community
interested in advancing NDN deployment and usability, and how to accelerate
deployment, both from research and commercial
perspectives&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NDN project team is providing a leadership
role in guiding an increasing range of community efforts in NDN design and
development. This two-day meeting is the first in a series that the NDN team
plans to organize in coming years. Through its testbed and outreach efforts, the
NDN research community is expanding beyond its original set of NSF-funded PIs
and students. A successful meeting will provide this growing community with a
forum to exchange the latest research results, discuss architectural directions,
articulate open challenges, and jointly review and revise plans for future
efforts.