* 1457880
* Industrial and Mechanical Engineering Scholars with Scholarships, Career Mentoring, Outreach and Advisement, Professional Societies and Engineering Learning Community (SCOPE)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Hsing Wei Chu, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2021
* USD 625,300.00

This project will provide scholarship funding for students pursuing bachelor
degrees in industrial or mechanical engineering. Three cohorts, a total of 36
scholars, will be served in this five-year project. Students selected will be
academically talented mechanical or industrial engineering students with
financial need. The scholarships will be complemented by academic support
including mentoring, tutoring, and undergraduate research opportunities. The
program will help to recruit and retain industrial or mechanical engineering
students, and will reduce the graduation time of these students. The program
will allow Lamar University to offer scholarships to directly address an area of
national concern: maintaining US competitiveness in industry. Scholarships for
academically strong engineering students, who may not otherwise be able to
afford college, have an impact on the number of engineering graduates prepared
to help national, regional, and local companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lamar
University is known as one of the most economically and racially diverse
universities in the West. More than forty percent of the student population is
from groups currently underrepresented in engineering. In the past decade, the
number of African-American students has more than doubled and the number of
Hispanic students has tripled. The diversity present at Lamar provides an
opportunity to broaden the participation of groups currently underrepresented in
engineering fields. This program will target students from sophomore to senior
years and provide the support needed to help insure degree completion. Support
activities will include enhanced academic advising, career advising, academic
support through supplemental tutoring, peer monitoring and undergraduate
research opportunities. Resources from engineering professional societies will
be engaged to help scholars to pass professional exams. Student engagement will
be enhanced by the formation of an engineering learning community. The project
will address not only the intrinsic difficulties of degree completion when faced
with financial instability, but also the difficulties that engineering students
experience as they decide upon a career in an engineering discipline. Project
results will provide information on the effectiveness of continuous intervention
in retaining low-income engineering students and will contribute to the
development of the best practices for retaining low income and talented students
in engineering.