* 1457577
* Curation Of National Antarctic Sediment Collections
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Sherwood Wise, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 598,004.00

This proposal would provide funding for continued operation of the Antarctic
Marine Geology Research Facility (AMGRF) at Florida State University. This
facility is the NSF repository of sediment cores from the ocean floor
surrounding Antarctica, and makes sediment cores available to the entire
scientific community, providing the equipment and knowledge necessary for
scientists to collect samples for specialized measurements. The sediments
provide a record of past climate, ocean circulation, and ice sheet history, and
were recovered at great cost using piston cores deployed from research vessels
and rotary coring from drilling platforms. The funding supports a curator, an
assistant curator, and a student work force from FSU. This staff supports
visiting scientists, manages the collections and the equipment used for core
characterization and sampling, and maintain data bases. The AMGRF houses a
unique collection of sediment cores from the Southern Oceans and has served in
this role for the past 50 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Antarctic
Marine Geology Research Facility (AMGRF) at Florida State University, the NSF
repository of Southern Ocean piston- and drill-cores, has been conducting marine
geological research and providing numerous services to the Antarctic and Earth
Science Community in its present building for the past 50 years. This proposal
requests operating funds to (a) continue provide these services, (b) manage
archives and databases, (c) complete necessary upgrades of the AMGRF Cold-Room,
and (d) continue our education and outreach programs for students and the
general public. The AMGRF archives and curates more than 23,000 m of cored
sediment (over 7,000 cores) collected by United States Antarctic Program (USAP)
vessels. The Facility also archives and curates some 5,500 m of rotary-cored
material from international programs such as ANDRILL. The standard core
processing services include core splitting, Multi-Sensor Track analyses, core
photography, whole-core x-rays, etc., core description publications (macroscopic
and microscopic), and core sampling. Facility personnel also provide curatorial
support services to field-based projects upon request. Analytical equipment at
the AMGRF serves the research needs of Facility personnel (for the generation of
detailed core descriptions), NSF Principal Investigators involved with the
United States Antarctic Program (USAP), and qualified users from the scientific
community in the U.S. and beyond. This equipment provides users of the Facility
with the necessary tools to rapidly and objectively analyze the piston cores and
drill cores sent to the Facility each year. The AMGRF maintains a core and
sample database with the latest map-sample search capabilities that can be
accessed through the continuously upgraded Facility website. This searchable
database contains basic information about all the cores stored at the facility,
as well as information on samples taken from 1964 to the present. In addition to
the sediment core archives the AMGRF also keeps archives of ship and deck-logs,
a collection of ca. 862,000 microscope slides, and a library of AMGRF related
publications. Facility personnel routinely provide tours and lectures for
students and the general public.