* 1457187
* Mechanisms of Transport Through Plasmodesmata
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,01/31/2019
* David Jackson, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

All organisms are made up of cells, a basic unit of life. While some
microorganisms, such as bacteria, are single celled, most plants and animals are
multicellular, composed of many billions of cells, and tens or hundreds of
different cell types. Each cell type has a specialized function, for example
different cell types in plants function to take up nutrients from the soil, to
photosynthesize, or to promote growth. Communication between different cell
types is critical for the proper growth and viability of plants. This project
will study a system for cell-to-cell communication, involving the transport of
signaling molecules through special channels called plasmodesmata. Genes that
control the transport process have been identified, and their role in
development and physiology will be studied. For example, one such gene encodes a
chaperone, a protein that can unwind other molecules, to allow them to pass
through plasmodesmata. These studies will provide new insights into plant
biology, that could provide strategies to improve crop plant productivity.
Outreach activities will target high school students from the local community,
as well as underrepresented groups, to provide them training and mentorship in
science. Such training is important to maintain a strong science and technology
base for the U.S. workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important and
unique form of cell-to-cell communication in plants occurs by the trafficking of
protein and RNA based signals through plasmodesmata, specialized channels that
are embedded in the cell wall. Despite their central importance to plant
development, physiology and defense, the general mechanism and regulation of
trafficking through plasmodesmata is poorly understood. This project will use
genetic, cell biological and biophysical approaches to understand how regulatory
transcription factors important for plant growth are able to traffic between
cells, to transmit important developmental signals. A novel genetic screen has
been developed to discover genes that are involved in cell-to-cell trafficking
of these proteins. The Jackson lab has already identified two genes, a
chaperonin, and a GTPase, using this approach. These discoveries suggest
mechanisms by which the proteins traffic, for example by partial unfolding of
the protein, or by signaling by the GTPase, to allow their transport through the
plasmodesmal channel. This proposal will further investigate the mechanism by
which these genes facilitate transport, and will discover new factors that
control the process. Studies of the trafficking mechanisms have the potential to
make significant improvements to plant productivity, by providing tools to
selectively regulate trafficking of developmental regulators, to limit the
spread of pathogens, or to understanding the transport of metabolites into sink
tissues, which is critical for plant growth. Hence, this proposal will advance
knowledge in a fundamental area of plant biology, and will bring potential
improvements to US agriculture. The project will also train a number of young
scientists at various levels, as well as develop resources to involve high
school students in modern biology research. The Principal Investigator directs
the "Partners For the Future" Program at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, which
allows local high school students to experience life in a research lab. He will
also develop an educational exchange with a high school in Queens, New York,
which predominantly serves minority students. This activity brings exposure to
the excitement and applications of scientific research to students who otherwise
have little opportunity for contact with scientific research.