* 1457523
* Cityscape Genomics of Rats in New York City
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Jason Munshi-South, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2020
* USD 672,071.00

Brown rats (also known as Norway or sewer rats) are one of the most common
mammals in the world, and cause significant damage to human health and
infrastructure. Cities in particular harbor very large rat populations, but
their biology is poorly known. This study will address novel and important
questions about the evolutionary and ecological processes occurring in the built
environment using the infamous rat population in New York City. What specific
types of urban infrastructure, such as sewers or subways, do rats use to move
through the city? Are rat movements associated with socioeconomics of human
neighborhoods? Where did NYC rats come from, and how are they related to other
populations around the world? How have rats evolved since they invaded NYC in
the 18th century? Results from this project will also be used to introduce
students and the public to evolutionary biology by funding art projects and
innovative curricular materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several complementary
genomic approaches will be used to understand the evolution of brown rats from
local to global scales. First, landscape modeling based on structural and
socioeconomic characteristics of NYC will shed light on the drivers of local
population structure and movements of rats within NYC. Next, signatures of
historical population size changes and ancestry that are encoded in the genomes
of rats from around the world will then be examined. Within NYC, genes involved
in recent adaptation to the urban environment will also be identified. Finally,
these evolutionary changes will be confirmed using DNA extracted from museum
specimens of rats collected over the last 125 years.