* 1457539
* Collaborative Research: Phylogeny and diversification of the orb weaving spiders (Araneae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Gonzalo Giribet, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/28/2018
* USD 489,857.00

This project will chronicle the evolution and diversification of the orb-weaving
spiders to resolve a long-standing problem in animal evolution, that is, the
origin and genealogical relationships of the main groups of orb-weavers.
Ubiquitous, diverse, and exclusively predatory, spiders are one the most diverse
and fascinating animal groups and the dominant arthropod predators in most
terrestrial ecosystems. Orb-weavers are remarkable not only because of the high
number of species described so far, but also because of the extraordinary
architectural diversity of their foraging webs, ranging from highly geometric
snare designs, often regarded as a pinnacle of animal engineering, to sheet and
irregular cob webs. Understanding web evolution and diversification requires an
empirically robust hypothesis about the underlying genealogical patterns - the
spider tree of life. Traditional anatomical and genetic methods have not yet
produced a compelling answer to this problem, and thus our understanding of the
evolution of this group is far from satisfactory. The researchers of this
project will use new methods to gather genetic data to answer this long-standing
question. The results of this research will be of interest to many biologists
working on any comparative aspects of orb-weavers because it will provide the
genomic resources and the fundamental comparative basis for studies on a broad
diversity of topics (silk biology, sexual selection, venom evolution, etc.).
This project will serve as a training platform for postdoctoral, graduate and
undergraduate researchers. In addition, the project will produce a public
exhibit at the Harvard Museum of Natural History that will explore the evolution
and biology of orb-weaving spiders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of three
investigators, experts in arachnid systematics and with a long and productive
history of research collaboration, will generate novel data through the
sequencing of 120 transcriptomes and target capture approaches using modern DNA
sequencing techniques for phylogenetic inference for a taxonomic sample of
orbicularians that would include representatives of all 21 known families of
orb-weavers and a diverse array of outgroups. These genomic data will be used to
infer the family-level phylogenetic relationships of orb-weaving spiders using a
diversity of analytical techniques. The PIs will also analyze a morphological
matrix of 85 selected orbicularians largely based on extensive data already at
hand. This project will use the results of the phylogenetic analyses to carry
out comparative analyses of orb-weaver diversification and of web architecture
evolution.