* 1457984
* Peers Organized by Discipline for Success
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2020
* James Stittsworth, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 12/31/2020
* USD 614,447.00

Pell Institute data indicates that financially needy students persist and
graduate at a lower rate than college peers. The Florida Department of Education
data shows that over half of the Duval County School District's 125,022 students
are on the free and reduced school lunch program, and U.S. Census statistics
reveal that less than 25% of Jacksonville's age 25 and over population has
earned a baccalaureate degree. This project at Florida State College at
Jacksonville (FSCJ) will address these needs through scholarships for
financially needy science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
students with additional student support for academic, transfer and career
success. The project will include intensive mentoring for at least 56
academically talented, financially needy students in the sciences, mathematics,
and aerospace engineering technology programs at the college. The college will
collaborate with multiple STEM industry partners that will provide hands on work
experiences for students, networking opportunities with STEM professionals, and
job placement assistance. Since 45 percent of all undergraduates nationwide
attend community college, information gained through this project will help
improve academic success and graduation and job placement for students beginning
higher education at community colleges, institutions rapidly becoming one of the
pipelines for STEM majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will strengthen: 1)
outreach to students in information technology and engineering technology; 2)
recruitment of first year students; and 3) awareness of the STEM-related
baccalaureate degrees offered by the college. Participants will be expected to
significantly outpace peers with regards to retention, completion, academic
success, and progression to STEM baccalaureate degrees and occupations.
Supporting this dynamic effort will be several key organizations including
CareerSource (the Regional Workforce Board) and Duval County Public Schools.
This project will have internal support from the Office of Student Success, the
Pre-College Outreach Department, Career Development Center, Office of Services
for Students with Disabilities, Library and Learning Commons, and the
Scholarship Office. This program will promote academic success, retention and
completion through an enhanced academic support and peer-mentoring system called
PODS (Peers Organized by Discipline for Success); small groups of 3-5 students
supported by a faculty mentor and peer tutors to form a triangle for success.
Recipients will participate in "Ready, Set, STEM!" two day orientations, the
College's STEM Club, how to study science seminars, and will receive assistance
from science and mathematics tutors. Activities will include field experiences,
site visits to STEM-related businesses and institutions, transfer workshops,
"Speaking of STEM" lectures, development of career education plans with each
student, and scientific internships and symposia. Extensive evaluation and broad
dissemination of the PODS model and Orientation Tool Kit will support
implementation of successful project elements in other settings and within other
disciplines. Open access to raw project data (guarded for student
confidentiality) will support further research into processes, populations, and
generalizable settings.