* 1458005
* Collaborative Research: Undocumented Shorelines of Lake Bonneville: New Paleoclimatic and Hydrodynamic Interpretations
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Charles Oviatt, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2015
* USD 44,324.00

The project will undertake fundamental research regarding Pleistocene Lake
Bonneville, which was the largest lake in the western United States during the
last glacial period, and the precursor to the modern Great Salt Lake. While the
Lake Bonneville record for the past 18,000 years is reasonably well documented,
the earlier period (18,000-30,000 years ago) is poorly understood because those
deposits have been destroyed or overprinted by younger, rising lake waters, or
subsequent erosion. This project will apply a variety of analytical tools
including ground penetrating radar, 3-dimensional digital photography,
hydrodynamic modeling, and radiocarbon dating of extremely small amounts of
organic material to inform our understanding of landscape dynamics that have
long puzzled researchers in this poorly documented period of the Lake Bonneville
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Lake Bonneville and its associated sediments are
culturally and economically important landforms of the Intermountain Western
United States. Sands and gravels deposited by the lake form important
groundwater aquifers, and provide aggregate resources to much of the region. The
time period of Lake Bonneville being studied is a critical period in Earth's
climate history as it marked the transition from a very cold, dry global climate
during glacial times to the warmer, interglacial climate of the modern era. The
records of landscape change at Lake Bonneville are vital for studying this
climatic transition in the Great Basin province, and will provide details about
rates of long-term hydrologic change within North America's largest desert.