* 1458396
* Underrepresented Students in Topology and Algebra Research Symposium (USTARS)
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Syvillia Averett, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2017
* USD 30,000.00

The fifth annual meeting of the Underrepresented Students in Topology and
Algebra Research Symposium (USTARS) is to be held at Florida Gulf Coast
University on April 18-19, 2015. Speakers will give 30-minute research talks in
various subfields of topology and algebra; these subfields include algebraic
combinatorics, enumerative geometry, knot theory, and representation theory. Two
distinguished graduate students will give hour-long presentations and one
invited faculty member, Dr. Angelica Osorno of Reed College, will give a one-
hour keynote address. Invited undergraduate researchers will participate in a
poster session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;USTARS promotes diversity within the
mathematical community by providing a platform for collaboration and
professional development. Participants are exposed to a variety of current
research, ideas, and results, and meet underrepresented professors and students
who will become future collaborators or colleagues. The conference also promotes
diversity by encouraging women and minorities to attend and give talks. Indeed,
the conference organizing committee is diverse in gender, ethnicity, and
educational background, and hence is well-positioned to encourage participation
from a diverse group of students. The participants of the conference will
continue to influence the next generation of students by serving as much needed
mentors and encouraging students in the mathematical sciences to advance
themselves and participate in research and conference
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.ustars.org/