* 1458811
* STEM Scholars: Persistence and Achievement in STEM  for Community College transfer students
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2023
* Brammer Charlotte, Samford University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 01/31/2023
* USD 620,520.00

Scholarships for academically strong STEM students, who may not otherwise be
able to afford college, have an impact on the number of STEM graduates prepared
to help regional and local companies compete and innovate in the global economy.
This project will increase the number of academically talented, economically
disadvantaged STEM transfer students who complete baccalaureate degrees in
biology and chemistry at Samford University in order to develop the STEM
workforce in Central Alabama. Approximately 40 scholars will participate in a
two-year program, designed to maximize academic success, social support, and
career development. The project will build on partnerships that were initiated
with two nearby 2-year colleges (Lawson and Jefferson State Community Colleges)
during a prior NSF-REU award. The institutions will conduct joint research
symposia, seminars, professional society meetings, and STEM recruitment events
and establish faculty exchanges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing that
providing transitional support structures is critical in promoting academic
success and retaining transfer students, the project team will utilize a variety
of high- impact practices including learning communities, academic tracking, and
close advising. Moreover, the scholars will participate in a four-day Transfer
Success Seminar to orient them to academic life at a 4-year institution and
cultivate a group identity within the cohort. The findings from the project
evaluation will help to contribute evidence that will improve our understanding
of best practices for supporting STEM community college transfer students
through to graduation. Formative evaluation will address the student's
satisfaction and identification as scientists (SALG) and faculty assessment of
the students' progress (rubrics). Summative evaluation will consist of an
analysis of how well the project components align with successful attainment of
the retention targets. In addition, internship employers will be surveyed.
Dissemination of the results of evaluation will be done through websites,
national meetings (the University of New Mexico Mentoring Institute Mentoring
Conference, the Ecological Society of America, the American Chemical Society and
the Biennial Conference on Chemical Education, and relevant journals (the
Journal of Research in Science Teaching and the Journal of Chemical Education).