* 1458527
* Collaborative Research: ABI DEVELOPMENT:  Notes from Nature:  Advancing a Next Generation Citizen Science Platform For Biocollection Transcription
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Walter Jetz, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2020
* USD 594,428.00

Biocollections (i.e., natural history collections) represent irreplaceable
natural heritage that taken together provide critical information about our
national and planetary biodiversity. In an era dominated by planetary-scale
anthropogenic change, both historical and recent biocollection specimens and
their associated data represent valuable benchmarks for analyzing the biological
impacts of environmental change and determining its causal factors.
Unfortunately, the vast majority of this baseline data critical to monitor our
planet's health are locked away in analog formats that impede their broader use.
Desperately needed are new approaches for liberating the data from specimen
cabinets. But technological advances that would enable this feat with internet-
scale resources, while promising in prototype, are neither scalable to the
challenge nor available. PIs from University of Florida, Florida State
University, University of Illinois, Yale, and the Adler Planetarium will further
develop Internet-scale citizen science - that is, the contribution of data,
analyses or solutions to scientific research primarily by public volunteer
participants, in order to significantly further the mission to digitize our
legacy biodiversity records. Citizen science is not merely a way to enhance data
gathering but it also creates mutually beneficial partnerships between
scientists and the broader community. In particular, engaged citizen scientists
of our nation can gain useful knowledge about organisms, biocollections and
their research value, and the impact of biodiversity research on human welfare.

The work funded under this grant advances the citizen science platform Notes
from Nature from its current prototype into production. Notes from Nature
presents Internet-enabled volunteers a set of imaged biological specimens stored
in biocollections across the nation, and asks them to help transcribe contents
from the labels associated with those specimen images. These transcribed
contents are then delivered back to the providers of those imaged specimens.
Notes from Nature already has a strong record for engaging the public in high
quality data generation, but was developed as a proof of concept that cannot
scale to the demand from either biocollections or its devoted citizen
scientists. Focal areas for advancing Notes from Nature include: (1) tools for
providers that provide near zero-cost and fast involvement (especially Biospex),
(2) increased transcription efficiencies, and (3) novel incentives and improved
metrics to further user and provider engagement. In the process, the project
will build a foundation for increased integration with other national scale
projects such as NSF's Advancing Digitization of Biological Collection program
and Map of Life. Several natural extensions of this topic are planned to
increase public engagement with, and understanding of, science and build
diversity in our Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) workforce. In
particular, the project will develop functionality for onsite and virtual
"transcription blitzes", especially targeted to those communities who are
underrepresented in the sciences. Also developed will be a prototype museum
transcription kiosk at Florida Museum of Natural History as well as for
classroom use with a lesson plan and evaluations targeted at both high school
(addressing Common Core Standards) and undergraduate levels. This STEM project
will also train two named female postdoctoral researchers. Results from this
project can be found at http://www.notesfromnature.org/.