* 1458692
* E2S5 Project (Environment, Engineering, Sustainability Science Student Success Scholarships)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Teresa Jones, Greenfield Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 632,455.00

The E2S5 (Environment, Engineering, Sustainability Science Student Success
Scholarships) Project is aimed at encouraging high academic achievement,
promoting experiential learning and internship opportunities that will
supplement students' scientific foundation at Greenfield Community College. The
program will also encourage student outreach and community service and will
prepare recipients for careers or continued studies in STEM-related fields. E2S5
is designed to support students in four STEM disciplines at the college and
incorporate experiential learning and internships as student learning outcomes.
Four disciplines will be targeted in this project: Engineering, Environmental
Science, Farm and Food Systems, and Renewable Energy/Energy Efficiency. The
program emphasizes recruitment of qualified students to these disciplines, and
will build on other college initiatives designed to support STEM students and
increase retention. E2S5 is also designed to facilitate next steps for students
to enter the workplace or to continue to baccalaureate granting institutions.
Towards this end, the project will build on existing opportunities for
experiential site-based learning and internships to deepen science discipline
understanding and will provide pathways to jobs or transfer. Internships will
provide students with the best possible experiential learning. They will provide
local businesses and agencies with student energy and expertise, and will help
prepare students to become responsive to the need for more American scientists
and engineers in the workforce.

The college will use S-STEM grant funds to provide a total of 102 scholarships
over a five-year period. Scholarship criteria are well defined and inclusive to
reach broadly into the diverse student body that populates these programs.
Funding plans will be structured to include as many qualified students as
possible. An extensive student support system, including advising and coaching,
tutoring and academic support, experiential learning, internship opportunities,
career and transfer counseling, and community building special events will be
built and scholarship recipients will be expected to participate. Goals of the
project include well-defined and significant improvement in persistence rates.
By the end of the grant period, the PI expects that 95% of the students will
either find discipline-related employment or transfer into a related discipline
at a baccalaureate granting institution. In terms of the broader impacts, the
program will emphasize the priorities of integrating teaching and experiential
research and learning, promoting diversity, and encouraging scientific
understanding that benefits society. Dissemination of results to the outside
community will primarily be accomplished through presentations at discipline
specific conferences and at conferences that focus on student learning.
Internally, dissemination will be through presentations to faculty as
professional development workshops that focus on learning communities, engaging
students in science, problem-based learning, and peer-led team leadership.
Findings will help broaden the higher education enterprise's understanding of
the attributes and practices of programs that are successful in promoting
academic opportunity and quality for students with financial need.