* 1458302
* Hope in the Heartland: The Carver Bridge to STEM Success Program
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2015,02/28/2021
* Derek Lyons, Simpson College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 02/28/2021
* USD 586,784.00

This NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) project at Simpson College located in Indianola, Iowa will contribute
to the national effort to produce more STEM graduates by establishing a cohort
of 15 academically talented and Pell-eligible students. Scholars will receive
academic support while they pursue degrees in actuarial science, computer
science, mathematics, or physics. They will participate in a variety of
enrichment activities such as (a) a one-week bridge program prior to their
freshman year, (b) a mentored relationship with leaders from local industry, (c)
a first semester computational modeling colloquium, (d) and a one-credit course
on solving industry-generated problems provided by their mentors. Scholarships
for academically strong STEM students, who may not otherwise be able to afford
college, have an impact on the number of graduates prepared to help national,
regional, and local companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are well-
defined and the methods outlined for achieving them are scaffolded to maximize
student learning. Activities like Campus connect (a first year orientation for
skill building, including early exposure to computational modelling and
writing), the Simpson Colloquium (a course that builds on modelling skills with
real-world problems), and the Bridge to Success course are grounded in the
literature and should lead to high academic achievement and retention of the
participants. The project will be evaluated on four criteria, Scholar GPA,
participation in internships, first to second year retention, and placement in
STEM graduate programs or careers upon graduation. The evaluator will gauge the
evolution of the scholars' perception of STEM careers through the Views About
Science Survey at the beginning and end of the project. Thus, project
performance will be compared to national standards. Students will also be
surveyed about all aspects of the project. Summative evaluation will rely on an
analysis of the data in aggregate. Results will be disseminated internally via
faculty development workshops. They will also be presented at appropriate
regional venues including the Joint Mathematics Meeting and MathFest and at
American Association of Physics Teachers, American Physical Society, Council on
Undergraduate Research national meetings. This effort is expected to add to the
knowledge base on development of recruitment and retention strategies for
science and mathematics majors.