* 1458011
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Everyday Relationships, Political Frontiers, and Industrial Market Zones
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* William Mazzarella, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2016
* USD 8,998.00

Concentrated industrial and commercial zones on international borders are
frequently promoted by their developers as both engines of economic development
and catalysts for improved political relationships. Social scientists have been
more skeptical, pointing out that when the countries involved have unequal
power, special economic zones may perpetuate instability through increased
economic and political inequality. However, there is little research on the on-
the-ground processes through which either positive or negative outcomes are
realized. University of Chicago doctoral student Jeremy Siegman, who is
supervised by Dr. William Mazzarella, will undertake research in a commercial
contact zone in the Israeli-occupied West Bank to address this knowledge gap.
This is an ideal site because the idea that developing economic ties between
Israelis and Palestinians might lead to peaceful coexistence between them and
throughout the region has been a mainstay of foreign investment in the region.
This will be the first detailed study of Israeli-Palestinian commercial contact
in the Israeli-occupied West Bank.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will
undertake a 12-month ethnographic study of Israeli-Palestinian contact as it
takes place in daily practice. He will focus on Israeli-controlled commercial
and industrial zones where many Palestinians work and sometimes shop. Research
methods will include participant observation of market practices, supplemented
with content analyses of media and activist materials; extensive interviews with
Israelis and Palestinian workers, shoppers, security agencies and activists; and
interviews with local economic analysts. These data will allow him to assess
how, through everyday work and shopping practices, Israelis and Palestinians
frame their relations to each other and how such framings may also be disrupted
or undermined by such ordinary events as workplace disputes, gendered tensions,
political or religious debates, and security activities. Only detailed
participant-observation and interviews, conducted in both Arabic and Hebrew, can
shed light on these complex spaces where two separated social worlds come
together. Building on previous experience in the area and his linguistic
fluency, Stiegman's research will shed new light on the puzzle of Israeli-
Palestinian commercial contact.