* 1458273
* CSBR: Natural History: High-Density Storage, Improved Preservation, and Digital Networking for OSU COV Collections of Fishes, Amphibians, and Reptiles
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Karen McBee, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 422,412.00

Oklahoma State University Collection of Vertebrates (OSU COV) comprises
collections of fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals, and frozen tissues
and is administered through the OSU Department of Integrative Biology. These
represent invaluable specimens and associated data that are used in research,
instruction, and outreach within the OSU/Northern Oklahoma community and
throughout the larger community of scholars. This project focuses on
improvements to COV-Fishes and COV-Amphibians and Reptiles through replacement
of substandard storage containers, installation of high-density, compactible
shelving, and completion of digitization and georeferencing for these
collections, thus allowing for enhanced use of these collections for research,
university instruction, and public education/outreach. These improvements will
facilitate use of these collections by OSU faculty and students, researchers
from other institutions, and also will enable collaborative efforts with K-12
groups and regional Tribal Colleges that have been hindered by poor conditions
of the collection. This award ensures protection of irreplaceable specimens,
increase efficiency of use of space, and provide access to associated data via
the Internet to researchers within and beyond the OSU
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COV-Fishes contains specimens from around
the globe with concentrations in the Central Plains of North America and Nepal.
This collection also includes a more than 20-year series of fishes from sampling
stations throughout Oklahoma donated by Oklahoma Department of Environmental
Quality (ODEQ) that have not yet been cataloged. The COV-Amphibians and Reptiles
collection includes specimens from around the world including Chilean lizards
and Ozark Plateau salamanders. These collections include type specimens of
species described in the last 10 years and have provided materials for these
descriptions to researchers at several other universities. Nepalese specimens
potentially hold additional undescribed species and ODEQ specimens have great
potential for understanding long-term patterns/processes in stream ecology,
impacts of environmental change and contaminants, and effects of changing
patterns of land use. This project will support installation of high-density,
compactible shelving and stainless steel tanks, and to replace substandard
containers. The collection catalogs are partially digitized, but only Oklahoma
fish are georeferenced, and no catalog is currently searchable via the Internet.
The project will allow for digitization and georeferencing of all catalogs and
development of a searchable database. Collaborations established with
interdisciplinary college-level and K-12 cross-disciplinary programs at OSU and
a growing collaboration with Comanche Nation College will be leveraged through
the supported improvements and digitization. All data resulting from this
project will be shared with iDigBio (https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring
accessibility to researchers and the public.