* 1458239
* Collaborative Research: Intertidal community assembly and dynamics: Integrating broad-scale regional variation in environmental forcing and benthic-pelagic coupling
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Huijie Xue, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 218,410.00

Rocky intertidal habitats in the Gulf of Maine (GoM) provide a model system to
examine the structure and dynamics of natural communities. Throughout the Gulf
of Maine, the same species are often found in these habitats but community
structure, dynamics and productivity differ markedly among 3 distinct regions
(southern, central and northern GoM). Past influential work, conducted primarily
in the southern and central GoM, focused on the local processes driving
intertidal community structure but produced very different conceptual models of
how these communities are structured. This project examines whether regional
differences in rocky shore community processes are driven by differences in
recruitment that are shaped by regional variation in temperature and food
availability and nearshore coastal oceanography. This project will improve the
understanding of how large-scale environmental forces interact with local
processes to control the distribution of species and the structure and dynamics
of these communities. Understanding the interaction between processes operating
at different scales is fundamentally important to developing more reliable
models that can be used to predict community dynamics. In addition, data
resulting from this project will have important implications for regional
dynamics in commercially important species and for ecosystem and fisheries
management within the GoM. Students and postdoctoral researchers will be
supported and trained as part of this interdisciplinary project.

The overarching hypothesis of this project is that regional differences in
community-level processes are driven by very different patterns of population
connectivity and recruitment in a few key species and that these differences are
ultimately caused by regional variation in temperature and food availability and
mediated by physical larval transport processes. Hence, the project will test
the following hypotheses with manipulative field experiments, field sampling,
connectivity estimates, and integrative modeling: 1) Locally-dispersing species
dominate dynamics in regions with a net export of planktonic larvae (Northern
GoM), while species with planktonic larvae dominate the dynamics in regions with
high settlement and extensive connectivity among populations (Southern GoM). 2)
Settlement density of species with planktonic larvae increases from northern to
southern regions in accord with regional variation in food availability. 3)
Population connectivity varies greatly among regions, with regions differing in
the degree to which they are self-seeded or serve as larval sources vs. sinks;
self-seeding leads to relatively localized population dynamics in the middle
portion of the GoM. 4) Patterns of population connectivity are driven by
physical transport processes and can be represented by coupling basic larval
behavior models with circulation models. At 18 different sites in the GoM across
~ 600 km, surveys will evaluate variation in recruitment, food availability and
secondary productivity and experiments will assess community processes in wave-
exposed and sheltered habitats. The project will use hydrographic, current
profile, and larval vertical distribution surveys to collect data for coupled
larval/circulation models. Population connectivity will be both modeled and
empirically evaluated (for one species) using elemental fingerprinting. A
spatially explicit metacommunity model will integrate across all project
components and test the relative importance of regional and local processes in
controlling community organization and dynamics.