* 1458359
* Bilateral BBSRC-NSF/BIO Collaborative Research: ABI Development: A Critical Assessment of Protein Function Annotation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Iddo Friedberg, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 506,490.00

Biologists are deluged with sequence data yet have derived comparatively little
biological information from it. The accurate annotation of protein function is
key to understanding life, but experimentally determining what each protein does
is costly and difficult, and cannot scale up to accommodate the vast amount of
sequence data already available. Therefore discovering protein protein function
by computational, rather than experimental means, is of primary importance.
Genomic sequence data are available from thousands of species, and those are
coupled with massive high-throughput experimental data. Together, these data
have created new opportunities as well as challenges for computational function
prediction. As a result, many computational annotation methods have been
developed by research groups worldwide, but their accuracy and applicability
need to be improved upon. The mission of the Automated Function Prediction
Special Interest Group (AFP-SIG) is to bring together computational biologists,
experimental biologists and biocurators who are dealing with the important
problem of predicting protein function, to share ideas, and create
collaborations. To improve computational function prediction methods, the
Critical Assessment of protein Function Annotation algorithms (CAFA) was
established as an ongoing experiment. CAFA was designed to provide a large-scale
assessment of computational methods dedicated to predicting protein function. By
challenging dozens of research groups worldwide to develop and provide their
best software for function prediction, the researchers involved in the AFP-SIG
will improve the ability of biologists to understand life at the molecular
level. The AFP-SIG researchers will also generate experimental data from fruit-
flies, fungi and bacteria to be used as benchmarks to test the software
participating in CAFA, and a deeper understanding of these model organisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is now possible to collect data that comprehensively
profile many different states of complex biological systems. Using these data it
should be possible to understand and explain the underlying systems, but
significant challenges remain. One of the primary challenges is that, as
researchers collect more data from many different organisms in many different
systems, they discover more and different genes. Assigning functions to these
newly discovered genes represents a key step towards interpretation of high-
throughput data. This leads to a critical need to assess the quality of the
function prediction methods that researchers have developed in recent years. The
mission of the Automated Function Prediction Special Interest Group (AFP-SIG),
founded in 2005, is to bring together bioinformaticians and biologists who are
addressing this key challenge of gene function prediction. In addition to
sharing ideas and creating collaboration, AFP-SIG has created CAFA: the Critical
Assessment of (protein) Function Annotation. CAFA is a community-driven
challenge to assess the performance of protein function prediction software, and
it has been carried out twice since 2010. The investigators will provide the
following outcomes: (1) robust open-source software to be used in function
prediction and assessment of function prediction methods, incorporated into the
high-profile annotation pipelines of UniProt-GOA; (2) expansion of the AFP
community by engaging bioinformaticians, biocurators and experimentalists,
thereby improving the quality and relevance of function prediction methods; (3)
large-scale experimental screens in Drosophila, Candida and Pseudomonas for
novel associations of targeted functional terms with genes; (4) an expanded CAFA
event, incorporating both the curated annotations from the literature and our
own experimental screens, in the last two years of the project. The progress of
the AFP-SIG and CAFA will be available from http://BioFunctionPrediction.org