* 1458478
* Preparing Students for Careers in Chemistry, Math and Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Julia Baker, Columbia College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 06/30/2022
* USD 610,503.00

Columbia College's "Preparing Students for Careers in Chemistry, Math, and
Computing Project" will provide financial, academic, social support and career
preparation to increase the number of students with degrees in chemistry,
mathematics, and computer and information science (CIS). Recruiting efforts will
focus on attracting women and minorities to pursue studies that will help to
diversify the STEM workforce in South Carolina. Participants in the program will
serve as role models and will inspire middle and high school students to
overcome barriers that they may perceive as preventing them from pursuing a STEM
major and career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will recruit and support an
academically talented, diverse group of 20 students with financial need to
complete baccalaureate degrees in chemistry, mathematics, or CIS. The goals of
the project are to raise the annual retention rate of these students from 83% to
90% and enable 80% of the participants to enter the STEM workplace or graduate
school within one year of degree completion. Participants will be selected based
on academic ability and financial need. Participants will be grouped in cohorts
and participate together in common courses, seminars, field trips, and group
dinners that will promote community building. Participants will be guided by
individualized advising teams and be provided with applied learning experiences,
professional development, and career coaching. This project will contribute to
the knowledge of how to recruit, retain, and engage women and minorities to
major and pursue careers in chemistry, mathematics, and CIS, enabling more
students from these underrepresented groups to enter STEM careers.