* 1458300
* CSBR: Natural History: Critical Curation for a Critical Collection: The Schuster Herbarium at The Field Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Matt von Konrat, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 208,640.00

Natural history specimen collections in museums and academic institutions
document species diversity and provide essential information for broad
applications ranging from conservation, securing national resources, discovery
of new species, to agriculture and medicine. Collections are also an important
resource for education and outreach. The Field Museum herbarium houses almost 3
million dried plant and fungi specimens. In 2013, the Museum acquired 35,000
liverwort specimens from the private herbarium of one of the most preeminent
botanists of the 20th century. Liverworts are a small group of land plants that
are closely related to the more familiar mosses. They play a critical role in
our understanding of plant evolution and are ecologically significant. This
recent acquisition makes The Field Museum liverwort collection, of over 220,000
specimens, the largest collection in the US and among the top four in the world.
The recently acquired liverwort collection is in critical need of curation
because of its poor condition. There is vital type material, used to describe
and name new species, requiring urgent attention. This project will ensure the
preservation of this collection as a national resource for future generations.
The project also engages teens in understanding the role collections play in
furthering scientific discovery. Families, students, and the general public can
also participate as Citizen Scientists and help discover biodiversity by
visiting http://microplants.fieldmuseum.org. The project has strong training,
outreach and educational components that will improve science instruction and
student learning, leveraging museum resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal objective is to curate the recently acquired private herbarium of an
estimated 35,000 liverwort (Marchantiophyta) specimens of the late Prof. Rudolf
M. Schuster, one of the most preeminent bryologists in the history of the
discipline. The current condition of this collection, ranging from specimens in
original newspaper and brown paper bags to original collecting packets,
necessitates extensive curation. The bryology research community has been
waiting decades to access this important collection in its entirety as many
significant specimens remained in private residence and were not made available.
There is vital type material that requires urgent attention. The principal
objectives include curating, barcoding, databasing and imaging all label data
and selected specimens. The timing of these collection improvement activities
will leverage and is synergistic with national digitization efforts and
international research programs. The digitization effort will provide digital
access to this collection, unlock new distribution records and new species to
science, and contribute to international databasing activities such as GBIF, The
Plant List, and EOL. All data resulting from this project will be shared with
iDigBio (https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring accessibility to researchers and
educators. Duplicate specimen material will be distributed to countries of
origin that would provide valuable reference material, mainly from under-
resourced yet biodiversity rich regions.