* 1458163
* Sustaining Undergraduate Classroom and Career Excellence for STEM Students (SUCCESS) Project
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Sharmin Sikich, DOANE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 03/31/2022
* USD 607,539.00

In Nebraska, seven of the twelve industry clusters that drive the state economy
are STEM-related. However, Nebraska STEM employers struggle to employ and retain
highly qualified, technically skilled employees, citing "limited workforce
availability" as the primary disadvantage to business growth statewide. Doane
College's Sustaining Undergraduate Classroom and Career Excellence for STEM
Students (SUCCESS) Project will award scholarships to 24 academically talented
students with financial need in the college's biology, biochemistry, chemistry,
environmental science, or physics program. Through increasing enrollment in STEM
majors and connecting students to local STEM industries, the project will
address Nebraska's need for a highly qualified STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical merit of this project lies in its
plan to design, implement, assess, and advance practices that support STEM
student success, such as STEM living and learning communities, Four-Year
Graduation Guarantees, common coursework structures, STEM workshops, and
undergraduate research experiences. Guided by a highly qualified PI team, and
with strong institutional support, the SUCCESS project will evaluate STEM
recruitment activities in order to advance knowledge regarding which activities
are most successful at increasing STEM student postsecondary enrollment.
Moreover, the project will build on past and current EPSCoR funding to increase
the number and quality of research opportunities for STEM students, as well as
opportunities for STEM students to participate and present at professional STEM
conferences. Evaluation findings will be disseminated within the Doane community
and to other postsecondary institutions and STEM professionals in order to
advance the knowledge and practice of STEM student recruitment, retention to
graduation, and STEM career preparation and placement, thus contributing to the
knowledge base about undergraduate scholarship projects of this type and
underlying elements that make them successful.