* 1458583
* Future Tech Stars NSF S-STEM Scholarship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Alexandra Vaschillo, Lake Washington Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2019
* USD 583,256.00

The goal of the Lake Washington Institute of Technology (LWTech) will be to
develop the Future Tech Stars NSF S-STEM Scholarship Program (Future Tech Stars)
to provide approximately 100 scholarships to full-time, low income, non-
traditional students in four STEM disciplines: Computer Security, Information
Technology Applications, Digital Gaming, and Multimedia Design. With more
students attending full time, the college anticipates increased student
retention, improved completion rates of degrees and certificates, and additional
students transferring to a four-year university. These outcomes directly support
national policy goals to improve post-high school education attainment. Future
Tech Stars will address the growing need for a skilled workforce to support the
vibrant technology industry in the Greater Puget Sound region and as a result
will lead to economic development for the Greater Puget Sound region and
improved employment outcomes for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three goals
of the program will be to: support student retention to complete certificates
within two years and associate's degrees within three years; increase the number
of students receiving a Certificate or Associate's degree in an information
technology, digital media, or computer networking technology program; and
increase the number of students who transfer to a four-year college or
university. To support full-time students and to encourage the transition to
full-time status, scholarship recipients will receive support from the program
coordinator and from faculty who will provide dedicated support through writing
workshops and advising. Through this work, this program will increase the body
of knowledge around support services in scholarship programs, especially in
programs targeting non-traditional students in technology programs. In terms of
the broader impacts, the college will work closely with students and financial
aid professionals to help them stay focused in studies. The students will be
tracked with an Academic Early Warning system to identify problems early on and
seek to help the students take corrective action. The project will involve the
whole campus, including the president, the PI, and individual students. Through
an evaluation of the project, the program coordinators will provide information
that can be used when disseminating the results of the project. As a member of
the State Board for Community and Technical Colleges (SBCTC), LWTech will access
SBCTC resources for use in dissemination of results at regional conferences,
through their yearly fact book, and at quarterly statewide meetings of college
staff associated with divisions such as Financial Aid, Institutional Research,
and Instruction.