* 1458888
* Net Community Production from O2 measurements on Argo Floats
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Steven Emerson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2019
* USD 860,663.00

The flux of biologically-produced organic matter out of the upper, sun-lit
waters to the deep ocean is known as the "biological pump". The geographic
distribution and temporal variability of the marine biological pump influences
atmospheric carbon dioxide levels, and maintains the oxygen distribution in the
ocean below the sun-lit zone. Determining this flux is essential for
understanding the marine carbon cycle feedback related to climate change.
Shipboard oxygen measurements, the currently-used method, are accurate and can
resolve small changes, but they cannot provide the areal and temporal oxygen
distribution necessary to resolve global geographic variability in primary
productivity. The goal of this project is to attain the necessary geographic
diversity of experimental results by measuring accurate annual cycles of oxygen
using sensors on autonomous platforms along three ocean transects with strong
gradients in carbon export. Results from this study will broaden the geographic
distribution of experimentally-determined marine biological pump observations.
The project will involve training for a postdoctoral researcher and will develop
an educational module on carbon cycle science for high school teachers.

The oxygen mass balance method has been used to determine net annual biological
oxygen production at marine time-series sites using shipboard oxygen
measurements and mooring-based oxygen sensors that are calibrated by Winkler
titrations. It has thus far been difficult to use this method on profiling
floats because the oxygen sensors have not been accurate. Recent studies have
shown improved accuracies in oxygen concentration measurements using Optodes on
Argo floats compared with the Winkler titrations. In this project, a researcher
will deploy Argo floats with calibrated and specially mounted Aanderaa Optode
oxygen sensors along three transects in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans that
cross regions of stark contrasts in biological carbon export. The data will be
used along with an upper ocean model to determine annual net biological oxygen
production, which is stoichiometrically related to annual net community
production (ANCP) and annual organic carbon export. The goal of this work is to
determine the geographic distribution of ANCP, and compare it with carbon export
values determined from satellite-based methods. In addition, the researcher will
also develop an oxygen-Argo system capable of monitoring small changes in the
oxygen concentration of the oxygen minimum zone.