* 1458845
* Linking nearshore kelp forest dynamics to sandy beach ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Carter Ohlmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,027,987.00

Primary producers, such as plants and algae, form the basis of most food webs
and their productivity and fate fundamentally shape ecosystems. Often, however,
food and other resources are delivered to a food web from an outside source,
providing a subsidy to the recipient ecosystem. Understanding these types of
trophic connections and exchanges between ecosystems is necessary for predicting
how food webs may respond to change, whether environmental or anthropogenic.
Despite their potential importance, quantitative evaluations of cross-ecosystem
material fluxes, variation of these fluxes in time and space, and ecological
responses of recipient communities are lacking, particularly for marine
ecosystems. By investigating links between a source ecosystem, kelp forests, and
a recipient ecosystem, sandy beaches, this project will expand and transform our
understanding of cross-ecosystem fluxes in the coastal ocean. Nearshore kelp
forests are highly productive marine ecosystems characterized by large seasonal
and interannual variations in net primary production (NPP). More than 90% of
kelp forest NPP is exported to adjacent ecosystems including the intertidal
zone. Lacking attached plants and algae, sandy beach ecosystems near kelp
forests depend heavily on imported drift kelp (wrack) to support complex and
diverse food webs. Although sandy beaches are a dominant shoreline type along
all U.S. coasts, provide habitat and prey for wildlife, including endangered
species, and are highly valued by society as recreational and cultural resources
that drive vibrant coastal economies, they receive little ecological study
compared to other shoreline types. This lack of knowledge hinders the
conservation and management of beaches as ecosystems. Perched on the narrow rim
between land and sea, beaches are highly vulnerable to climate change,
particularly sea level rise, and will be impacted by changes in climate, as will
kelp forests. This project integrates biological and physical approaches to
achieve an understanding of the fate and transport of exported kelp, and how
variability in this resource subsidy shapes the community structure and function
of recipient beach ecosystems. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
integral members of the research team, receiving scientific training and
mentoring in coastal marine ecology and in public outreach and education. The
training and participation of local residents and coastal managers in regular
shoreline surveys for beached kelp plants will provide an essential research
component of the study and enhance public awareness of scientific research,
coastal ecology and the role of links between kelp forest and beach ecosystems.
The results of this project will provide new insights into the dynamics of
connectivity between coastal marine ecosystems that can be applied to their
conservation and management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
understand trophic connectivity between a donor ecosystem, kelp forests, and a
recipient ecosystem, sandy beaches, with two primary goals: 1) an evaluation of
how variation in kelp wrack input affects patterns and processes in beach
ecosystems and 2) a quantitative understanding of trophic connectivity through
physical transport and input of drift kelp biomass from kelp forests to sandy
beaches. The project will begin with two years of intensive work at a well-
studied kelp forest in the Santa Barbara Channel, Mohawk Reef, and along 10 km
of adjacent coastline, where the research team will measure intertidal community
structure over time in response to variability in kelp inputs. To assess effects
of variation in wrack input on ecosystem function, they will also measure kelp
consumption and secondary production rates of intertidal consumers on adjacent
beaches. They will directly observe fate and transport of kelp using
complimentary approaches: 1) tracking kelp plants tagged at Mohawk Reef using
drifters with GPS; and 2) tagging large numbers of kelp plants (2000) with
"drift cards" at Mohawk Reef for recovery by the project team and trained
volunteer beachcombers. Ending distributions of recovered drift cards and
drifter tracks along the shoreline will then be computed. These data will be
used to inform and validate a kelp forest-to-beach kelp transport model based on
numerical simulations of coastal surface currents from the Regional Oceanic
Modeling System (ROMS). Using predicted kelp beaching rates from this model run
regionally, the investigators will then sample community structure and wrack
biomass at a larger set of beaches spanning 100 km of the southern California
shoreline to test the generality of research findings. This combination of fate
and transport observations, beach community surveys and process measurements,
and modeling will allow the investigators to characterize temporal variability
in kelp subsidy inputs and the consequences of this variability for community
structure and function of recipient beach ecosystems.