* 1458496
* Scholarships for Robotics and Mechatronics Systems Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Mark Paulik, University of Detroit Mercy
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 593,500.00

In order to address the increasing demand for engineers who need to be trained
for multi-disciplinary product innovation, University of Detroit Mercy (UDM)
launched a new undergraduate degree program entitled "Robotics and Mechatronic
Systems Engineering." The objectives of this proposed S-STEM project is to
attract talented students, particularly women and minorities, into this new
program and increase the number of engineering graduates trained in
interdisciplinary engineering through financial help, mentoring, improved
student support, and retention efforts. The long-term strategy includes several
components: (a) working with the extensive pre-college program that the college
already sponsors to increase the interest of students in engineering
disciplines, (b) working with high schools, For Inspiration and Recognition of
Science and Technology (FIRST) Robotics Competition teams and community colleges
to attract more students into engineering disciplines, and (c) provide
scholarships and academic support to qualified and financially challenged
students who enroll in this new degree program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has an aggressive retention plan including: strong academic support for the
S-STEM scholars with comprehensive, focused, and cohort-based advising; cohort-
based registration in most classes to help develop camaraderie within the group;
tutoring in math and other challenging subjects, as needed; participation of all
S-STEM students in a one-year paid co-op experience in industry; mentoring from
alumni and industry leaders on the college advisory board; annual field trips
and networking events to develop professional relationships with potential
employers and develop career insights. This project will help develop the
understanding of the effect of early cohort formation and mentoring on college
success, enable formation of closer ties with specific industrial partners
through the expansion of the co-op program, and improve the student support
structure at UDM through evidence-based techniques of academic intervention.
This project will also help establish a committed group of alumni from the new
degree program who will make the program stronger for future generations of
engineers. The results from this program will be presented at educational
conferences such as American Society for Engineering Education Annual conference
and the Frontiers in Engineering Education conference.