* 1458719
* Supporting Inclusive Excellence in STEM Education for Low-Income High-Achieving Students through Scholarships and Innovative Programming
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Kathryn Goddard, Ursinus College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 05/31/2021
* USD 593,357.00

The Supporting Inclusive Excellence (SIE) project at Ursinus College will
support 30 academically talented students demonstrating financial need.
Scholarships and support programs will assist these students in completing their
majors in biology, biochemistry, or neuroscience and in entering the STEM
workforce or STEM graduate school following completion of a baccalaureate
degree. This project will address a national need for trained individuals to
enter a growing number of STEM career opportunities. Over the five-year grant
period, 30 students will receive scholarships to help close the gap between
existing aid and family contributions for tuition. Not only will academic
support systems be provided to scholarship recipients to remain in the pipeline
toward future STEM careers, other students on campus will also benefit from some
of these supports.

The technical merit of the project lies in its coordinated approach to support
recruitment and retention of STEM students through academic advising, curricular
and co-curricular activities, mentoring and research opportunities. Activities
for scholarship recipients include: 1) intensive co-curricular advising to
support STEM coursework, 2) a bridge program to facilitate the transition
between the first and second semesters of introductory biology, 3) inclusive
pedagogy in introductory biology and chemistry courses, 4) a series of workshops
offered by the Career and Professional Development office towards achieving STEM
careers, and 5) research opportunities that will strengthen students' connection
to the STEM community. The SIE project will be assessed and findings will be
shared so that other institutions can incorporate successful approaches for
supporting high-achieving and low-income students. The results of the assessment
will contribute to the larger knowledge-base regarding the circumstances under
which scholarship projects of this type are successful.