* 1458952
* RII Track-1: Gravitational Wave Astronomy and the Appalachian Freshwater Initiative
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2023
* Sarah Tucker, Higher Education Policy Commission
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 21,066,907.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
IIA-1458952&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: RII Track-1: Gravitational Wave
Astronomy and the Appalachian Freshwater
Initiative&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Higher Education Policy
Commission&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Research
Consortia will be established in the strategic and WV-specific areas of
freshwater quality research and detection of gravitational waves (GWs). Research
on water quality is motivated by the state?s prioritization of management of
water resources. An interdisciplinary team of researchers with expertise in
biology, ecology, environmental engineering, chemistry, and geology will develop
analytical facilities and expertise through the Appalachian Freshwater
Initiative (AFI) to understand and detect ecological and biological impacts of
complex mixtures of contaminants in water under varying climate change
scenarios. Research on GW detection will take advantage of the Robert C. Byrd
Green Bank Telescope in Green Bank, WV. This team, consisting of astrophysicists
and engineers, will build the physical and human infrastructure necessary for
researchers to directly detect and characterize gravitational waves. The project
will broaden participation of minorities and females in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) professions through continuing education
workshops and scholarships. Public engagement will occur through citizen science
efforts, as well as museum and planetarium displays and
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;The freshwater
quality research focuses on detecting novel and dilute contaminants and
pathogens, understanding the complex chemical interactions and pathogen
characteristics, predicting contaminant transport, toxicity, and degradation
pathways, and understanding how climate-related changes in precipitation regimes
affect biological communities. The group will develop rapid, sensitive, low-cost
sensors for contaminants and pathogens that have the potential to impact aquatic
ecosystems and the freshwater supply. Researchers will work to understand the
sub-lethal, chronic, and cumulative effects of the chemical, biological, and
physical contaminants in Appalachian streams and rivers. In addition, the group
will model effects of multi-contaminant mixtures on ecological communities.
Detection of GWs and the characterization of GW sources will allow studies
ranging from early universe cosmology to formation and evolution of galaxies to
populations of compact objects in the local universe to tests of general
relativity and alternative theories of gravity. The sensitivity of pulsar timing
arrays to nanoHertz frequency gravitational waves emitted by supermassive black-
hole binaries will be enhanced through addition of more millisecond pulsars to
the array, development of improved algorithms for characterization of pulsars,
better understanding of the source populations, and improvements in the
sensitivity and efficiency of algorithms for detecting GW signatures.