* 1458469
* Program for the Advancement of the Discipline
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Margaret Vitullo, American Sociological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2018
* USD 214,720.00

SES- 1458469&lt;br/&gt;John W. Curtis&lt;br/&gt;American Sociological
Association&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding through this award provides ongoing
support for the joint American Sociological Association/National Science
Foundation (ASA/NSF) Fund for the Advancement of the Discipline (FAD). Since its
inception in 1987, FAD has provided small grants to encourage innovative
research and support conferences that advance the state of knowledge within the
discipline. More than 300 scholars have received funding through the program to
date, and this award, together with a renewed funding commitment from the ASA,
will continue the program for another three years. Proposals submitted to FAD
are reviewed by an advisory committee of established scholars; about one quarter
of the submitted applications is funded, with a maximum award of $8,000. Funds
have been utilized by recipients to train research assistants, and defray the
costs of original data collection, data transcription, and travel to archives.
Among recent FAD recipients,those receiving awards between 2009 and 2012?more
than half published results from their supported project in a scholarly journal
or book and 19 percent reported that their work had been cited in popular media.
Spread over all recipients during the same period, every dollar spent on FAD
awards generated $1.46 in additional funding from other sources; among the
approximate one-third of FAD researchers whose awards led directly to additional
research support, the average additional return was
$4.76.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important purpose of the FAD program is to
encourage successful applications on the part of younger scholars, those
employed outside research universities, and researchers who are minorities and
women. FAD provides guidance and mentoring to these scholars through a well-
developed process, including developmental evaluations by prominent scholars in
the discipline and mentoring opportunities. Additional broader impacts of FAD
include substantial student training and learning; curriculum modification;
building scholarly networks; contributions to sociological infrastructure; and
policy impact and media attention. The scholarly, educational, and policy
impacts of FAD projects far outweigh the cost of these small awards.