* 1458739
* Scholarship Program for Master's Degree Seeking Students in Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Aaron Carpenter, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 610,180.00

Binghamton University will create a scholarship program that will encourage
capable, domestic, and financially challenged students to successfully complete
a master's (MS) degree in electrical, computer, or mechanical engineering. MS
students will also develop leadership skills, entrepreneurial ability, and
teamwork through course work, seminars, and internships in industry. The program
allows Binghamton University to offer scholarships to directly address a current
need in high-technology industries for American citizens with advanced degrees
in engineering. Scholarships for academically strong engineering students, who
may not otherwise be able to afford study for advanced engineering degrees, will
provide the future technological leadership needed by national, regional, and
local high-technology industries.

The Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Mechanical
Engineering at Binghamton University will recruit three cohorts of nine students
each. The program of study for the recipients will closely follow the
recommendations in the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) reports for
educating the engineer of 2020. Specifically, the program will be dedicated to
fostering the MS degree as a professional engineering degree. As advocated by
the NAE in Engineer 2020, the development of advanced technical expertise will
be combined with leadership skills, entrepreneurial thinking, and teamwork.
These educational goals will be achieved through courses and seminars taken in
common by the students. Internships opportunities with high-technology
industries will be emphasized. The S-STEM scholars will participate in monthly
seminars with fellow students, faculty members, and industry partners. The
seminars will be used as a vehicle to guide students in their academic and
professional development. The program aligns with an institution-wide initiative
at Binghamton University highlighting combining master's degrees with
internships. The S-STEM scholars will benefit from Binghamton University's
departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Mechanical Engineering
history of active interdisciplinary collaboration and engagement with industry.
The experience of the program as developed through evaluation and assessment
will add to the body of knowledge about best practices for need and merit-based
scholarship programs in engineering.