* 1458504
* S-STEM: UTM S-STEM Scholars
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Ray Witmer, University of Tennessee Martin
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 586,000.00

Project UTM S-STEM at the University of Tennessee Martin (UTM) will provide 35
scholarships for four years averaging $4,800 each year to academically promising
students with financial need. Students will be incoming freshman and transfer
students majoring in Chemistry, Engineering, Geology, Computer Science, and
Mathematics. This project will provide the resources needed to recruit, support,
and retain more students, including minorities and women, in STEM fields that
will improve the nation's capacity for innovation and provide regional industry
with needed STEM talent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will recruit STEM
students that have demonstrated financial need as well the desire and capability
to major in an underrepresented STEM field: Chemistry, Mathematics, Engineering,
Computer Science, or Geology. The UTM student body is largely first generation
college students that come from rural areas and many come from economically
challenged areas of Tennessee. The average family income of West Tennessee is
lower than the US average and many of these students that come to UTM are under-
prepared for STEM studies. A number of support mechanisms will be provided to
aid these students. A major focus of the project will be the development of a
STEM academy. This two week intensive academic course will be collaboratively
taught each summer by all STEM disciplines and will review material from the
previous year and introduce new material students will see in the upcoming year.
The STEM academy will help to remedy areas where UTM S-STEM Scholars are
struggling and give them a jump start on the upcoming year. It will serve as a
method to reinforce material and concepts students learn in their classes and
help them to retain this knowledge throughout their academic career. The project
will also establish a learning community. This community will provide both
scholarly and social activities to support the S-STEM students to persist in
STEM and aid in career exploration. Activities will include monthly lunches with
faculty, field trips to industrial sites and other areas specific to each of the
disciplines involved, seminars, and involvement in service learning. Scholarship
students will be guided in career exploration through exposure to opportunities
in government, industry, research, academia, and education through field trips
and speakers. Scholarship students will be encouraged to participate in research
projects with mentoring faculty to broaden their STEM experiences and to apply
to internships, summer experiences, and REU programs. This scholarship program
will directly affect the success of the students involved as well as impact how
science education is conducted in the future. The project will be evaluated
through attitudinal surveys, graduation and retention rate data, STEM course
performance, and questionnaires on all project components. Project results will
be disseminated to the campus community and at national meetings focused on STEM
education as data is evaluated yearly. S-STEM scholars will make YouTube videos
to showcase their experiences throughout their time at UTM. The incorporation of
the STEM Academy will serve as a model for all STEM and ideally other
disciplines within the university and at other 4-year institutions with similar
demographics.