* 1458505
* Biotechnology, Bioremediation, Math and Science (BioMaS) Workforce Collaborative
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Stephanie Goloway, Community College of Allegheny County Allegheny Campus
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 629,207.00

This National Science Foundation Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at the Community College of
Allegheny County, Allegheny Campus, will provide scholarships, academic support,
and wraparound services to talented associate's degree students majoring in
Biotechnology, Bioremediation, and Math &amp; Science (BioMaS) who demonstrate
financial need. The project will address the need for biotechnology workers, as
well as science and mathematics teachers, in the ten-county Pittsburgh region by
training scholarship recipients for employment in these high-growth sectors, and
providing the support scholars need to excel and become highly-qualified
graduates in their fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BioMaS project goals will
include (1) providing scholarships and critical wraparound services, including
an onsite clinical social worker to assist students with barriers, internship
opportunities, and the job search; learning community experiences; and tutoring
to improve retention, persistence, graduation and employment rates; (2)
strengthening pathways to employment; (3) connecting degree programs to regional
industry by linking potential employers and college training to solidify and
build sustainability through an employment pipeline; and (4) providing
information on STEM training and jobs for high-school and college students,
including veterans and underrepresented minorities. The BioMaS project will
create pathways to biotechnology and bioremediation employment opportunities, or
to further education for graduates, by leveraging well-established business and
higher education partnerships. In addition, a partnership with Indiana
University of Pennsylvania will provide a pathway for BioMaS Math &amp; Sciences
graduates to obtain bachelor's degrees in middle-level education in math and
science. Project goals will be evaluated via both qualitative and quantitative
analyses of data such as scholar demographics, enrollment and completion
patterns, background preparation, and course and program performance; scholar
participation rates and feedback regarding optional program elements; and rates
of employment. The project is ultimately expected to serve as a model for
community colleges, particularly in terms of understanding of how to develop
wraparound services for students that will support them as they prepare to
contribute to a highly-skilled STEM workforce.