* 1458093
* Achieving Community College Excellence, Success and Scholarship (ACCESS) in  Engineering and Computer Science
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Chienann Hou, Montgomery College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 593,468.00

This National Science Foundation Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Montgomery College in
Rockville, Maryland will provide scholarships and support services to
academically-talented students majoring in engineering and computer science who
demonstrate financial need. The project will address the need for larger numbers
of engineering and computer science professionals, as well as the need to
increase the proportion of these professionals who are from groups
underrepresented in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Main goals of the
Achieving Community College Excellence, Success and Scholarship (ACCESS) in
Engineering and Computer Science S-STEM program at Montgomery College will
include increasing the number of community college students who earn bachelor's
degrees in engineering and computer science, and contributing to the development
of a scalable engineering education model for students transitioning from
community colleges to four-year institutions. Students will be recruited from
high schools and college-level math and science courses, and selected based on
academic potential demonstrated via cognitive and non-cognitive correlates of
academic success. The five-year ACCESS project will provide 136 scholarships and
support five cohorts of students by expanding on best practices and building on
current practices involving high school outreach, intensive faculty and peer
support, undergraduate research opportunities, transfer support, and strong
articulation agreements and programmatic enhancements with select four-year
engineering colleges. Throughout the project, its success will be evaluated via
analyses of multiple data sources, including assessments of student support
services, student skills development, and student responses to interview and
focus group questions. The project is expected to contribute to understanding
attributes and practices of successful student scholarship and support programs,
such as integrated, inquiry-based instructional methodologies; student support
systems; structured two-year/four-year program articulations; and transfer and
career advising.