* 1458130
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Plant Genotype-Phenotype (G2P) Association Discovery via Integrative Genome-scale Biological Network & Genome-wide Association Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Hairong Wei, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 384,351.00

Understanding the mechanisms of genotype and phenotype (G2P) associations has
been an important and challenging task in modern biology. The challenge lies in
the high-dimensional gene variables and the complexity of gene regulation and
interactions that collectively define particular phenotypes (also called
traits). The project will develop innovative methods, tools and bioinformatics
systems to decipher the plant G2P associations through integrative genome-scale
biological network and genome-wide association analysis. A breakthrough in this
work will lead to a systems-level understanding of how biological processes,
pathways and complex traits in plants are hierarchically regulated. Advancing
such fundamental knowledge will greatly benefit modern genome-assisted plant
breeding by providing the underlying regulatory mechanisms and key regulators of
agriculturally important traits. This in turn will have great potential to be
translated into new means of improving plant quality and production for
agriculture, thus benefiting society as a whole. Cutting-edge technologies will
be developed to study G2P associations in plants, providing excellent
opportunities for training undergraduates, graduates and postdocs in
interdisciplinary fields such as computational biology, bioinformatics, plant
genomics, and statistical genetics, at the three institutes. Underrepresented
minorities and women will be especially targeted in the recruitment of the
project. The research will form the basis of the proposed educational workshops
centering on bioinformatics and statistical genetics. Creative and innovative
hands-on outreach activities will be arranged through the three institutes?
outreach programs with local K-12 schools to inspire young minds to become
bioinformatics scientists.

Innovative methods will be developed to analyze genome-scale biological networks
and genome-wide associations through a fully integrated bioinformatics platform,
enabling the discovery of G2P associations in plants. Specific aims of the
project include 1) to develop novel top-down and bottom-up graphical Gaussian
model (GGM) algorithms to reconstruct the hierarchical gene networks that
control biological processes and pathways; 2) to develop models and algorithms
that enable large-scale marker-trait association analysis with high precision
using novel statistical genetics approaches; and 3) to develop a Graph-search-
empowered integrative bioinformatics platform to facilitate the integration,
deciphering and discovery of G2P associations. To validate our approaches and
tools, public data from genome-wide plant 'omics' studies and genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) will be integrated and analyzed, associating traits
with SNP markers and fine-tuning the prediction of phenotype-associated
hierarchical and/or pleiotropic regulators and functional networks. The novel
knowledge and analytic methods and tools yielded from this project will be
disseminated into the public at large through presentations, publications and
web applications. All the tools and data resources will be made freely available
at http://plantgrn.org/ to the plant research communities, accelerating plant
bioinformatics and plant science research, education and applications.