* 1458572
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: An open infrastructure to disseminate phylogenetic knowledge
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Arlin Stoltzfus, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2020
* USD 447,696.00

Because phylogenies (trees) showing the evolutionary relationships of species
are so useful in bioscience and biotechnology, there has been a major worldwide
effort to determine trees for various groups of organisms. This information can
be knitted together into a single "Tree of Life" (ToL) covering millions of
species, though it is often better to think of expert ToL knowledge as a forest
of overlapping source-trees. Because this body of knowledge is complex, rapidly
changing, and distributed among many online resources, getting the latest
knowledge is a challenge. The focus of this project is to get ToL knowledge into
the hands of scientists, educators, and the public, by building a distributed
system of internet services that work together with existing NSF-sponsored
projects to deliver custom trees to users as quickly and easily as they
currently get online driving directions. The resulting system will allow a
greater range of life-sciences researchers to ask more complex and challenging
questions relating to diversity and biological functions. The project will work
directly with educators and with educational resources such as the Encyclopedia
of Life, making it easy for millions of users to access the latest scientific
knowledge of species relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phylogenetic trees are
useful in all areas of biology, both to organize knowledge by guiding
classification and for process-based models that allow scientists to make robust
inferences from comparisons of evolved entities (genes, species, etc).
Phylogenetic knowledge is disseminated today via a very large number of
idiosyncratic pathways, most of which are not easily traceable. While experts
continue expanding the Tree of Life (ToL) knowledge, addressing gaps and
conflicts, our focus is on dissemination, putting ToL knowledge in the hands of
researchers, educators, and the public. The goal of this project is to design
and develop an open web-service architecture for ToL delivery, with the
functionality necessary to integrate into scientific workflows, including name-
resolution, tree discovery, subtree extraction, and scaling of trees. The
architecture will be designed as a sustainable distributed collection of
services and will rely on semantically rich descriptions to facilitate
composition of services and to documents the tree discovery and reuse process.
The project will cultivate this system as a community resource by (1) involving
partners, domain experts, and a broader phyloinformatics community in the design
process; (2) partnering with other projects to involve them as service-providers
or consumers; (3) developing innovative clients demonstrating quantitatively
important use-cases; (4) staging a hackathon for participants to add services or
develop clients. Results of the project will be accessible via
www.phylotastic.org.