* 1458223
* CSBR Ownership Transfer: Saving an ecologically data-rich collection: adding the Geological Survey of Alabama Fish Collection to The University of Alabama Ichthyological Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Phillip Harris, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 272,239.00

An award is made to the University of Alabama - Tuscaloosa to acquire the fish
collection of the Geological Survey of Alabama (GSA). This collection of over
450,000 specimens of freshwater fishes from throughout the State, provides an
unparalleled record of the occurrence, distribution, and ecology of these
species in the Tennessee and Mobile River basins, will be transferred to the
University of Alabama Ichthyological Collection (UAIC). The transfer will secure
the collection at UAIC and ensure the long-term care of these valuable
specimens, as well as providing increased access to the specimens and associated
ecological data through the UAIC web portal (specifyweb.as.ua.edu) and those of
project partners (GBIF, FishNet2, VertNet, and iDigBio). The intensive sampling
effort that resulted in the GSA collection makes it of particular importance to
the research community including its use in student training and research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project transfers ownership of the GSA fish
collection into UAIC, providing immediate curatorial intervention to a very
large collection of freshwater fishes and associated ecological data that would
otherwise be lost to the scientific community. Addition of these specimens into
UAIC augments and supplements the material currently in UAIC in both the number
of specimens and the value of the associated collection and ecological data to
the research community. The GSA collection represents intensive sampling
throughout Alabama and surrounding drainages and potentially informs
systematics, biogeography, taxonomy, life-history, and ecological studies. The
environmental data associated with a large portion of the specimens provide
time-series information usable by conservation biologists, ecologists and land
managers to document human impacts and environmental changes across freshwater
aquatic ecosystems in Alabama. The GSA collection also greatly increases UAIC's
holdings of threatened and endangered species endemic to Alabama, and
facilitates future research on these taxa by providing electronic access to
these valuable specimens. By uniting these collections and providing access to
associated field data through several biodiversity information portals an
invaluable resource documenting freshwater fish biodiversity in Alabama and the
southeastern United States is made available for training and research.