* 1458808
* Bilateral BBSRC-NSF/BIO:Towards detailed and consistent function prediction from protein family databases
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Paul Thomas, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,679,187.00

Thanks to continuing developments in DNA sequencing technology, we now know the
exact genetic makeup ("genome") of thousands of different organisms, encoding
millions of different proteins, and these numbers continue to grow rapidly. But
simply knowing the chemical specification (the "sequence") of these proteins is
only a first step: the ultimate goal is to discover how genes and proteins
function to support the diversity of life, and also how some of them can be used
for commercial and biotechnology applications. This research project will expand
the capability of scientists and their students to advance their analyses from
sequences to functions, by bringing together multiple different state-of-the-art
approaches. Each of these approaches uses both computational (necessary to
address a problem of this magnitude) and broad biological
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general approach in this project is to
classify proteins into families of related proteins, and, wherever possible,
describe how each family relates to function. These relations may be very
complex, and scientific accuracy will require application of multiple, diverse
methods. In order to accomplish this aim, the project will expand InterPro, a
widely used resource that already contains (though with limited integration)
three of the leading databases for protein family and functional classification:
PANTHER, Pfam and TIGRFAM. A fourth classification resource, the Structure-
Function Linkage Database (SFLD), will also be incorporated into InterPro. These
four databases use complementary methodologies to represent and describe protein
relationships, which will be integrated to address the problem of protein
function classification with unprecedented accuracy, precision and ease-of-use.
The products of this work will be used to improve sequence analysis tools that
support the scientific community, as well as to provide enhanced educational
materials, and will be broadly accessible over the web at
http://ebi.ac.uk/interpro.