* 1458402
* ABI Development: The Electronic Transponder Analysis Gateway (ETAG): An Animal Behavior Observatory
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Eli Bridge, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2020
* USD 314,890.00

The Electronic Transponder Analysis Gateway (ETAG) is a software system enabling
a biological observatory by providing professional data management and versatile
data dissemination to a growing community of researchers who use Radio Frequency
Identification (RFID) technology to better understand animal behavior. RFID
allows for short-range wireless communication between small transponder tags and
readers, and it can facilitate tracking of individual items or animals that are
equipped with a tag. RFID is a mature and ubiquitous technology, familiar to
people in the form of "microchip" tags implanted in cats and dogs. A community
of researchers has emerged that employs RFID to track individual birds, mammals,
fish, reptiles, and even insects in a wide range of field and laboratory
research endeavors. For the majority of these projects, data collection,
analysis, and curation are currently done by hand, which requires individual
investigators to spend considerable time on data management rather than science.
ETAG will transform the practices of its user community, by creating a common
infrastructure based on open-source tools that will allow scientists to collect,
validate, visualize, analyze, and share data and metadata in near real-time. As
a result, researchers will have new capacities both for producing novel science
and for sharing their work with their peers and the general public. The capacity
to follow the activities of individual animals at feeding stations and nests is
a powerful gateway to conversations about Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math (STEM). ETAG will provide new avenues for researchers to showcase their
work and share it with the public through websites and social networking,
featuring real-time updates from activities in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the ETAG project is to generate informatics
infrastructure for RFID-based research, and to equip the emerging user community
with resources that let them get the most from their data both in terms of
generating new science and performing public outreach and education. ETAG will
serve as a data upload portal, a professionally curated database, and a
multifaceted dissemination portal for RFID data and will also facilitate the
exchange of technical information about hardware, experimental approaches,
protocols, and data analysis software produced by the user community. ETAG is
part of a broader initiative that will make low-cost, highly versatile RFID
equipment available to the scientific community. Already, more than 50 research
groups in 19 countries have employed RFID systems designed by the ETAG team to
carry out data collection in field and lab settings. Improved hardware and
software resources will spur even wider adoption of RFID technologies by
biologists and educators. With system support for real time data exchange, ETAG
will allow these users to monitor their field or lab studies remotely and
respond rapidly to emerging developments or problems. In addition, a common set
of Internet-based tools will make it possible for teams of biologists and/or
citizen scientists to undertake studies at a continental scale with concomitant
data collection at networks of field sites. Finally, the software design
documents and code will all be open source, allowing scientists to form
alliances with a range of engineers, web designers, and IT specialists who will
help add to and maintain the ETAG infrastructure. Progress and outcomes of the
project can be tracked at http://etag.animalmigration.org.