* 1458520
* Science and Mathematics Attraction, Retention, and Training for Texas (SMART Texas)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Gumm, Stephen F. Austin State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2021
* USD 623,764.00

This NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) project at Stephen F. Austin State University (SFASU) will provide
academic, social, career preparation, and scholarship support to approximately
twenty (20) financially deserving mathematics and biology majors with high
academic potential. The goals of the Science and Mathematics Attraction,
Retention, and Training for Texas (SMART Texas) program are to: (1) increase the
number of students entering and completing a mathematics or biology major; (2)
prepare mathematics and biology majors for the workforce or graduate study; and
(3) investigate and identify key elements of a replicable model for STEM student
success with a special focus on first generation low-income and other
underrepresented groups of undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SMART Texas project will incorporate a combination of innovative and established
best practice strategies to increase recruitment and retention, as well as
improve student success and graduation rates. The scholarship students will
engage in a STEM living learning community where they will be involved with STEM
peers and STEM faculty in both academic and non-academic settings. S-STEM
students will have access to cohort mentoring, dedicated academic mentoring by
faculty in their discipline, internships and undergraduate research
opportunities (including laboratory research), and a variety of networking
opportunities including support to attend and participate in discipline
conferences. The planned combination of strategies will be implemented and
investigated to determine obstacles students face and best practices to help
overcome these obstacles to increase participation, retention, graduation, and
overall student success, especially for underrepresented groups. A paired
longitudinal study will be conducted to examine the effects of these
interventions over time when compared to nonparticipating STEM majors. Results
will be disseminated throughout the STEM community.