* 1458714
* Advancing Student Futures in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Urmi Ghosh-Dastidar, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2020
* USD 616,288.00

This project at CUNY New York College of Technology will contribute to the
national workforce by providing scholarships and educational support to
academically promising students with financial need in associate degree programs
in computer science and chemical technology and baccalaureate degree programs in
applied mathematics and biomedical informatics. Because retention and graduation
rates in computer science and applied mathematics reveal a profound
underrepresentation of women, the project will place a heavy emphasis on
recruiting and enrolling greater numbers of female students and in providing
evidence-validated interventions to support their retention, graduation, and
workforce entry. The college is a Hispanic Serving Institution ranked third in
the nation in the number of associate-level STEM degrees awarded to Black
students, 23rd in degrees awarded to male students, and 48th in degrees awarded
to women. Because the college is a minority-serving institution, improving
retention and graduation will increase the participation of underrepresented
students in STEM undergraduate and graduate programs and the New York City
workforce, having ever-widening social and economic impact on individual
students, the institution, and the wider community. Using an active
dissemination agenda the institution will share key strategies and outcomes to
other CUNY institutions, peer Hispanic Serving Institutions, and other non-
research-intensive undergraduate institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through well
crafted activities the project will (1) recruit and increase participation in
four targeted science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) majors,
focusing on women, promising underrepresented students from local minority-
serving high schools, and undeclared and liberal arts students with strong math
preparation; (2) retain and graduate academically talented, low income students
in STEM programs by strongly encouraging students to register for 15+ credits
per semester to promote timely progress to graduation; (3) provide comprehensive
support structures at critical junctures that include financial support,
academic advisement, academic support, and career counseling, using a natural
cohort approach to developing a professional STEM identity; (4) increase
internal transfer of students from associate degree to baccalaureate degree
programs and STEM graduate study or workforce placement through advisement; and
(5) evaluate and assess the program, employing a cycle of continuous improvement
and well-defined metrics of project success. The project will build upon
intensive analysis of institutional data on retention and graduation in the
targeted programs and will implement a comprehensive set of academic and social
interventions such as Peer-Led Team Learning and other cohort-strengthening high
impact practices that have proven effective with low-income students. In
addition, the new baccalaureate program in Biomedical Informatics at the college
will develop competencies in computer applications in the use of conformational
and genomic data to elucidate biological phenomena and the secure electronic
storage, retrieval, and use of biomedical information in healthcare delivery and
research, reflecting the latest approaches in a burgeoning and rapidly changing
field.