* 1458098
* CSBR: Natural History: Essential storage upgrade for ornithological research collections at the University of Iowa Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Trina Roberts, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 366,540.00

This project will upgrade infrastructure in the bird, egg, and nest research
collections at the University of Iowa Museum of Natural History. Founded in
1858, UIMNH is the oldest US university museum west of the Mississippi River,
and it remains the only museum of its kind in the state. Its holdings represent
more than a century of biological collecting in Iowa, the Midwest, and around
the world, and are of historical and ecological importance. The ornithology
collection is among the largest and best-documented, with approximately 13,880
bird and 17,220 egg and nest specimens, many from the Midwest before large-scale
agriculture and urbanization drastically changed the landscape. This collection
is an important and irreplaceable resource for modern scientific studies,
including research on the effects of land-use and climate change, introduced and
invasive species, and modern agricultural practices. This upgrade will improve
conditions, alleviate overcrowding, and generally secure and stabilize the
collection, ensuring its continued availability while increasing access for
scientists and students. The project will provide training and development
opportunities for several undergraduate students. It will also include the
development of public exhibit components on the use of museum collections in
modern scientific research, to be displayed both at UIMNH and in the traveling
UI Mobile Museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project's major activity
will be the installation of a compactor storage system and new cabinets in one
room of Macbride Hall, the 1907 building housing UIMNH. Consolidating and
rehousing the ornithology collection in this single area will allow more
efficient use of space and taxonomic reorganization, and will greatly improve
access by staff and visitors. This upgrade will bring the entire ornithology
collection into an environmentally controlled room for the first time in its
history. As part of the upgrade and rehousing process, all specimens will be
georeferenced. Scientifically and historically important specimens will be
photographed, increasing the amount of digital data available for the
collection. The bases of public exhibit cases that currently contain research
specimens will be transformed into a combination of interactive exhibits for
children and "visible storage," introducing museum visitors to the research
collections and their role in modern science. In addition, a digital touchscreen
module on collections-based research will be added to the UI Mobile Museum
(http://discover.research.uiowa.edu/mobile-museum). All data resulting from this
project will be shared with iDigBio (https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring
accessibility to researchers and educators. Additional information on the UIMNH
collections can be found at http://www.uiowa.edu/mnh/researchcollections.html.