* 1458524
* ABI Development: A unified Galaxy-based platform for multi-omic data analysis and informatics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Timothy Griffin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,780,233.00

Acquisition of system-wide molecular information on genomes, proteomes and
metabolomes (multi-omics data) is now possible for biological researchers.
Approaches that jointly analyze and interpret multi-omic data provide new
understanding of the molecular interplay between genes, proteins and
metabolites. For example, proteogenomics integrates DNA or RNA sequence data
with mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics data to identify novel protein
variants expressed under different conditions; metaproteomics integrates
metagenomic data with MS-based proteomic data to identify proteins expressed by
microbial communities; metabologenomics integrates genomic and proteomic data
with metabolomic profiling data, connecting genotypes to function. To enable new
discoveries mined from multi-omic data, the raw data must first be analyzed with
specialized, domain specific software. Unfortunately, the requirement to master
and integrate different software for large-scale data analysis discourages many
researchers who may otherwise use and benefit from multi-omic approaches in
their work. The goal of this project is to provide a solution to this problem by
developing a unified, web-based analytical hub for multi-omic data accessible to
bench scientists. Broader Impact activities will include promotion and
dissemination of these software tools to the greater research community and
training of undergraduates in bioinformatics via internship
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage the web-based, user-
friendly and research enabling Galaxy bioinformatics workbench. In addition to
proteogenomics and metaproteomics, novel Galaxy extensions will be built to
enable data analysis for metabolomics, a field in desperate need of a unified
resource to consolidate its many useful but scattered software tools. Combined
with new interactive visualization tools, data exchange features, and deployment
in scalable and accessible cloud-based resources, Galaxy's functionality will be
significantly enhanced to empower more researchers in multi-omic data analysis.
The project has these Specific Aims: 1) Enhance the Galaxy environment with new
interactive visualization tools and data exchange functionalities necessary for
effective multi-omic data analysis; 2) Extend the Galaxy environment to analyze
and process diverse metabolomics data and support workflows for metabolic
activity profiling; 3) Extend the Galaxy environment for integrative genomic-
proteomic data analysis supporting proteogenomic and metaproteomic applications;
4) Ensure Broader Impact by promoting usage of Galaxy for multi-omics by the
research community and providing undergraduate training opportunities in
computational systems biology via a local area institutional network. Results
from this project can be found at usegalaxyp.org.