* 1458600
* Broadening the Net:  Promoting Success in the Sciences for All Students
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Emily Niemeyer, Southwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2021
* USD 614,325.00

To address regional and national STEM workforce demands, this NSF Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at
Southwestern University in Georgetown, Texas will provide access to quality
science and math education for 16 students with demonstrated financial need.
Enrollment in the institution's computer science, math and physics majors will
be bolstered through intensive recruitment efforts in area magnet and college-
preparatory high schools. The project will focus on making a variety of social
supports available while at the same time providing students with a curriculum
that integrate investigative learning strategies in introductory to upper-level
courses. This approach, which is grounded in the literature, has been shown to
have positive impacts on learning in general and to be empowering for students
from underrepresented groups and women.

Scholars will develop their scientific identities through project activities
that focus specifically on inclusivity, inquiry, and community-building.
Students will participate in two Summer Science Overnights, regular meetings
with dedicated S-STEM faculty mentors, a two-credit course on less well-known
career tracks in the sciences, cohort-building experiences, and clustered
enrollment. The overnights are an innovative way to introduce students to the
campus-wide STEM community and should help them create ties early on in their
college experience. Further, all of the project components are examples of
sustainable, transferrable tools for engaging STEM majors. The Evaluation Plan
describes three key areas for assessment including, (a) project deadlines and
benchmarks, (b)) formative assessment of individual S-STEM progress and
likelihood of retention, and (c) overall project formative and summative
assessment. Formative assessment will rely on student perceptions of academic
performance and engagement and of social and family support logged in journals.
The individual support structures will also be evaluated. Summative assessments
will be done in part through an annual questionnaire on scholars' perceptions of
their SSTEM academic and mentoring. The PI team will participate in the national
conversation on STEM education by reporting its results through meetings of the
Association of American Colleges and Universities and the Howard Hughes medical
Institute. A project website will also be designed.