* 1458626
* Bilateral BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Mining of imaging flow cytometry data for label-free, single cell analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Anne Carpenter, Broad Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 394,349.00

The goal of this project is to develop and demonstrate software to mine data
from imaging flow cytometers. These instruments can capture thousands of images
of cells per second. The images can in theory be analyzed to precisely measure
hundreds of features related to a cell's appearance ("morphology"); this project
is to develop advanced machine-learning software to accomplish this, unlocking
the otherwise hidden information within the images. The software will be
developed, improved, and validated in several demonstration experiments
involving the cell cycle, the component cells of primary blood, immune cell
activation, and stem cell identity. The goal will be to use as few or indeed no
fluorescent biomarkers, eliminating the need to perturb cells. The resulting
open-source software will be freely available to scientists worldwide for both
applied and clinical research, and will be accompanied by user-friendly training
materials and in-person workshops. The project is collaborative and
interdisciplinary and includes training early career-stage scientists in
computational biology, via the existing Scientists without Borders program.

The project involves close collaboration with researchers using imaging flow
cytometers and builds on successful interdisciplinary work in biological data
mining. In order to devise the novel software and methodology to mine the large
datasets acquired using imaging flow cytometry, the team will develop algorithms
to seamlessly import data from an imaging cytometer, robustly segment cells,
quality-filter them (e.g., for debris and blur), and quantify morphological
parameters (usually hundreds) for each cell (usually thousands), including
various measures of size, shape, and texture. Using these features, trained
machine-learning algorithms will identify cell phenotypes of interest or
otherwise characterize the state of cell in driving biological projects from
project partners who use imaging flow cytometry in a host of biological research
studies. The goal will be to use as few or indeed no fluorescent biomarkers,
eliminating the need to perturb cells. The project will give the scientific
community a validated, open-source software toolbox of image processing and
machine learning algorithms readily usable by biologists. More information about
the project can be found at:
http://www.broadinstitute.org/~anne/Carpenter_NSF_ImagingFlowCytometry.html