* 1458339
* C-PaMS Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2023
* Mary Lowe, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 05/31/2023
* USD 565,495.00

Loyola University Maryland aims to increase STEM graduation rates through the
Computer Science - Physics, and Mathematics Statistics (C-PaMS) scholars
program. The C-PaMS program will enroll two cohorts, in consecutive years, to
major in STEM disciplines. Scholars will receive a rigorous education taught by
faculty with a passion for undergraduate teaching, a focus on interdisciplinary
science, and a strong grounding in the liberal arts. Scholars will develop as a
cohort, through a first-year pre-orientation program and a living-learning
program. These programs will include shared mentors to orient scholars to
college life and to advise them about STEM opportunities. In subsequent years,
each cohort will continue to develop, as the scholars enroll in a colloquium
that connects them with local STEM professionals and an interdisciplinary
project-based course. Throughout their four years, the scholars will be advised
and encouraged to participate in STEM research and internship opportunities.
Through these experiences, scholars will gain the knowledge, skills, and
confidence necessary to succeed in STEM careers and graduate
education.Scholarships for academically strong computer science, physics and
mathematics students, who may not otherwise be able to afford college, have an
impact on the number of STEM graduates prepared to help national, regional, and
local companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will work with the
admissions and financial aid departments at Loyola to recruit and select
students for the program. To recruit locally, connections will be made with
Baltimore City High Schools. Recruitment strategies will be designed to
encourage participation from women and underrepresented groups by focusing on
local magnet high schools, where over 75 percent of the student population is
from these groups. The objectives of the program will be to: (1) increase the
affordability and access to STEM degrees, (2) Build cohorts to support student
success, (3) provide interdisciplinary STEM opportunities, and (4) increase
graduation rates in STEM by providing academic support for scholars. Through
evaluation and assessment, the project team will be able to determine which
objectives correspond with high levels of success in STEM at Loyola. Results
from the evaluation and assessment components of the program will be
disseminated at professional conferences and journals to encourage the
development of similar programs at other higher education institutions.