* 1458457
* ABI: Innovation: Computationally uncovering dynamic transcription factor interactions within and across organisms
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Mona Singh, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2019
* USD 707,468.00

This project entails the development of new computational methods to uncover the
dynamic variation of transcriptional regulatory networks. While nearly all cells
within an organism have the same DNA, they can exhibit very different
characteristics as different genes are turned on, or expressed, within them.
Transcription factor interactions, comprising regulatory networks, control which
genes are expressed, and thus the dynamics of these interactions across cells,
conditions and organisms are a critical feature of proper biological
functioning. To date, however, most existing knowledge about regulatory networks
is static in nature: for nearly all organisms, transcription factor interactions
are known under only a small number of conditions of interest. To help fill this
gap and begin to uncover the dynamic nature of transcriptional regulatory
networks, novel computational approaches will be developed to predict and
compare condition-specific transcriptional interactions within an organism and
varying transcriptional interactions across organisms. Software for these tasks
will be released and made available to the broader scientific community.
Additionally, significant new outreach efforts will be undertaken to recruit a
diverse group of students to take part in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, new computational approaches
will be developed to uncover and differentially analyze condition-specific and
cross-organism variation both in regulatory interactions between transcription
factors and their genomic targets, as well as in interactions amongst regulators
themselves, as these interactions are a central mechanism by which regulatory
specificity is achieved. The approaches will leverage large numbers of
transcription factors with known binding specificities, existing chromatin
accessibility data across numerous conditions that reveal which portions of a
genome are accessible to be bound by transcription factors in those conditions,
and comparative analysis of multiple closely related fully sequenced organisms.
The results of this research will be disseminated at
http://compbio.cs.princeton.edu.