* 1458939
* Collaborative Research: Global Observational Constraints on Oceanic Response to Wind Forcing
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Ramsey Harcourt, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 80,645.00

The physical processes responsible for distributing momentum throughout the
ocean surface boundary layer are the subject of active concern in the
oceanographic community. This interest is motivated to a large degree by the
central importance of correctly parameterizing upper-ocean processes in coupled
climate models. At the same time, there is a tradition in oceanography of
seeking physical information by examining the nature of the relationship between
wind stress and observed surface currents. This study will contribute to a
better understanding of the mixing processes that are needed to accurately
parameterize the ocean surface boundary layer in global climate models, an
important societal benefit. Any improvement in the ability to estimate surface
currents given the wind forcing is expected to be of interest for oil spill
response and other practical applications. A key output for the community will
be an improved estimate of the locally wind-driven currents, which will be
distributed from the Global Drifter Program's website as a supplementary data
product. This project will also support an early-career scientist.

The goal of this project is to better understand the dynamics of the ocean
surface boundary layer through the first global study of the wind/current
transfer function. This is to be accomplished by analyzing in detail the
response to wind forcing in the global array of surface drifters, which sample
the ocean currents in the vicinity of their 15 m drogue depth. The global
analysis is to be informed and tested by (i) a prototype study from the Salinity
Processes in the Upper Ocean Regional Study region, near a well-instrumented
air-sea flux mooring, and (ii) analysis of synthetic data generated with a
recently improved turbulence closure model that explicitly includes Langmuir
turbulence. The hypotheses that wind, wave, and stratification state
substantially modify near-surface mixing will be tested by examining
dependencies of the transfer function on various environmental parameters, such
as Langmuir number. Observed patterns will then be interpreted and scrutinized
by deriving new theoretical approximations to the expected transfer functions
characterizing different mixing processes.