* 1458252
* Supporting Students for Success in Mathematics, Computer Science and Physics at the University of San Diego
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Perla Myers, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2020
* USD 609,811.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at the University of San Diego
(USD) will support, and retain a diverse group of mathematics, computer science,
physics and biophysics majors. The project will recruit broadly for participants
including those from disadvantaged and underrepresented backgrounds in STEM, by
building on the results of a previous NSF S-STEM project. The data obtained from
both projects will lead to successful recruitment, retention, and academic
success of disadvantaged and underrepresented groups in STEM at other
institutions.

The project will fund two nine-student cohorts. Students who exhibit interest
and talent in the identified areas during their first year in college will be
encouraged to apply to join a cohort and receive financial and other support for
three subsequent years. The S-STEM scholars will be extensively mentored
throughout their undergraduate experience by project faculty, and will regularly
participate in STEM enrichment and community-building activities. Scholars will
take a one-unit course, especially designed by project faculty, to develop the
communication skills and interdisciplinary-thinking strategies required to be
successful while in school and after graduation. The program will establish
several high-impact practices leading to student success that will be continued
at USD beyond the duration of the project, and shared with other universities
through publications and presentations.