* 1458002
* ABI innovation: Computational method for exploring the mysteries of cell-penetrating peptides
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Andrei Lomize, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2019
* USD 754,734.00

This project aims to develop a new computational method and a web server for
prediction of the cell-penetrating ability of naturally-occurring and synthetic
peptides and analysis of their interactions with cellular membranes. Cell-
penetrating peptides (CPPs) were discovered two decades ago and since then were
used for delivery of various macromolecules into cells and tissues. However, the
molecular mechanisms of passage of peptides through cell membranes still remain
a mystery. To shed light on the mechanisms of direct membrane crossing by CPPs,
an innovative theoretical method will be developed. This method will quantify
the energetics of the processes underlying peptide entry into cells, including
binding of peptides to membranes, their folding into alpha-helical and beta-
sheet structures, and crossing the lipid bilayer by diffusion or by inducing
membrane deformations, such as thinning, curving, or pore formation. The project
is expected to have a significant scientific impact by providing unique
methodology and the first public web server for discovery and design of novel
CPPs. This method will be also valuable for analysis of interactions with
membranes of a much wider spectrum of biologically active peptides and proteins
with potentially beneficial or harmful physiological effects. The development
and application of such general tool will advance scientific knowledge in the
field of membrane peptides and proteins. An easy-to-use web tool will benefit a
broad community of students, teachers and researchers engaged in the fields of
biophysics, molecular and cell biology, bio-nanotechnology, and drug design. The
project includes participation of students from the University of Michigan in
development of the computational resources, as well as teaching K-12 students
from socio-economically disadvantaged groups using videos, images, and tangible
molecular models of peptides and proteins in membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new method will combine a thermodynamic model of secondary structure formation
by peptides and an anisotropic solvent model of the lipid bilayer that accounts
for specific polarity profiles, curvature, elastic moduli, and transmembrane
potential in different biological membranes. The proposed methodology will be
extensively tested and implemented on a public web server that will allow the
following: (1) to quantify membrane-peptide interactions, energy and binding
modes, including deformations of the lipid bilayer by peptides (PPM 3.0); (2) to
perform modeling of membrane-bound beta-sheets and alpha-helices, including
generation and optimization of their all-atom three-dimensional structures (FMAP
2.0); and (3) to predict potential CPPs by calculating and evaluating their
possible translocation mechanisms, pathways and energy barriers in the lipid
bilayer (CPPpred). The CPPpred server will generate all-atom three-dimensional
structures of peptides, estimate their membrane binding modes and energy
barriers along the translocation pathway, and evaluate mechanisms of peptide
translocation using their amino acid sequence and parameters of specific
membranes as input. The high computational efficiency of the method will allow
its application for large-scale computational screening of peptide databases to
identify potential CPPs.