* 1458095
* Collaborative Research:  Role of small-sized protists in the microbial loop with emphasis on interactions between mixotrophic protists and picocyanobacteria
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Eunsoo Kim, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 05/31/2019
* USD 80,606.00

Protists are mostly single-celled, eukaryotic microorganisms, including algae
and protozoans. They are ubiquitous, diverse, and major contributors in oceanic
food webs. Determining their taxonomic identity and the extent to which they
contribute to carbon and nutrient cycles (whereby carbon and minerals are
continuously changed chemically in the environment and reincorporated in living
organisms) are among the major goals of this study. Moreover, the investigators
will study how they respond to environmental change, one of the most important
and challenging current problems in oceanography. Answering these questions is
fundamental to understanding how living organisms in the ocean environment
interact with one another and contribute to the health and productivity of the
ocean. The main goal of the project is to investigate biotic interactions of
small-sized protists with very tiny cyanobacteria also known as
picocyanobacteria, which represent the most abundant photosynthetic organisms in
the ocean. These studies will be done both in ocean environments and in
laboratory experimental settings. Considering the limited knowledge on this
topic, the work planned in this project promises important and exciting
discoveries. Two early career female scientists will lead this project. In
addition, one postdoctoral scholar, one graduate student, and at least three
undergraduate summer interns will participate in the proposed research
activities. The principal investigators will create a strong public outreach
program that will engage middle school students in hands-on activities related
to ocean sciences, and will produce a video in collaboration with the Education
Department at the American Museum of Natural History. The video will summarize
the major findings of the proposed research. It can be used in schools and in
informal learning settings, including access by the public on the Internet
through the Museum's Science Bulletins web page.

Single-celled eukaryotic microorganisms or protists, though largely outnumbered
by picocyanobacteria (Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus), contribute
significantly to ocean carbon biomass and primary productivity, partially by
virtue of their larger cell size. In addition, small planktonic protists can
regulate picocyanobacteria abundance through grazing. The main goal of this
project is to investigate biotic interactions of planktonic pico- and nano-sized
eukaryotes with picocyanobacteria, both in the field and in laboratory settings.
A set of field- and culture-based experiments will be conducted, using state-of-
the-art methodologies, including fluorescence-activated cell sorting, isotope
and fluorescent stain labeling, and next-generation molecular sequencing to
address the research objectives. Operationally, this project is structured
around two objectives: Objective 1 is to assess the contribution of small
protists to carbon and nutrient cycling through measurement of primary
production, bacterivory, mixotrophy and phosphorus uptake in major microbial
groups, and evaluate the role of nutrient availability in controlling
mixotrophy. Objective 2 will focus on assessing the distribution and diversity
of small-sized protists that feed on picocyanobacteria and further evaluate the
role of nutrient availability among the protists that are mixotrophic. To reach
these objectives field-based experiments will be conducted in contrasted
environments: the North Pacific subtropical gyre (phosphorus replete, dominated
by Prochlorococcus at Sta. ALOHA) and the North West Mediterranean sea
(phosphorus deplete, dominated by Synechococcus at Sta. DYFAMED). Complementary
experiments using model protists and picocyanobacteria will be conducted using
controlled cultures in the lab. The work will provide critical new information
on the phylogenetic diversity and function of marine microbial eukaryotes, with
emphasis on their ecological role as predators (phagotrophy, mixotrophy) on, and
competitors with, the picoyanobacteria Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus.