* 1458676
* Scholarships in STEM To Achieve Results (S-STAR)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Allison Davis, East Los Angeles College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 607,600.00

Through the Scholarships in STEM To Achieve Results (S-STAR) project, East Los
Angeles College (ELAC) will provide scholarship support for 15-20 students
annually. The awards will be available on a competitive basis to all science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) majors who demonstrate finanical
need and the aptitude to succeed in STEM disciplines. Data shows that attrition
in STEM disciplines is disproportionately high among Hispanic students at ELAC.
Building on the infrastructure established by the institution's Mathematics,
Engineering, and Science Achievement (MESA) and Academic and Student Support to
Improve Student Transfer (ASSIST) programs, S-STAR will provide not only
scholarships, but also supplemental instruction, access to a STEM Study Center,
one-on-one counseling, mentoring, research and internship opportunities,
professional development workshops, and other support services that are
strategically planned to foster student success. Being the state's largest
Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), ELAC is implementing S-STAR to increase the
number of academically talented, underrepresented STEM students successfully
prepared for transfer to four-year STEM degree programs, and ultimately to high-
skill, high-wage jobs in fields of local and national need. Additionally, this
project will contribute to diversity in research. By increasing S-STAR students'
competitiveness and encouraging them to participate in undergraduate research,
these students will more likely to attend graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S-STAR objectives are to: (1) alleviate economic
burdens of college students with demonstrated financial need, while improving
students' educational opportunities; (2) increase retention, success rates and
degree completion; and (3) increase the number of skilled STEM students ready to
succeed in technical areas of local and national need by increasing their
competitiveness to participate in research and internship experiences within
four-year institutions, industry, and/or national labs, while at the community
college. Both qualitative and quantitative data collection efforts will be used
to assess the attainment of the objectives. Ongoing dissemination of incremental
outcomes, best practices and lessons learned is planned through scholarly
articles focused on women and minorities in science and engineering, community
college STEM student success, and through presentations at conferences that
offer platforms to share knowledge among both community colleges and four-year
institutions.