* 1458029
* Workshop: Disaster Communication Redesigned
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2014,03/31/2016
* Timothy Sellnow, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 03/31/2016
* USD 49,974.00

The rapidly changing nature of disasters and the staggering pace of
communication technology innovation have an inevitable influence on how
practitioners communicate across the life cycle of disasters and how the public
seeks information and makes decisions on whether or not to adhere to these risk
communication messages. With these changes, disaster communications scholarship
must also adapt and progress. This has led to a growing need for cross-
disciplinary communication-focused scholars to inform one another's research,
the outcomes of which are likely to yield highly applied results that can change
the face of disaster, crisis, and risk communications as we now know it. By
bringing together scholars and practitioners to discuss emerging theory,
breakthrough methods, and vital research questions, we have the potential to
transform the future of risk communication scholarship and practice. Such
outcomes include developing a public, online research repository on disaster and
crisis communication; publishing an invited comment in the Natural Hazards
Observer and articles in peer reviewed academic journals; and identifying and
developing a research agenda on disaster communications to advance the future of
public warnings and crisis communication for the nation.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides funding to hold a workshop, which will bring
together the nation's leading scholars and experts in risk, crisis, and disaster
communications, to identify gaps and intersections in theoretical orientations,
methods and innovations, and prioritize research needs for the future. Over the
course of two days, scholars will identify and discuss the cutting edge
theoretical questions within their disciplines that contribute to knowledge
about social and behavioral responses to disaster warnings and crisis and risk
communication; the cutting edge methods used to conduct data collection and
analysis; and the primary scientific research questions on warnings, risk, and
crisis communications in disaster that are likely to yield practical insights
that will reduce losses and increase human security in disaster.