* 1458444
* Collaborative Research: Super-Plateau Breakup and Cretaceous Quiet Zone Tectonics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Anthony Koppers, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 180,348.00

Almost 30% of the Pacific plate south of the equator formed in a period where
Earth's magnetic field was exceptionally stable. During this Cretaceous period,
the Ontong-Java-Nui (OJN) volcanic outpouring also occurred, creating a large
plateau (1/100 of Earth's area) that eventually split apart. With no reversals
of the magnetic field to generate the characteristic crustal anomalies that
allow scientists to track tectonic plate motions, it has not been possible to
understand the cause-effect relation between this deep magmatic generation and
the change in plate motion at the surface. While satellite measurements provide
broad indication of seafloor structure, it is not possible to discern the narrow
abyssal hills that would have formed at the fast spreading centers that
controlled the plateau breakup. More detailed seafloor mapping and sampling are
required. Undergraduate and graduate students will receive training in marine
geological data acquisition during this study and some will participate in post-
cruise analysis via class projects. Podcasts of a research seminar will extend
the reach of the new knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OJN breakup is
hypothesized to have occurred via spreading at the Osbourn Trough, along
unmapped spreading centers in the Ellice Basin. Like other early Cretaceous
oceanic plateaus, the OJN seems to have formed near a triple junction. Better
understanding of Pacific tectonics during the Cretaceous normal superchron
should shed light on the connections between oceanic plateau formation, breakup,
plate reorganizations and associations with mantle plumes. In addition,
paleolatitude data from the super-plateau remnants can to be tied to a common
Pacific reference frame to refine the Pacific apparent polar wander path, which
will then be compared with the Indo-Atlantic reference frame to determine the
relative contributions from hotspot drift and true polar wander. Understanding
evolution of OJN-linked processes is a long-term undertaking. This study takes
the first step in this process with a multibeam survey of the Ellice Basin that
will combine mapping of the central parts of this large basin where extinct
spreading centers are likely to be located and remnants of fracture zones can be
easily discerned. Coupled with selective dredging and Ar dating of basaltic
rocks, as well as existing samples from IODP Site U1365 near Osbourn Trough, it
will be possible to determine the timing of the inferred change in spreading
direction, termination of Ellice Basin spreading, and the end of rifting along
the Osbourn Trough.