* 1458166
* Collaborative Research: US-BRAZIL IRES/Analytical Applications of Nanomaterials and Microfluidic Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Frank Gomez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 12/31/2019
* USD 116,427.00

This collaborative project will facilitate a three-year international research
experience for U.S. undergraduates majoring in STEM disciplines. Students from a
diverse regional population will be recruited as summer cohorts to participate
in research projects with researchers from the Brazilian Science-Technology
Corridor (Sao Paulo - Campinas - Sao Carlos). The interest in analytical
applications combining microfluidics and nanomaterials has grown exponentially
in the last years. Considering these advances and their importance for future
developments, this IRES program aims to provide the tools for students to
develop the skills required to face an internationally-competitive job market
linked to chemical analysis. This proposal aims to boost education and training
in a creative, multidisciplinary, and culturally-rich environment. A focus on
minority recruiting, combined with the involvement of graduate students as
mentors, will provide the support mechanisms required to expand and strengthen
the pool of participants as well as the research experience. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments in nanotechnology and microfluidics have allowed
the understanding and rational utilization of a series of micro total analysis
systems (uTAS). The existing links between these two fields have enabled
crossing the traditional borders and the development of unique training
opportunities for students in science and engineering tracks. Furthermore, the
interest in analytical applications combining microfluidics and nanomaterials
has grown exponentially in the last years. Although this integration has
enhanced sensing, separation, and extraction procedures, the applicability of
specific nanomaterials for chemical analysis depends mainly on the chemical
composition, structure, size, morphology, and preparation method. Considering
these characteristics and their importance for future developments, this IRES
program aims to provide students an enriching research experience and link
chemical properties with a real-world analytical problem.