* 1458285
* CSBR: Natural History: Securing Alcohol Types and Donated Alcohol Specimens at the INHS Insect Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Matthew Yoder, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 487,741.00

An award is made to the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign to support
the insect collections at the Illinois Natural History Survey (INHS). The
project will secure type specimens at INHS, the standard bearers for species,
and address further needs for accessioning and digitizing nearly 60,000 vials of
donated specimens. Type specimens are expected to be available to scientists in
perpetuity, because if they are damaged, identity of species could be lost. Most
ethanol preserved insect types at INHS are nearing 100 years old and to mitigate
further degradation of these specimens, they will be placed in refrigerated
storage with new vials. The specimens will also be further documented through
imaging. These specimens provide knowledge of past distributions of species,
enhancing our ability to predict both past and future distributions environments
change. Expectations for data gathering, description of new species, data
analysis, and data sharing are rapidly changing. This award will provide support
for training the next generation of biodiversity scientists and informaticians
in specimen curation and management from field data collection to analysis of
data in the laboratory. This work will ensure a future of qualified, well
trained biologists.

The INHS Insect Collection (INHS-IC), one of the oldest entomological
collections in North America, houses approximately 7.3 million insect specimens.
Over 5,000 primary and secondary wet types exist at the INHS-IC. The older type
specimens are in danger of being damaged by desiccation and degradation due to
leaching of biological molecules. These specimens will be secured by upgrading
vials, imaging labels and specimens, and storing the types in refrigerated
space. A training component will be implemented during which a Master's student
will use these collections to examine repeated distribution patterns of aquatic
insects (chorotypes) in eastern North America, and summer interns will be
trained in specimen curation and digitization, learn to code basic
bioinformatics scripts, and present an exit seminar on a research topic. A large
number of University of Illinois undergraduates will be provided with
opportunities to learn museum practice through specimen identification,
curation, and digitization of specimens during the project. All label data will
be captured using TaxonWorks, a new platform for managing a wide range of
biodiversity data tasks, and shared via a local web portal, iDigBio, and the
Global Biodiversity Information Facility.