* 1458350
* Galileo Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Emilie Stander, Raritan Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ferrara
* 06/30/2020
* USD 625,870.00

This project will build a learning community for STEM students at Raritan Valley
Community College through faculty mentoring, career development activities,
cohort building and access to key student services. Approximately 34 scholars
will participate in the learning community, which is designed to improve
students' educational experiences and connection to peers, faculty and the
college, all with the objective of increasing STEM retention, degree achievement
and successful transfer to four-year institutions. Partnerships among multiple
stakeholders (high schools, 4-year institutions, community organizations, and
local employers) will support a well-rounded plan for recruitment, retention,
and then placement in the workforce or colleges and universities that grant
bachelor's degrees. This project is expected to have an impact on the number of
STEM graduates prepared to help national, regional, and local companies compete
and innovate in the global economy.

The project will investigate the influence of i) improved academic and social
integration and ii) improvement in economic circumstances on educational
outcomes for academically talented STEM students with demonstrated financial
need. In addition to expanding efforts to nurture a STEM learning community (see
activities above), the quality and rigor of assessment and evaluation activities
will be enhanced in order to test whether efforts to help students assimilate
and financial assistance can explain their retention and commitment to complete
STEM majors. Formative evaluation will address scholars' satisfaction with the
project and its contribution towards their satisfaction with the institution,
their educational progression, and their career development. Summative
evaluation will consist of an analysis of the alignment of retention and
enrollment with the project objectives. In addition an analysis will be done on
the long-term effects of the project on student placement in college or in the
workforce and persistence in STEM fields. Dissemination of the results of
evaluation will be done through conferences and workshops focused on higher
education and pedagogy. Potential conferences include the Faculty of the Future
conference held annually at Bucks County Community College and Best Practices
Conference in New York City sponsored by the Institute of International
Education.