* 1458632
* Transfer Initiative for Engineering Scholars (TIES) - Phase II
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Jennifer Michaels, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 01/31/2021
* USD 620,963.00

The Transfer Initiative for Engineering Scholars (TIES) project will increase
opportunities for academically talented, 2- and 4- year students with financial
need to transfer to programs in electrical or computer engineering at the
Georgia Institute of Technology. The PI team will retain many of the strategies
that were used in a first implementation of TIES; however, these have been
further refined and will move TIES to a best practices blueprint for recruiting
and retaining these transfer students. This project will address two of the
major challenges faced by academically gifted students who are strong candidates
for admission: financial need and academic support. The target population for
this effort will include students at community colleges, and 2- and 4- year
institutions that serve underrepresented groups. Approximately 115 scholarships
will be award to 33 students over the five-year grant period. The TIES support
structure will enable these students to perform at or above the level of
traditional students. Since many of the TIES scholars will maintain strong ties
to their home institutions, they can serve as role models and help create a
pipeline for community college graduates who want to attend Georgia Tech or
other top engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TIES program will be
based on an analysis of successful paths taken by non-traditional students and
generalizing them for a broader group of institutions. Using an approach and
management team that have had success in a variety of outreach efforts for
improving engineering enrollment and diversity, the PIs will build and expand
upon those existing efforts to offer several support program options for such
students and will include a mix of programs designed specifically for non-
traditional junior-level transfers. Examination of these combinations of
students and programs will advance the understanding of how to help non-
traditional students. Several program details, such as active involvement with a
cohesive student cohort and mentoring activities focused on research and career
development, will keep students motivated to succeed. TIES will address
important national and institutional concerns by providing financially limited
students from 2- and 4- year colleges opportunities to graduate from a top-tier
engineering school. This program will provide a best practices template for
other departments and engineering schools that wish to recruit and graduate
talented non-traditional students.