* 1458772
* Succeed in Engineering Technology Scholars (SETS):  Identifying and Developing Future Technology Leaders
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Heidar Malki, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 767,868.00

In the Succeed in Engineering Technology Scholars (SETS) project, the PIs will
plan to award 20 scholarships per year over a five-year period to academically
talented engineering technology (ET) students demonstrating financial need. A
goal of the project will be to improve the academic performance, time-to-
graduation, and career-readiness of these scholars. Students will be selected
from those enrolled full time in the targeted ET programs: Computer ET,
Mechanical ET, and Electrical Power ET. Eligible students from underrepresented
groups will be encouraged to apply for the scholarship. By developing academic
support services and programs for the SETS recipients, the SETS project team
will ensure the success of the project, thus increasing the number of well-
educated and skilled employees to fill local, regional, and national needs in
the engineering technology workforce. The project team will establish strong
partnerships with university student service offices and local industry and
community colleges, to create a sustainable career-path and scholarship program
for aspiring students in ET programs. Six industry partners have committed to
providing guest speakers, arranging field trips, sponsoring student projects,
and providing internship and job placement opportunities for SETS recipients. A
project advisory board including members from these collaborative partners will
be established to ensure project success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team
has established four objectives that tie directly to measurable outcomes: 1)
Award 20 scholarships per year to academically talented students demonstrating
financial need enrolled full time in targeted ET programs; 2) Ensure 90% of SETS
recipients maintain a minimum grade point average of 3.0 during the semesters
for which they receive the scholarship; 3) Grant at least 30% of scholarships to
students from underrepresented minority groups; and 4) Assure all SETS
recipients participate in at least 80% of the activities designed for them. SETS
recipients will develop a Technology Leader Game Plan (TLGP) with their assigned
mentors when they enter the SETS program. The TLGP will be used to guide and
monitor their academic progress and ensure their timely graduation. The project
will advance discovery and understanding by increasing opportunities for
students to fully engage in academic education and research as well as
technology leadership development activities. Both formative and summative
assessments will be performed to gauge the impact that the SETS programs is
having on the learning experience and career prospects of the SETS recipients.
From an analysis of the data and from surveys, the PIs will identify and
disseminate the best practices and lessons learned to other UH colleges,
administrators, and student support staff, as well as the larger engineering
educational community.