* 1458731
* Strengthening Pathways to the Baccalaureate for STEM Scholars from a Predominantly 2-Year Campus
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Natalie Hyslop, University of North Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2020
* USD 614,935.00

The University of North Georgia (UNG), through the project entitled
"Strengthening Pathways to the Baccalaureate for STEM Scholars from a
Predominantly 2-Year Campus" will strive to increase the science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) workforce by recruiting, mentoring, and
supporting academically talented but financially needy students through degree
completion and partnering with employers to facilitate placement in the STEM
workforce. The project will focus on students who enroll at UNG's Gainesville
Campus, which has a mission of that of a traditional 2-year institution, and who
transfer to baccalaureate STEM programs at UNG's Dahlonega Campus, and also seek
to improve student retention and graduation rates on both campuses. The project
will support full time students in programs leading to associate or
baccalaureate degrees in biological sciences (except medicine or other clinical
fields), physical sciences (including physics, chemistry and materials science),
mathematical sciences, and technology areas associated with the aforementioned
disciplines. Among the intended broader impacts are providing students with
skills to improve academic and workforce competitiveness, increasing faculty
involvement in mentoring students, fostering permanent changes in organizational
practices to provide an environment that encourages and supports diversity, and
increasing the economic diversity of the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will achieve four key objectives:
(1) improve educational opportunities for financially needy students by awarding
24 competitive scholarships annually, (2) increase retention of students to
degree achievement by creating supportive environments through enhancements in
organizational culture and practices; (3) improve student support programs by
providing faculty mentoring, peer mentoring, academic workshops, tutoring, an
early alert system, counseling, disciplinary activities, undergraduate research
experiences, and participation in professional meetings; and (4) increase the
number of well-educated, skilled employees in the STEM workforce by implementing
the project with industry partners, who will provide guest lecturers, site
visits, special activities and internship and placement opportunities in STEM
occupations. The initiative will advance knowledge of effective practices that
prepare students to pursue STEM careers from traditional 2-year institutions,
the nation's fastest growing educational level, by innovatively integrating
student support and placement.