* 1458964
* Collaborative Research: Super-Plateau Breakup and Cretaceous Quiet Zone Tectonics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Paul Wessel, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 329,297.00

Almost 30% of the Pacific plate south of the equator formed in a period where
Earth's magnetic field was exceptionally stable. During this Cretaceous period,
the Ontong-Java-Nui (OJN) volcanic outpouring also occurred, creating a large
plateau (1/100 of Earth's area) that eventually split apart. With no reversals
of the magnetic field to generate the characteristic crustal anomalies that
allow scientists to track tectonic plate motions, it has not been possible to
understand the cause-effect relation between this deep-generated volcanic
activity and the change in plate motion at the surface. While satellite
measurements provide some indication of seafloor structure, it is not possible
to discern the narrow abyssal hills that form at the fast spreading centers that
controlled the plateau breakup. Direct seafloor mapping and sampling are
required. Undergraduate and graduate students will receive training in marine
geological data acquisition during this study and some will participate in the
post-cruise analysis via class projects. Podcasts of a research seminar will
extend the reach of the new knowledge.

The OJN breakup must have occurred via spreading at the Osbourn Trough, along
unmapped spreading centers in the Ellice Basin. Like other early Cretaceous
oceanic plateaus, the OJN seems to have formed near a triple junction. Better
understanding of Pacific tectonics during the Cretaceous normal superchron
should shed light on the connections between oceanic plateau formation, breakup,
plate reorganizations and associations with mantle plumes. In addition,
paleolatitude data from the super-plateau remnants can to be tied to a common
Pacific reference frame to refine the Pacific apparent polar wander path, which
could then be compared with the Indo-Atlantic reference frame to determine the
relative contributions from hotspot drift and true polar wander. This is a long-
term undertaking that will require several expeditions and contributions from
multi-disciplinary investigators. This study takes the first step in this
process with a multibeam survey of the Ellice Basin that will combine mapping of
the central parts of this large basin where extinct spreading centers are likely
to be located and remnants of fracture zones can be easily discerned. Coupled
with selective dredging and Ar dating of basaltic rocks, including samples from
IODP Site U1365 near Osbourn Trough, it will be possible to determine the timing
of the inferred change in spreading direction, termination of Ellice Basin
spreading, and the end of rifting along the Osbourn Trough.