* 1458449
* Breaking the Silo - Mathematics as a Common Language in Science
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Seth Oppenheimer, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2021
* USD 623,903.00

The project "Breaking the Silo - Mathematics as a Common Language in Science" at
Mississippi State University (MSU) will provide both financial and academic
support to students majoring in Chemistry, Math, or Physics at MSU. Focused
intervention in the early stages of undergraduate gateway courses such as
General Chemistry, Calculus and Physics can have enormous impact in retaining
students within STEM fields and enhancing the chances of student academic
success. This project will focus on student-centered tools, learning approaches
and mentoring interactions that can be utilized throughout a student's four-year
college degree. This integrated approach will support deserving students from
Mississippi and the Southeastern United States to pursue and complete degrees in
the physical sciences and enter science careers. Recruitment efforts with
special attention paid to underrepresented populations, as defined by ethnicity
and gender, will promote a diverse and capable workforce.

Specific objectives of this project will include (1) Supporting students
financially to pursue physical science degrees through scholarships; (2)
Supporting students academically to complete a Bachelor's degree in the targeted
majors of Chemistry, Math or Physics; and (3) Supporting students through career
development strategies to pursue careers in the physical sciences. Student
support will be developed as a cohesive, integrated plan that includes academic
tutoring support for science and math classes, a focus on the development of
study skills and time management strategies and co-registration in both gateway
science courses, and a 1-credit hour course on Mathematics as a Common Language
for the scholarship cohort. Mentoring workshops and career development
activities will be a continued focus in addition to research experiences for
undergraduates. Assessment and evaluation of the project will be both formative
and summative. An external evaluator will coordinate and evaluate survey
instruments and achievements to assess projected outcomes and the level of
achievement of the stated goals of the project. Lessons learned and effective
practices that emerge from the program evaluation data will be disseminated
widely to the STEM education community and help increase widespread
understanding of the attributes and practices of successful student scholarship
and support programs.