* 1458908
* Collaborative Proposal: How Did the World's Largest Single Volcano Form at a Triple Junction? A Magnetic and Bathymetry Survey of Tamu Massif, Shatsky Rise
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2018
* William Sager, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 12/31/2018
* USD 71,006.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will attempt to gain a better
understanding of the formation of Tamu Massif, the main volcanic edifice of
Shatsky Rise oceanic plateau. This will be accomplished by collecting and
analyzing magnetic anomaly and bathymetric data over Tamu Massif during of a
32-day cruise on the Schmidt Ocean Institute research vessel Falkor in the fall
of 2015. The project will support an early-career female investigator and
promote international collaboration with Japan. Graduate students as well as
undergraduates will be involved in the sea-going experience. The project will
have an outreach component consisting of learning modules for students to learn
about submarine volcanoes and marine geology and geophysics as well as
partnering with museums to create exhibits with video feeds to the
ship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test
two end-member hypotheses about the formation of Tamu Massif on the Shatsky
Rise: 1) that Tamu Massif is the result of a large mass of thermally-buoyant
material arising from the core-mantle boundary region as a new mantle plume is
formed (?plume head? hypothesis); or 2) that Tamu Massif is the result of
plateau eruptions occurring where plate boundaries or plate cracks release
pressure above areas of the upper mantle with lower melting temperatures
(?fertile? mantle hypothesis). The project results will allow for the revision
of the existing map of magnetic anomalies and the revision of the tectonic and
structural interpretation. The project will have an outreach component that will
be organized by Leslie Peart, former outreach coordinator for Consortium for
Ocean Leadership for IODP, who currently works for the Corpus Christi Aquarium.
Potential outreach activities consist of learning modules for students to use to
learn about submarine volcanoes and marine geology and geophysics as well as
partnering with museums to create exhibits with video feeds to the ship.