* 1458427
* IRES: U.S.-Czech Research Experience for Students on Wide Bandgap Materials for Energy and Biosensing Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Tania Paskova, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 07/31/2020
* USD 249,855.00

This U.S.-Czech International Research Experience for Students (IRES) project
provides graduate and undergraduate students from North Carolina State
University (NCSU) and nearby U.S. universities, North Carolina A&T and Shaw,
with early career international research experience at the Czech Academy of
Sciences' Institute of Physics, in Prague. The goal is to contribute to a
diverse and globally-engaged science and engineering workforce by providing
eighteen U.S. student participants, six annually, with the opportunity to pursue
mentored research on wide bandgap materials, i.e., nitride and oxide
semiconductors materials. At the Czech partners' institute, each participant
will gain hands-on experience with advanced characterization techniques.
Overall, the research objectives of this IRES project are to study the
fundamental and growth related properties of novel wide bandgap semiconductor
materials, to identify current technology challenges, and investigate approaches
for problem solving. Such materials are of interest because they exhibit promise
for future use in devices that would be capable of operating at high power and
high frequency, and in harsh atmospheric conditions or biocompatible
environments.

Under the direction of Principal Investigator Tania Paskova and her Czech
counterparts, participant research activities span materials science, surface
science, semiconductor physics, and chemistry. The intent is to work
cooperatively to increase our fundamental understanding of the inherent
electrical, optical and surface properties of wide bandgap materials as well as
their modifications, following a variety of chemical treatments to examine their
potential and limitations for energy and biosensing applications. The new
knowledge and improved understanding of the surface properties, polarity, and
doping effects in wide bandgap materials with different crystallographic
alignments are expected to contribute to future applications, including power
electronics, optoelectronics, and chemical and biological sensors. The early
career international research experience will expose the U.S. students to
current technology challenges and increase their awareness of the importance of
novel materials for areas essential to our future quality of life.