* 1458613
* Holyoke Community College STEM Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Ileana Vasu, Holyoke Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 03/31/2020
* USD 625,540.00

This NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) project at Holyoke Community College in Holyoke, Massachusetts will
recruit, retain, and encourage academically talented, financially needy,
students to complete their associate's degrees and continue their education. In
order to address regional and national STEM workforce needs, as many as 20
scholars will be exposed to an academic climate meant to inspire them to become
engineers, chemists, mathematicians, and physicists. The scholars will
participate in a STEM 101 course, which includes a curriculum is based on
Complete College America's model for developing "meta majors" to help students
choose reasonable academic majors and reduce time to degree completion. Students
will also have the option to attend seminar activities, which will include
speakers and field trips to transfer universities and industry partners, college
success workshops, and diversity training. Moreover, continuing scholars will be
encouraged to act as ambassadors in college access activities, as well as
champions for new scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research shows that STEM majors
must be exposed to a robust learning environment. Thus, the PI team has created
a comprehensive plan for academic support services, mentoring, career
counseling, and assistance for community college student transfer to four year
schools. The STEM 101 course will offer students a positive first year STEM
learning experience that introduces content, experiential learning, and STEM
career exploration. Additionally, the seminar series will help integrate
students into the life of the college. Formative evaluation will be used to
address aspects of the project that need improvement, assess student engagement
and support, and review academic challenges through a modified version of the
Community College Survey of Student Engagement. Summative evaluation will
consist of an analysis of student attitudes and perceptions (surveys and
interviews) regarding the active learning community, activities to improve STEM
discipline awareness, and academic progress. Dissemination of the results of
evaluation will be submitted to journals such as the Community College Journal,
and the Community College Times, and, in so doing, help to expand the knowledge
base regarding the circumstances under which scholarship awards of this type are
successful.