* 1458468
* STEM-Success Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Swanson, University of Providence
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 08/31/2021
* USD 600,281.00

To address the national need to increase the number of STEM graduates, this NSF
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM)
project at the University of Great Falls will support 16 academically talented
students who have expressed interest in STEM careers. Biology, chemistry, and
mathematics majors will participate in comprehensive program of academic
supports including (a) a course on STEM research preparation, (b) weekly
professional development meetings, (c) science writing enrichment through the
Learning Community, and (d) peer-led study sessions. Initiatives to recruit and
retain Native American students will be reinforced by a counselor responsible
for engaging these (and other interested students) in activities that will
integrate them into the life of the college. Scholarships for academically
strong STEM students, who may not otherwise be able to afford college, will
increase the number of STEM graduates prepared to promote innovation and
competiveness in national and regional industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
retention strategies proposed in this project are grounded in the current
literature. The project elements are designed to promote students' intellectual
growth and the development of skills that are highly valued in the workplace
(communication, critical thinking, and collaboration). Students will also
benefit from early exposure to research and career opportunities. The external
evaluator will investigate the project's impact on student satisfaction,
participation, and retention to graduation. Formative evaluation will include
student feedback on the effectiveness of the recruitment plan, courses, and
other academic supports (surveys and focus groups). Summative evaluation will
consist of an analysis of motivation for students who persist in the project and
students who do not. The active recruitment plan includes development of a video
that will be disseminated by the Office of Admissions to multiple stakeholders
(K-12 schools, industry, and community partners) and made accessible through a
website and the Montana Office of Public Instruction. Project results should add
to the knowledge base on effective tools for retaining a diverse community of
students in STEM. Outcomes will be presented through a university website and at
Regional Lilly Conferences on teaching and learning. A manuscript will be
submitted to the Journal on Excellence in College Teaching, Learning Communities
Journal, or Journal on Centers for Teaching and Learning.