* 1458139
* CSBR: Natural History: Securing and Digitizing Data for Parasite  Biodiversity Specimens in the Manter Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Scott Gardner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 499,991.00

The goal of this project is to make data associated with the H.W. Manter
Laboratory (HWML) more readily available to the scientific community, as well as
to facilitate long-term security and conservation of its specimens. These
important collections contribute to the ability of scientists in the USA to
predict emerging diseases, understand global environmental changes, and enable
responses to these threats to the national security by scientists and
policymakers. Donated by top-ranked research scientists, four collections of
parasites are being integrated into the HWML. These contain important knowledge
of the biodiversity of parasites and their hosts, and this work will allow the
HWML to database, conserve, and repair a large number of specimens that have
remained un-catalogued (and unknown) for many years. The McDonald collection
incorporates helminths from migratory waterfowl of the central North American
flyway; the Wilson collection contains both identified and unidentified
ectoparasites collected worldwide; the Hargis marine platyhelminth collection
holds specimens from the Antarctic, Gulf of Mexico, and southern oceans; and the
Telford hemoparasite slide collection holds parasites collected from reptiles
worldwide.

The primary objectives of this project include converting an existing but
outdated database, PARASITE, into a modern relational database system (Arctos, a
multiuser online database for natural history and biodiversity collections),
which will then be the HWML's main database, enabling scientists world-wide to
query the collections for both digital images and data. Arctos will permit users
to simultaneously target both vertebrate host collections and the parasites of
these hosts - a capability currently unavailable in PARASITE. Such relational
queries are essential to enable a complete picture of host/parasite biodiversity
to research scientists working in many different fields. In coordination with
the digitization effort, all specimens in four key parasite collections which
are the last remaining backlogged sections of uncataloged specimens in the HWML
will be repaired, or marked for future repair, and transfered into permanent-
secure physical storage. All data resulting from this project will be posted
online (http://hwml.unl.edu/) and shared with iDigBio
(https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring accessibility to researchers and educators.