* 1458212
* Integrated Mathematics and Science Scholars (iMASS) Program
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Sherry Kasper, Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 07/31/2021
* USD 603,291.00

There is an established need in the United States to increase significantly the
number of American scientists with interdisciplinary training. This NSF
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM)
project at Lee University in Tennessee (TN) will support 35 scholars as they
complete undergraduate degrees in mathematics, biology, chemistry, or
biochemistry. Students will participate in an enhanced curriculum designed to
immerse them in a cohesive STEM community. Through a sophomore and junior year
seminar course, students will be provided with an abundance of resources
including intensive faculty mentoring, formalized peer-to-peer interactions,
career services, and service learning opportunities. An Experimental Design and
Statistical Analysis course will expose scholars to interdisciplinary research
before their senior year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institution has identified
"uncertainty about career paths" as a barrier to retention in STEM. This project
addresses this issue by establishing a range of career-related experiences
(interdisciplinary group projects with real-world applications, undergraduate
research collaborations with the University of Tennessee and Oak Ridge National
Labs, and an early course on experimental methods) and enhanced career services
with internship and job shadowing opportunities. As a capstone experience,
mathematics and science majors will be partnered for collaborative projects
designed to lead science majors to a deeper understanding mathematical
application and validation and to introduce mathematics majors to scientific
experimentation and data analysis. Evaluation efforts will address the quality,
effectiveness, and impact of the project on key stakeholders. Formative
evaluation will focus on student and mentor satisfaction with academic and
social supports (surveys and focus groups) and academic progress. Summative
evaluation will consist of an analysis of lessons learned from all aspects of
the project. Dissemination to regional stake holders will occur through meetings
of the Southeast TN STEM Innovation Hub (K-12) and the Cleveland Associated
Industries. Project results will be presented at disciplinary meetings (Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics and American Chemical Society among
others) and the Appalachian College Association (ACA) Annual Summit. This active
dissemination effort is expected to add to the knowledge base about design and
implementation of successful recruitment and retention strategies for STEM
majors.