* 1458343
* Creating a Community of Transfer Scholars in Computing and Information Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2023
* Penny Rheingans, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 03/31/2023
* USD 632,488.00

The "Creating a Community of Transfer Scholars in Computing and Information
Technology" project at the University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC), will
recruit, retain, and graduate a total of 25 academically-talented transfer
students with financial need in computing majors. Students majoring in four
computing majors in two academic departments (Computer Science, Computer
Engineering, Information Systems or Business Administration Technology) will be
eligible to participate in the program. The recruitment plan leverages existing
collaborations with five community colleges in Maryland and will focus on
encouraging woman and underrepresented minorities Students to apply to the
scholarship program. The project will leverage a highly effective student
support delivery model (CWIT Scholars Program) and the peer support of its
community of undergraduate technology and engineering
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholarship recipients will participate in a new
scholars retreat; faculty, peer, and industry mentoring; academic and
professional development activities; and a transfer student seminar. The project
will contribute to the body of knowledge about the experiences of and challenges
faced by transfer students in computing majors, especially women and
underrepresented minorities, and will provide evidence regarding the efficacy of
support services and community support on the success of transfer students in
general and more specifically, students with financial need, women, and
underrepresented minorities in computing majors.