* 1458045
* CSBR: Natural History: Mission Critical Improvements to Virginia Tech's Insect Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Paul Marek, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2019
* USD 467,249.00

An award is made to the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University to
support improvements to the Virginia Tech Insect Collection. Founded in 1888,
this is the oldest and largest entomological collection in the Commonwealth. Its
nearly half-million specimens represent the rich insect diversity of the eastern
United States with emphasis on the Appalachian region. This collection is an
exceptional repository of pollinators, endangered insects, and many native
species, once common but now disappearing from habitat loss. Museum specimens
provide a critical baseline for comprehending biological change through time,
tracking the spread of insect disease vectors and agriculturally destructive
invasive species that threaten our ecosystems, agriculture and public health.
This collection is a frontier for the discovery and description of biodiversity,
representing hundreds of undescribed new species. This award will provide
support for personnel and new cabinets and drawers to improve conditions for
specimens. Specimen data will be digitized and made accessible through online
resources, improving access to "dark data" conserved alongside the physical
specimens (more than 98 percent of the material is currently not digitized).
Several scientifically valuable collections in the museum will be conserved,
including specimens of Federally Endangered species, endemic Appalachian
species, and critical pollinators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the continuous
use and constant growth of this collection, the storage and curation methods are
antiquated and it is currently located at a temporary storage facility. This
project will provide critical support to the collection and will accomplish the
relocation of the collection to campus, improve the physical storage
infrastructure for specimens, and address digitization, cataloguing, and
documentation of specimens. Over the duration of this project, undergraduate and
graduate students along with a new full-time collections manager will be trained
in collections research, including curatorial best practices, digitization, and
networking biodiversity data. Public outreach events will target the underserved
Appalachian population. Science curriculum kits will be developed for elementary
students, and old insect cabinets and drawers will be upcycled as mini-natural
history collections and donated to local nature centers. An insect collection
exhibit will be developed for the University's annual Bug Fest and Bug Camp for
elementary school students. With a revitalized presence on campus and a greater
capacity to engage the public with insects and science, the Virginia Tech Insect
Collection represents a unique and powerful resource to translate the importance
of biodiversity and science to the historically underserved Appalachian region.
All data resulting from this project will be shared with iDigBio
(https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring accessibility to researchers and the
public.