* 1458136
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Geological Analysis To Determine Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Michael Storozum, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 20,066.00

According to researchers, humans have entered the Anthropocene - a period of
time when human action dominates natural processes. Yet, no one is quite sure
when or how humans have arrived at this critical junction in time. Some
researchers argue that the Anthropocene is recent, while others argue that it is
thousands of years old. Archaeology is well situated to resolve this debate and
provide historical insight into this problem. In particular, the investigators
will use the early and rich archaeological record of China to better document
the origins of the Anthropocene. This study uses a series of buried soils as a
record of ancient environmental conditions, helping to put environmental changes
now happening in China in a historical context. As part of this project, the
investigators will help train Chinese collaborators interested in build the
first reference collection of archaeologically important soil samples collected
from Henan, China. The investigators will foster an exchange of perspectives,
knowledge, and data between Chinese and American scholars necessary to answer
this problem.

Under the direction of Dr. Tristram Kidder, Mr. Michael Storozum will use an
extraordinarily preserved record of buried soils in Neihuang County, Henan,
China to better document the origins of the Anthropocene to answer this specific
research question. From two localities in Neihuang County, Anshang and
Sanyangzhuang, the investigators will collect and analyze a continuous series of
samples with a variety of scientific methods including X-ray florescence,
electron microprobe, grain size distribution analysis, loss-on-ignition,
magnetic susceptibility, and soil micromorphology to identify signatures of past
human land use. Additionally, the investigators will refine the chronology at
both Sanyangzhuang and Anshang with accelerator mass spectrometry dating of
radiocarbon samples. By identifying signatures of past human land use, the
investigators will be able to assess how humans transformed the natural
environment of ten thousand years ago into the environments of the Anthropocene.
This project will provide the data for Mr. Storozum's doctoral dissertation.