* 1458026
* Mathematics Mentoring and Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* Joleen Beltrami, University of The Incarnate Word
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 05/31/2021
* USD 612,206.00

The Mathematics Mentoring and Scholarship (MMS) program at the University of the
Incarnate Word (UIW) in San Antonio Texas will increase the number of
academically talented but financially needy students qualified to enter the STEM
workforce or graduate school upon completing a bachelor's degree in mathematics.
The program will provide annual scholarships to 15 mathematics majors along with
funds for travel for professional development and to conduct academic
presentations. Students will participate in weekly mentoring sessions to address
any issues concerning their courses, degree, and college experience. Recruitment
will target local high schools and five local community colleges in the Alamo
Colleges network. This project will increase the number of academically talented
but financially needy students qualified to enter graduate school in mathematics
or to enter the workforce in a technical area of national need that requires
professionals with advanced mathematics knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the program are to increase student retention and graduation and
to ensure participation in mentoring and professional development activities.
The program also encourages student participation in research programs and/or
internships to facilitate placement of in a technical field or graduate program.
Scholars in the program will be paired with a peer to guide them through issues
or concerns they have regarding university life, the mathematics degree, and
other program related issues. Field trips to local employers will expose
students to real-world STEM experiences and provide them with potential
employment opportunities. The MMS program has the potential to increase the
number of woman and underrepresented groups available to purse STEM related
graduate degrees or employment and to develop effective academic interventions
to support these groups.