* 1458120
* Supporting Transfers to Reach Educational Aspirations in Math and Science
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Steven Zook, Fresno Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ferrara
* 05/31/2021
* USD 605,631.00

The Supporting Transfers in Reaching Educational Aspirations in Math and Science
(STREAMS) Program at Fresno Pacific University (FPU) will target increasing the
number of community college transfer students who obtain science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) baccalaureate degrees and will build on an
existing partnership between the university and the College of the Sequoias
(COS). STREAMS will identify a diverse population of academically talented
community college students with financial need and recruit these students to
transfer to math, biology, chemistry, or environmental science program at the
university. This project will enhance STEM collaborations between a community
college and a four-year institution and increase the number of STEM graduates
from populations traditionally underrepresented in STEM including first-
generation, Hispanic, and low-income students through recruitment efforts that
focus on these groups. In so doing it will increase the number of STEM role
models for the younger members of these groups and advance research and practice
regarding effective STEM scholarship programs and student support services for
transfer students from underrepresented groups. The project will enable the
university to continue to develop, apply, evaluate, and advance theories and
practices that increase STEM baccalaureate degree attainment among community
college transfer students such as articulated transfer agreements, cohort
building activities, mentoring, transition-to-university programming, upper-
division STEM tutoring, study groups, and graduation guarantees.

The university will augment student support structures to ensure that at least
85% of the scholars obtain a baccalaureate degree within two years of
transferring to the university. The project will enhance a number of existing
student support services as well as services initiated through a collaboration
on a Title V Hispanic Serving Institutions grant program targeting STEM
students. These enhancements will include the formation of cohorts, two-year
Graduation Guarantees for scholars, a special seminar designed for scholars,
robust faculty-student mentoring, upper division STEM tutoring, STEM retention
strategies, and Supplemental Instruction. It will enable at least 80% of S-STEM
scholars to secure employment or enter a graduate program in a STEM field within
one year of graduation. STREAMS will better prepare STEM students for the
workforce or graduate programs by providing key support services and activities,
including one-on-one STEM career counseling, GRE preparation, job shadowing at
local STEM businesses, internship and research opportunities, field trips to
STEM businesses and graduate schools, and workshops with STEM industry experts.