* 1458640
* Collaborative Research:  ABI Innovation:  Connecting resources to enable large-scale biodiversity analyses
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Jose Fortes, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2021
* USD 834,828.00

Extracting biological knowledge from complex datasets such as those now being
compiled requires integration of powerful computational tools. Recent
developments in computational biology as well as rich new data sources provide
novel opportunities for integrating massive amounts of biological data. This
perfect storm of new data and advanced data acquisition, management, and
integration afford the unique opportunity to drive the discovery of new, complex
patterns in biology. The project will leverage NSF's considerable investment in
biodiversity tools provided by Open Tree of Life (the framework for the
project), Lifemapper (which handles geospatial data), iDigBio (data from ~1
billion museum specimens that carry locality data and their ecological
information), and Arbor (computer tools that permit new analyses from the
sources noted). It will create much needed computational connections among these
tools. It will then build upon these new linkages and tools, enabling novel
research in biodiversity. These linkages will provide researchers the
opportunity to rapidly synthesize datasets and use them to address diverse
evolutionary questions. The tools and infrastructure the project will build will
connect species relationships with species distribution models, climate
projections, genes and traits. The project will transform future studies of
biodiversity; it will provide a global integration of powerful tools that will
permit new data-driven discovery in "next generation" biodiversity science. It
will provide interdisciplinary post-doc and graduate student training in
bioinformatics, use of digitized specimen data, and complex analyses (e.g.
ecological analyses), preparing the biodiversity scientists of the future. The
project will recruit underrepresented students and women and develop an
undergrad course that will help train students with the integrative skills
(field biology to computational biology) needed in the workforce. We will
further develop this module for wider classroom use. We will introduce an annual
week-long course at University of Florida (UF) for students and post-docs on the
use of the resources developed. With education specialists at UF, the project
will produce video materials and a coordinated display for general audiences on
the importance of digitized specimen data, and their utility for studies of
climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a computational
framework linking diverse data (trees of species relationships, morphology,
ecology, fossils, geography, and climate) across research tools used by the
biological community, including Open Tree of Life, which will serve as the
framework to which all other biological data - traits, genes, genomes, and
especially specimens - will be linked, as well as Lifemapper, iDigBio, and
Arbor. Use of the large, hyper-diverse plant group Saxifragales will provide
precisely what is needed to drive the development of these tools--a
comprehensive dataset that covers morphology, ecology, geography, fossils, and
climate provides a test case for refining the tools the project will develop and
their integration. The project will: 1. Facilitate new synergistic research of
broad utility at the interface of phylogenetics, ecology, evolutionary biology,
biogeography and biodiversity science, enabling scientists to address novel
questions relating phenotypic and ecological biodiversity, spatial and temporal
variation, community assembly, and diversification across landscapes and through
time. 2. Increase visibility and accessibility of iDigBio, Open Tree of Life,
Arbor, and Lifemapper resources by linking them together and making them
available through multiple access points (e.g., pre-existing tools associated
with Arbor and Lifemapper) in a variety of appropriate formats. 3. Develop a
complete, multifaceted species-level dataset for a large clade (Saxifragales),
which will not only fill in this branch on the ToL, but will produce a resource
of great utility for the scientific community to explore. 4. Demonstrate the
utility of iDigBio, Open Tree, Lifemapper, and Arbor resources with a
comprehensive analysis using near complete sampling of Saxifragales, for which
we will add the following data layers: DNA sequences, morphology, fossils,
ontologies, geospatial and environmental data, digitized voucher specimens, and
link to the Encyclopedia of Life (EOL). The project will: 1) provide
interdisciplinary post-doc and graduate student training in bioinformatics,
large-scale phylogeny reconstruction, use of digitized specimen data, and
complex post-tree analyses (e.g. niche modeling, niche diversification),
preparing the integrative biodiversity scientists of the future; 2) recruit
underrepresented students and women; 3) developed an undergrad course that uses
field collection, herbarium specimens, digitized data (iDigBio), and niche
modeling (with climate change; 4) introduce an annual week-long course (UF) for
students and post-docs on the use of the resources produced; 5) produce video
materials and a coordinated display for general audiences on the importance of
digitized specimen data, their utility for modeling niche evolution through time
and implications for climate change. The project will provide a platform that
will enable other researchers to take the same integrated approach in other
groups. It will also establish web links to EOL and 1) build species pages; 2)
place morphological and other trait data on TraitBank, making these widely
available; 3) work with EOL and iNaturalist to engage citizen scientists.