* 1458264
* Advances in Wiregrass Georgia: Infrastructural Improvements to Sustain Another Half-Century of Herbarium-Based Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* James Carter, Valdosta State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2019
* USD 176,917.00

In the number of vascular plant species, Georgia ranks seventh among the states.
Much of this biodiversity resides in the fire-dependent longleaf pine-wiregrass
communities and associated seepage slopes and pitcher-plant bogs, sand hills,
barrier islands, Carolina bays, tupelo swamps, mesic slopes with Appalachian
affinities, and blackland prairies of the Coastal Plain. Georgia is the fourth
most rapidly growing state in the U.S. and the fastest in the Southeast, and its
native plants and ecosystems are threatened by land development and invasive
exotic plants. A collection of more than 70,000 museum-quality specimens, the
Valdosta State University Herbarium has major strength and focus on plant
diversity of the Georgia Coastal Plain. It is the primary resource for
scientific research about plants of this region. The online availability of
digital photographs and the data from biological collections greatly increases
access to specimens and the potential for using these biodiversity resources in
diverse ways, including the assessment of the ecological and conservation status
of species and ecosystems, and changing trends in populations of plant species,
related to climate change, habitat degradation, and the introduction of exotic
species. The virtual access enabled by this project will promote knowledge, use,
and recognition of the valuable biodiversity data in the Valdosta State
University Herbarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance
infrastructure of the Valdosta State University Herbarium through the
installation of a high-density storage system that will increase its specimen
holding capacity by about 30%. The new compactor system will provide secure and
safe storage of this irreplaceable biodiversity resource and will sustain its
growth for the next 15 years. This project will provide funds to mount and
digitize 5,000 specimens and provide precise geographical coordinates for nearly
15,000 specimen records, making vitally important specimens and their associated
digital photographs and data available to the community of biodiversity
researchers and others online. This project will also secure and revitalize the
extensive and currently dormant Vanderbilt University Teaching Collections by
bringing them to Valdosta State University where they will be used to train
future generations of students and biodiversity researchers. The specialized
learning promoted through the direct involvement of undergraduate students in
curating and digitizing biological collections and in biodiversity research will
bring new perspectives on potential careers in science. Students will present
their work at scientific meetings, and opportunities provided through this
project will enable the participation of under-represented groups. Outreach
programs targeting young people at an impressionable age, their teachers, and
others will bring issues of biological collections and biodiversity before a
large and diverse audience through herbarium tours, informal presentations, and
a summer workshop for teachers. All data resulting from this project will be
posted online (http://herb.valdosta.edu/) and shared with iDigBio
(https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring accessibility to researchers and educators.
Additional information is available at
http://ww2.valdosta.edu/~rcarter/HERB/Herbindex.htm.