* 1458748
* ABI Innovation: Advanced mathematical, statistical, and software tools to unlock the potential of animal tracking data
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* William Fagan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,162,723.00

This project aims to develop a statistically rigorous analytical foundation for
the nascent field of movement ecology. An understanding of animal movement can
inform a wide range of biological topics including population and community
ecology, animal physiology, disease spread, gene flow, and wildlife management
and conservation. Historically, a lack of movement data limited progress, but
advances in tracking technology have facilitated the collection of high-quality
movement data for an ever-growing number of species. Now, the key bottleneck is
the dearth of good statistical tools for extracting information from these
accumulating data sources. This research addresses this gap by combining
movement-modeling techniques from physics with statistical methods for non-
independent data from geostatistics. These next-generation analytical tools will
allow biologists to tackle the four key analysis categories in movement ecology:
1) modeling movement paths, 2) estimating kinematic quantities such as velocity
and distance travelled, 3) identifying driving relationships between resources
and movement, and 4) quantifying animal space use. Outreach efforts will target
the diverse array of biologists collecting and asking questions of animal
movement data. Specifically, a series of tutorial papers will demonstrate
methods covering the four analysis categories on conservation-focused case
studies including African bush elephants in Kenya and the endangered khulan in
the Mongolian Gobi desert. Additionally, an in-depth training course aimed at
conservation practitioners and wildlife managers will be offered, and project
results will be incorporated into the graduate and undergraduate curriculum at
University of Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work combines recent advances
in modeling movement as a continuous space, continuous time stochastic process
with kriging techniques from geostatistics. Kriging is a statistically optimal
method of probabilistically "filling in the blanks" between a limited number of
autocorrelated data points. Kriging revolutionized geostatistics and is now the
gold standard for interpolating between autocorrelated spatial point
observations. Analogously, adapting kriging to movement data will allow
researchers to probabilistically reconstruct movement paths from a limited
number of location observations. Knowledge of the continuous path an animal
traversed is the critical nexus linking animal movement data to a wide range of
ecologically-informative and conservation-relevant analyses. These
transformative methods therefore have the potential to remove the key roadblock
that is currently holding movement ecology back. To fully capitalize on that
potential, this project will develop an integrated suite of freely available
software packages for the R environment for statistical computing. These
packages will enable users to answer movement related questions for a broad
range of species with the powerful krige-based analytical tools the project
develops. Project results will be available at
http://biology.umd.edu/movement.html.