* 1458171
* CSBR Natural History: Rehousing and inventory of fluid-preserved mollusks at the Academy of Natural Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Gary Rosenberg, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2018
* USD 345,105.00

This project will inventory more than 50,000 samples of fluid-preserved mollusks
at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia (ANSP). The collection is
threatened by the increasing failure rate of old jar lids, which will be
addressed by replacing the lids with ones made of archival materials. The
collection contains about 1.5 million specimens from 140 countries. Endangered
and extinct species are represented in more than 1,000 samples containing more
than 200,000 specimens. Much of the fluid-preserved collection is appropriate
for DNA analysis, in addition to being suitable for dissections. Ensuring that
this material is properly archived and that information about is available
online supports research on molluscan biology and conservation throughout the
world. The project will train four undergraduate students from Drexel University
in molluscan systematics, taxonomy, and curatorial techniques. Each student will
work full-time for six months as a curatorial assistant at ANSP, learning
conservation and preservation techniques. Students will receive an introduction
to molluscan diversity and learn about the value of systematic collections for
research in evolutionary and conservation biology. The general public will be
introduced to the project at the annual Members' Night at ANSP, which was
attended by more than 1,000 people in 2014, and at the annual Philadelphia Shell
Show, which attracts about 1,500 visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
rehouse in archival materials 41,000 samples from ANSP and integrate about 9,500
samples received from other institutions. Many of the jar lids in the collection
are made of bakelite or steel, materials now known not to be archival for fluid
preservation. When lids fail, the specimens dry out, reducing their scientific
value; all non-archival lids will be replaced with archival ones. Jars will be
moved from standing directly on shelves into aluminum trays, so that fluid
levels can be checked by scanning entire trays rather than picking up one jar at
a time. Before the advent of DNA technology, it was assumed that samples sent on
loan from the fluid-preserved collection would be destroyed when they were
dissected, so ANSP asked for similar material in exchange. However, it was not
usually recorded when a sample had been deaccessioned for destructive sampling.
Also, in some cases, the presence of an alcohol lot in addition to a dry lot was
not recorded in the catalogue. Each sample will therefore be verified against
its database record, yielding a current inventory of the fluid-preserved
collection. A module will be added to the database to record the condition of
the sample at the time of rehousing and any action taken. All data resulting
from this project will be shared with iDigBio (https://www.idigbio.org/),
ensuring accessibility to researchers and educators. Data will be made available
online through the ANSP website (http://clade.ansp.org/malacology/collections/)
and other portals.