* 1458699
* Missouri State University Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Kenneth Vollmar, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 07/31/2021
* USD 628,164.00

Growth in the fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
are critical to the advancement of Missouri State University (MSU), the State of
Missouri, and the United States of America. This Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project aims to significantly
increase the quality and number of graduates in the STEM fields of computer
science, engineering, mathematics, and physics at MSU. This will be achieved
with the use of scholarships that attract and retain students interested in STEM
fields, seminar classes, volunteer opportunities, and tutoring in Calculus II
and III and Physics I and II. The core of student support services will be a one
credit a semester seminar course. Topics will emphasize other student support
opportunities, student success strategies, internships, undergraduate research,
employment, and graduate school. Scholarships will be provided to 15 sophomore
and 6 transfer students each year based on academic talent and financial need.
These scholarships will last two years, provided progression toward graduation.
More than 84 computer science, engineering, mathematics, and physics students
will be directly impacted by these scholarships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will enhance student retention, performance, breadth of understanding,
and student peer support networks as well as enhance the understanding of cohort
seminars, course specific tutoring, mentoring, and group building among STEM
disciplines on the MSU campus. Each of these areas will be evaluated by an
external evaluator associated with this proposed S-STEM project. The evaluation
will be conducted using surveys and performance in specific courses to gather
both quantitative and qualitative information about all aspects of the project.
The results will be used to improve all aspects of the project, many of which
will continue beyond the project's duration.