* 1458198
* CSBR:Natural History: Critical infrastructure upgrades and expanded digital access to Non-vertebrate Paleontology Collections at the University of Texas at Austin
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Rowan Martindale, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 495,880.00

An award is made to the University of Texas (UT) at Austin for infrastructure
upgrades and support for expanded digital access to the Non-vertebrate
Paleontology Collections. The funding will alleviate pressure for storage space
within this collection located on the Pickle Research Campus of UT. Transfer of
specimens from the main campus has stressed the capacity of current storage to
critical levels that significantly hinder access and specimen retrieval. Direct
user access is vital to ensure that materials remain easily available for on-
going and future research, education, and public outreach. This project will
address many of these issues. It will facilitate cabinet upgrades, specimen
security, and expanded digital access to irreplaceable fossil collections,
especially those currently housed without climate control. Specimens include
rare historic material, extirpated or extinct species, collections from now
inaccessible localities, fossils from the geologic mapping of Texas, thesis and
dissertation samples, paleobotanical collections, a unique Holocene marine, land
snail and mussel collection, a genotypic mollusc collection, and several
orphaned collections. New archival cabinets will provide more efficient space
usage, and are a vital step in the progression to fully compacted climate-
controlled space when additional funding permits. The physical structure of the
cabinets combined with climate curtaining will prevent contamination by pests
and pollution, buffer swings in temperature and humidity, and improve security.
Public interest and education, furthered through innovative web and mobile
applications, will be expanded through a variety of social media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the project implementation, most specimens will be
passed through a freeze/thaw cycle to kill insects and larvae prior to their
transfer to new cabinets. All transfer activity will be tracked via a linked
geographic information system (GIS) to a database (Specify6) and web interface;
collections will remain digitally accessible during the project by leveraging
whole-drawer imagery, which could not be achieved without the previous
deployments of an effective GIS and imaging as part of the ongoing inventory
process. The project continues an institutional strategy to conserve important
collections in the repository and to make high resolution 2-D, and now 3-D,
digital surrogates available for collaborative research. All specimens will be
imaged in full-drawer context, and individual specimens captured with their
historic labels as an added resource. Refinement of the web connectivity between
repository map, database, and images will enable remote access for potential
teaching specimens and research resources. Virtual specimens and related data
will be available for query and download, retaining flexibility to explore these
off-site collections in a variety of contexts, including taxonomy, geology, and
global paleogeography. Locality coordinates, corrected for plate tectonic
movement, will be provided for both spatial and temporal analysis of data. All
data resulting from this project will be shared with iDigBio
(https://www.idigbio.org/) and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility
(GBIF), ensuring accessibility to researchers and the public.