* 1458986
* IEEE EMBS BRAIN Grand Challenges Conference November 13-14, 2014, Washington, DC
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Bin He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 11/30/2016
* USD 25,000.00

PI: He, Bin &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1458986&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;Title: Workshop: IEEE EMBS BRAIN
Grand Challenges Conference, November 13-14, 2014, Washington,
DC&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IEEE EMBS BRAIN Grand Challenges Conference will be
organized during November 13, 2014 - November 14, 2014 in Washington DC. The
goal of the Conference is to provide a platform for open discussion and debate
joined by the international scientific community with regard to the road maps of
addressing BRAIN grand challenges as discussed and identified by NSF and NIH
workshops and advisory groups. Such public discussions are critical for the
scientific community to engage so the visions on BRAIN grand challenges can be
smoothly translated into research innovations in years to come. Of particular
emphasis will be the engineering challenges for advanced brain research through
advancing innovative neurotechnologies (BRAIN). This reflects the vision that
technological innovations are key to major advances in BRAIN research. The
broader impacts of the Conference will include recruiting and recognizing
outstanding young investigators to/in BRAIN research, and facilitating their
participation in addressing the BRAIN grand challenges in a highly integrative
platform together with world leaders in BRAIN research and education. This award
is being made jointly by two Programs. (1) Biomedical Engineering, in the
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Division
(Engineering Directorate); and (2) Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
(EFRI) (Engineering Directorate).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Conference will have
plenary lectures and panel discussions in mapping neural circuits: micro and
macro; understanding functional neural dynamics; controlling neural circuits and
restoring function; and funding and translation in the BRAIN initiative. Keynote
and plenary speakers will include thought leaders from academia, government and
industry. An interactive poster session will also be organized, in which the
scientific community will present their ideas and engage in discussions. To
attract and recognize outstanding young investigators to the BRAIN initiative, a
young investigator BRAIN awards competition will be held for students,
postdoctoral fellows and assistant professors (or equivalent). These awards will
be selected by a panel of international experts in BRAIN research. It is
anticipated that the Conference will contribute to public debate and discussion
on how to address the grand challenges in BRAIN initiative. It will lead to a
better understanding of several issues including, but not limited to: how can we
image the brain activity and function with high spatial and temporal resolution
by developing novel noninvasive imaging technologies; how can we image neural
circuits with greater spatio-temporal resolution; how can we manipulate neural
circuits and brain networks so as to enhance our understanding of the brain
function and treat brain disorders; what are the engineering innovations needed
to address the grand challenges, such as innovative sensors, imaging
technologies, informatics and computational techniques; and what are the
challenges to involve more engineers to work together with neuroscientists to
address BRAIN grand challenges.