* 1458953
* A Panel Study of the Dynamics of Change in Egypt and Turkey
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Mansoor Moaddel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 356,794.00

People's sociopolitical and cultural views change as a result of their
experience. An important component of this experience is the outbreak of major
events in their lives. These events may be personal, like getting married or
divorce, the birth of one's child or the loss of a loved one, starting a new
career or losing a job. Life-changing events may also happen at a broader
societal level, including a sudden shift in the economic conditions, a major
societal upheaval or revolutionary development, sudden changes in the government
through a military coup, or political repression by the government or an act of
violence perpetrated by terror groups. Such events may reinforce or challenge
cherished beliefs, causing a shift in people's orientation toward either
conservatism or liberalism. In the contemporary Middle East, comparative
historical studies of ideological production and cross-national values surveys
have shown associations between changes in social conditions and changes in the
dominant sociopolitical discourses and people?s value orientations It is,
however, unclear how changes in these conditions explain changes in discourses
and values. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In prior research comparative surveys were
carried out in Egypt in 2011 and Turkey in 2013, using a nationally
representative sample of more than 3,000 adults in each country. This project
will re-interview the same respondents in order to assess how changes in their
life conditions and the outbreak of events that transpired since the last
surveys affected their values and political behavior. This project will
contribute to a mechanismic explanation of change in values and political
engagement by launching a panel study in Egypt and Turkey, where adequate
infrastructure for survey research is available. This panel study will (1)
explain changes in sociopolitical and cultural values; (2) examine how variation
in participation in such activities as peaceful demonstrations, political
protests, and political violence is linked to changes in (a) inter-group
relations, (b) identity and framing, (c) attitudes toward the West and liberal
values, (d) religious fundamentalism, (e) dysphoric emotions or personal
efficacy, and (f) sources of news information (the Internet, satellite TV,
mobiles); (3) assess how people's perceptions of corruption and trustworthiness
of public officials are linked to political action and conflict; and (4)
evaluate the implications of this study for peace and national security. This
project will also contribute to survey methodology by (1) including a new Event
History Calendar in the questionnaire, and (2) assessing the effects of privacy
during the interview and interviewer characteristics on respondents.