* 1458033
* CSBR: Natural History: Preserving and ensuring access to critical biological collections in an emerging museum at the University of Nevada, Reno
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Elizabeth Leger, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 10/31/2017
* USD 251,433.00

The state of Nevada, located in the core of the Great Basin, contains a unique
flora and fauna, but is also a region under threat by invasive species, water
diversions, and other land-use practices. A host of taxa and entire communities
are endangered and in decline. The Great Basin, which is high in fish endemism,
has experienced 12 fish extinctions in the past 100 years, more than any other
region in North America. Eight of these have occurred in Nevada, with seven
extinctions endemic to Nevada alone. Almost a third of the remaining
ichthyofauna is federally listed. Given the dramatic changes in the region, and
those yet to come, museum collections play a significant role in supporting
organismal science, providing baseline information about regional biodiversity
and chronicling biotic change over decades. The fluid collections at University
of Nevada, Reno (UNR) are a pivotal resource, ranking among the most extensive
holdings of Nevada material and containing irreplaceable specimens of extinct,
extirpated, and endangered taxa. Through the opening of public exhibit space,
the new Natural History Museum is playing a unique role in biodiversity
education in Nevada. Undergraduates, graduates, and alumni are engaged in all
aspects of the museum, including hosting K-12 visits and the creation of public
displays and outreach content, developed with an eye towards meeting the state's
soon-to-be-adopted Next Generation Science Standards.

The UNR has recently consolidated the majority of its natural history
collections, formerly housed in widely disparate, off-campus locations, into a
single, newly-renovated space on-campus. This award supports integration of
fluid collections into this resource, making ca. 28,100 herpetological and fish
specimens (including extinct and endangered taxa) accessible for researchers and
managers. In addition to moving material to a central, on-campus location,
specimens will be transferred to new, more appropriate containers, fully
catalogued, digitized, and georeferenced for publication through online database
portals. Securing, preserving, and ensuring access to these collections will
allow research and management communities the ability to reconstruct the
evolutionary and ecological history of the Great Basin. Impacts of this project
include both scientific and societal benefits, including expansion of an already
successful K-12 outreach program, and establishment of a consolidated web
presence for both fluid collections and natural history museum. All data
resulting from this project will be posted online
(http://arctos.database.museum) and shared with iDigBio
(https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring accessibility to researchers and educators.