* 1458839
* Promoting Retention and Completion with STEM Research and Design Cohorts at Linn-Benton Community College
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Gregory Mulder, Linn Benton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2021
* USD 616,800.00

The Linn-Benton Community College's (LBCC's) "Promoting Retention and Completion
with STEM Research and Design Cohorts" Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project will annually provide
approximately 21 scholarships to academically talented LBCC STEM majors with
financial need. Because this project builds upon and expands prior successful
S-STEM efforts (Tech Scholars Program, TSP-I and TSP-II), participants will be
referred to as TSP-III Scholars. Chemistry, physics, geology, engineering, math,
computer science, and biology will be the target majors for the scholarships.
Students will engage in research and/or design project experiences as part of
one of several possible Research and Design Cohorts (RDCs). This will be
accomplished through a one-credit course called "Destination Graduation," which
is an institutional requirement; a STEM-centered version of this course will be
available to S-STEM scholars. Further, students will have the opportunity to
engage in additional optional RDC activities with faculty members after
completion of this course. Scholars will be recruited primarily through targeted
outreach to four groups: (1) Oregon Marine Advanced Technology Education (MATE)
Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) program, (2) Linn and Benton Counties' 5th Year
High School Students, (3) College Assistance Migrant Program (CAMP), and (4) For
Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology (FIRST) Robotics.
Targeting these groups for recruitment is expected to yield a pool of applicants
who not only have the academic talent or potential to succeed in STEM
disciplines, but also financial need, as many students engaged in some of the
programs are low-income, first generation college students. Additionally, the
MATE ROV teams in Oregon are roughly 50% female, thus lending to the possibility
of broadening participation of women in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected short-term outcomes of the project are:
(1) to provide significant financial relief for the students; (2) to foster an
environment where students feel supported by the program and the college to stay
in school, have a sense of community at the college, achieve academic success,
and transition successfully to a four year program; (3) to engage faculty in a
system that assesses outcomes and makes changes when appropriate to improve
student learning and retention. The Colorado Learning Attitudes about Science
Survey (CLASS) will be used to determine whether or not the students who receive
the scholarships indeed face reduced financial strain compared to non S-STEM
students, including non-STEM majors. This survey will be issued several times
throughout each year allowing for a comprehensive measure of how the
scholarships impact financial stability and ability to concentrate on learning.
Intermediate expected outcomes are that TSP-III scholars will: (1) be retained
and perform well academically compared to their non S-STEM counterparts; and (2)
transfer successfully to a four-year institution and feel a continued sense of
peer group support at those institutions. Data reflecting student retention and
success will be provided by LBCC's Office of Institutional Research to track
student performance each quarter allowing faculty, advisors, and project staff
to intervene early if problems are identified. The National Student
Clearinghouse will be used to track the number and percent of TSP-III Scholars
who transfer successfully. In collaboration with partners such as California
State University at Fullerton and Oregon State University, a follow-up survey
will be administered to obtain feedback on the scholars' experience, progress,
and preparedness for the four-year program as well as the extent of peer support
received.