* 1458192
* CSBR: Ownership Transfer: Miocene Colombian Vertebrates and Conservation of the Duke Lemur Center Fossil Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Anne Yoder, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 536,524.00

Fossils document the existence of previous life forms on Earth. By studying
their attributes and distribution across the world and through time, we gain
understanding of the ever-evolving nature of the Earth and the responses of
organisms to climate change and habitat disturbance. Understanding the fossil
record can guide present and future conservation efforts and help develop
policies that promote healthy ecosystems, a crucial factor for human survival.
For these reasons it is critical that fossils and other natural history
collections be safely stored and managed to assure open access to these
resources for scientists, educators, students, and the general public. The work
proposed here consists of packing and moving a large collection of South
American fossils to the Duke Lemur Center Division of Fossil Primates (DFP) to
ensure its long-term preservation. This collection includes important primate
fossils that will be inventoried, cataloged, and digitally archived, along with
all locality and collection data. The project will provide full and open access
of the entire collection to researchers and the public through a "virtual
museum" framework. Many aspects of this work will involve the participation of
local North Carolina high school students as well as Duke University
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
secure the fossil primates and associated faunal elements housed in the DFP, a
collection of vertebrates from the Late Eocene-Early Oligocene of Egypt (38 to
29 Ma), the early Miocene of Egypt (19.5 Ma), and the latest Pleistocene-
Holocene from Madagascar (500 to 15,000 BP). The project will also transfer an
important and complementary Middle Miocene collection from La Venta, Colombia to
the DFP. The Colombian collection is under imminent risk of displacement and
destruction. The fossil primate collections at DFP are critical for testing
hypotheses concerning how and when modern groups appeared in time and space. DFP
collections enhance study of species diversity and extinction in relation to
climate and habitat change. Past events can inform present conservation efforts
as living non-human primates become more critically endangered. Open access to
3D renderings and models of DFP specimens will catalyze hypothesis-driven
research focused on primate evolution. All updated specimen and georeferenced
locality information will be made available for online searches as part of an
updated and redesigned DFP website (http://www.fossils.duke.edu/) and will be
shared with iDigBio (https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring accessibility to
researchers and educators. For additional information see
http://lemur.duke.edu/discover/division-of-fossil-primates/ and
http://morphosource.org/.