* 1458609
* REU Site:  Convergence of Research at the Interface of the Biological, Physical, and Engineering Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Lynne Regan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 260,244.00

This REU Site award to Yale University, located in New Haven, CT, will support
the training of eight students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2015- 2017.
The program focuses on grand challenges in the life sciences using physical and
quantitative approaches. The program includes more than twelve Yale faculty
mentors from nine departments: Applied Physics, Biomedical Engineering, Cell
Biology, Chemical &amp; Environmental Engineering, Mechanical Engineering &amp;
Materials Science, Molecular Biophysics &amp; Biochemistry, Molecular, Cellular,
and Developmental Biology, Pathology, and Physics. In consultation with the
program leadership, students choose a mentor and research project from three
areas: (A) mechanics of cellular processes, (B) protein function, design, and
engineering, and (C) technology and method development for imaging biological
systems and processes. Students also participate in workshops on laboratory
methods, scientific presentations, ethics, STEM careers, and the graduate school
admissions process. Students present their work at a research symposium
coordinated with the NSF-funded CRISP REU program at Yale. Students are selected
based on their academic performance, research interests that mesh with those of
the REU program, and their interest in STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and will be encouraged to present their results at
scientific conferences. The program's professional development activities will
include oral and poster presentation workshops, information sessions on the
graduate application process, and outreach activities that involve communicating
science to the general public. A significant goal of the program is that by year
3 at least two thirds of the participants will have decided to pursue a PhD or
MD/PhD after graduation from college. Thus, this program will contribute
directly to the development of a STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
that participate in this program are required to be tracked after completion of
the program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information is available at http://www.sackler.yale.edu/summer.htm,
or by contacting the PI (Prof. Corey O'Hern at corey.ohern@yale.edu) or co-PI
(Prof. Lynne Regan at lynne.regan@yale.edu).