* 1458934
* Collaborative Research:  Fingerprinting to Reduce Risky Borrowing
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Jessica Goldberg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2018
* USD 65,142.00

The research will quantify the impacts of improved personal identification of
borrowers through a randomized controlled trial on technology to collect digital
fingerprints of microloan borrowers. This alternative means of establishing
personal identity, will allow for testing dynamic repayment incentives, which
involve conditioning future credit access on a borrower?s past repayment
performance. This study is designed to measure how changes in borrowers?
behavior due to increased incentives to repay loans affect their profits,
consumption, investment, and household wellbeing. In addition, this study will
examine how lenders respond to the new technology, by measuring how loan
officers interact with clients, how microfinance institutions adjust their
borrowing requirements, and the local availability of credit. Impacts will be
measured using administrative data from microlenders in combination with two
years of survey data on borrowers and loan officers. Our results could lead
private and non-profit lenders to adopt fingerprint identification technology of
their own accord. In addition, our findings could help shape the policies of
governments and of development institutions such as the World Bank, which could
(for example) provide technical assistance to help foster the establishment of
fingerprint-based credit reference bureaus that could further enhance the social
benefits of the technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We implement a randomized
controlled trial involving microfinance customers and loan officers at five
different microfinance instiutions. Credit officers play important roles in
screening customers and enforcing dynamic incentives for loan repayment, and
rely on their personal assessments and knowledge of customers in the absence of
reliable ways to identify new or repeat borrowers. We randomize access to
fingerprinting technology for screening borrowers and checking credit histories
at the credit officer level, stratified by MFI. This strategy also generates
variation in the fraction of credit officers in a given geographic area who are
using the new technology. We use this variation to estimate the effect of
fingerprinting on behaviors of three important sets of actors: borrowers
themselves, credit officers, and MFIs. Our main estimates will come from OLS
regressions, which are unbiased because of the random assignment of credit
officers to the fingerprinting technology, but will include district and MFI
(strata) fixed effects to improve precision. At the borrower level, we focus on
repayment outcomes and on measures of household welfare. On the supply side, we
measure the time allocation and decision-making of credit officers to see
whether they reallocate their effort to monitoring borrowers who were not
fingerprinted and are therefore not subject to increased repayment incentives,
and to measure the evolution of decisions about access to credit at the
extensive and intensive margins. We use the regional variation in the intensity
of fingerprinting to see whether MFIs reallocate staff time or loanable funds to
areas in which they have comparative advantages (more access to fingerprint
technology than their competitors within the market, and more access than they
themselves have in other markets). Ultimately, this project seeks to deepen our
understanding of the impacts of a pervasive form of information asymmetry in
many developing countries by studying dynamic behavior of borrowers and lenders,
and measuring supply side responses to improved borrower identification. Answers
to these questions will provide a fuller picture of the economic impacts of
reducing a common but so far understudied type of information asymmetry.