* 1458685
* Career Launch in Engineering Scholarship Program (Career Launch)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Sunil Sharma, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 05/31/2021
* USD 634,936.00

The goal of the Career Launch in Engineering Scholarship Program (Career Launch)
will be to significantly reduce the number of hours the S-STEM Career Launch
scholars need to work outside of school as a means to help retain them to
graduation and reduce time to degree completion. Career Launch will also create
a systematic peer-mentoring program through the three cohorts of Career Launch
scholars. This project will address the need for highly qualified STEM
professionals in industry, especially in the Pacific and Inland Northwest. Idaho
is largely a rural state; however, a variety of high tech companies have large
facilities within the state or surrounding areas, and they have an ongoing need
for highly trained STEM professionals. This project will develop new recruiting
pathways, retention, and support mechanisms for students, and placement efforts
for graduates that will enable the University of Idaho to make a significant
difference in terms of the quality and quantity of STEM professionals available
to these industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the project will be on
decreasing or eliminating the time that Career Launch students must spend at
external jobs during the school year as well as increasing student support
through peer and faculty mentoring and enrichment activities. Career Launch has
three measurable objectives: (1) reduce the number of hours worked outside of
school by a significant amount; (2) build a systematic mentoring program that
will create a sense of community for the students; and (3) retain to degree
completion a minimum of 22 Career Launch Scholars. The program objectives will
be achieved through (1) identification of high-quality students, (2) cohort
development, (3) peer-mentoring program implementation, (4) engineering academic
achievement, and (5) outcome-oriented evaluation. Specific components include
peer-mentoring and cohort-building activities such as social, research, and
orientation activities. Scholars will become peer-mentors in their second year
and form a college-wide peer-mentoring program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aligns with several of the goals of the NSF Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) hence it is receiving partial co-funding
from that program.