* 1458229
* CSBR: NATURAL HISTORY COLLECTIONS: TRANSFORMING ACCESSIBILITY TO THE  RICH, SITE-BASED, MULTI-TAXON COLLECTION OF ARCHBOLD BIOLOGICAL STATION
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Eric Menges, Archbold Expeditions, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 449,164.00

An award is made to the Archbold Biological Station (ABS), an internationally
recognized not-for-profit biological field station in central Florida, to
preserve and secure a unique, irreplaceable record of life in the Florida Scrub
habitat of the Lake Wales Ridge, one of the Nation's most imperiled ecosystems.
The project targets approximately 270,000 specimens including arthropods plants,
mammals, birds, fish, and reptiles. Specimens will be digitized and imaged to
increase online access to information about this unique collection from the
Florida Scrub and surrounding environs. Activities proposed will enhance
advances in the biological sciences, promote benefits to conservation, and
increase educational outreach. For example, by offering more opportunities for
use of the collection to inform research projects and other forms of student
engagement, ABS's programs for students will be strengthened. Furthermore,
information about the collection will be shared during workshops with regional
land managers and ABS will increase access to teaching specimens and exhibits
for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will allow Archbold
Biological Station to curate and digitize its diverse collection. This
digitization effort will improve data accessibility to researchers and
educators. A major focus of this project will be the arthropod collection
(specifically the ants, scrub endemics, insect-flower visitors and dead wood
insects) but other taxonomic groups will also be secured. Partnering with
iDigBio will enable ABS to effectively database, image and migrate specimen data
to the Internet. Symbiota-linked portals will augment the ABS website, providing
an excellent example of what a regional field station collection can achieve. By
posting the collection data online, ABS will make available a virtually complete
biodiversity record and rich ecological data, enabling studies of biodiversity
in ways that would be difficult to otherwise replicate. This increase in
accessibility will also benefit educators and the conservation community.