* 1458184
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Investigating the Nature of the Subcontinental Upper Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/23/2014,08/31/2017
* Anna Courtier, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 70,005.00

Earth's continents have been assembled via amalgamation of land masses over
geologic time, eventually forming stable continental interiors, with associated
tectonic activity and deformation typically isolated to the periphery of the
continent. Over time, successive episodes of deformation in the form of
extension, compression, magmatism, accretion, and rifting have left the sub-
continental upper mantle with a complex signature of thermal and chemical
variability. Many ancient continental areas have been modified by relatively
recent dynamic processes, for example active volcanism, rifting, and subduction
at continental edges contribute to a complex sub-continental mantle. Of
particular interest is the history and influence of melting, melt production,
melt migration, and melt storage in sub-continental upper mantle, as it provides
a window into past and present dynamical processes, including the formation of
continents. This multi-disciplinary project will provide a systematic and
geographically-detailed investigation of the dynamical, chemical, and thermal
processes at work within the sub-continental upper mantle and their
relationships to past and present melting within the Earth. The research team
links a primarily undergraduate institution with a research institution and will
include training of a postdoctoral researcher, undergraduate researchers through
online and face-to-face research collaborations. These connections will be
strengthened through long-term cross-institutional research experiences and the
inclusion of a pre-service teacher working with the researchers to develop
curricular activities describing Earth structure for high school and
undergraduate classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year project will
develop and apply rock physics models of melt, material mineralogies, and
rheologies against observables provided by complementary seismic approaches,
providing a comprehensive characterization of the velocity and density structure
within the sub-continental upper mantle. The team will investigate the
hypothesis that seismic signatures within the sub-continental upper mantle are
relatable to past or current episodes of partial melting, and that they bear the
fingerprints of thermal, chemical, and dynamical processes brought about by
convective motions and mantle flow, both past and present. They will decipher
these signals by: 1) using four seismic tools sensitive to absolute shear and
compressional wavespeeds, their relative variations, as well as impedance
contrasts, discontinuity sharpness, and anisotropic structure, 2) through
geodynamic modeling of the seismic observables to quantify whether the presence
of melt (or remnant, frozen-in melt) is consistent with the observed seismic
structures, and 3) comparison of the inferred models to predictions for mantle
rheology, electrical conductivity, temperatures, and composition, and the
relationship of variations in these parameters to tectonic evolution and
dynamical settings.