* 1458535
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Resilience In Adaptation To Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Scott Hutson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 24,847.00

Gavin R. Davies of the University of Kentucky together with associates from the
Universidad del Valle de Guatemala will investigate how rural communities in the
southwestern Maya highlands in Guatemala negotiated the multiple challenges of
the Classic to Postclassic Transition (c. 800-1200 AD). Inspired by recent
research on the environment and globalization, this research is grounded in
notions of community resilience and quality of life, concepts that have
significant potential for the comparison of past and present social dynamics and
for facilitating cross-disciplinary research. Long an important focus of studies
in the Maya Lowlands, this period remains shrouded in mystery in the neighboring
highlands, critically undermining understanding of the origins and development
of the major social and political entities. Preliminary data from the
southwestern highlands, however, indicates that collapse in the lowlands and
crisis in the adjacent Pacific Coast may have galvanized political elites in
this area to strive for greater integration, urbanism and complexity. However, a
lack of rural settlement data means that it is currently impossible to determine
how rural households and communities responded to, or were affected by, this
transformation. Addressing this lacuna, the current investigations will generate
baseline settlement and chronological data for all habitable portions of the
western shore of Lake Atitlan region. Representing the first collaboration
between the University of Kentucky and the Universidad Del Valle de Guatemala,
this project is expected to pave the way for future collaborations between these
two institutions and to generate future training and research opportunities for
both undergraduate and graduate students in anthropology and related
disciplines. It will also provide data for Mr. Davies doctoral dissertation.

Combining intensive reconnaissance survey, with the test excavation of domestic
and non-domestic locales, the investigators will identify patterned responses to
broad-level changes and delineate changes in community wealth, identity and
resilience. Recognizing that all adaptations entail a cost or trade-off, the
primary hypothesis of this research is that the communities that were most
prosperous in the aftermath of the crisis were those that traded community
autonomy and identity for security by submitting to the rising power of a
centralized authority.