* 1458281
* CSBR: Ownership Transfer: Rehabilitation and digitization of a significant collection of amphibians, reptiles, and fishes through institutional networking
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Lee Fitzgerald, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 204,432.00

This award will support the transfer a collection of reptiles, amphibians, and
fishes from West Texas A&amp;M University (WTAMU) to the Biodiversity Research
and Teaching Collections (BRTC) at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU). The WTAMU
collection consists of more than 15,100 amphibian and reptile specimens and ca.
30,000 fish specimens. It is in danger of being lost, but has great scientific
importance. The WTAMU collection contains holdings from West and North Texas
that fill gaps in knowledge of species distributions. An outcome of the project
will be a properly curated teaching and regional reference collection at WTAMU
for use in zoology courses and by natural resource agencies. Graduates from
WTAMU are employed as biologists for these agencies, with the expectation of
skills at specimen identification. Linkages created during this project will
enhance the usefulness of both WTAMU and BRTC
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BRTC is an appropriate repository for the
WTAMU collections. The BRTC Division of Amphibians and Reptiles (101,000
specimens) is 12th largest in the USA and fully georeferenced. The Division of
Fishes (660,000 individual specimens, catalogued across 44,565 lots) ranks 20th
in size, is online and is 80 percent georeferenced. A unique feature of the
WTAMU collection is that sympatric fishes, amphibians and other reptiles were
collected during studies of ecology and conservation of turtles. It contains at
least 2,060 freshwater turtles representing 34 genera and 14 genera represented
by more than 5 specimens each. There are 719 specimens of map turtles in the
genus Graptemys, including 312 specimens of the endangered Cagle's map turtle,
G. caglei. The project will support two graduate students and multiple
undergraduate workers who will gain extensive curatorial experience and
understanding of the importance of collections. With this project, new material
will be incorporated into outreach activities through the Texas Master
Naturalist Program, Project Wild, Flying Wild, Science and Civics, and the
Leopold Education Project. Data from these collections will be made available on
local, national, and international biodiversity data resources, including
VertNet, the Global Biodiversity Information Facility, and iDigBio
(https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring accessibility to researchers and the
public.