* 1458314
* CSBR: Natural History: Critical Access and Storage for the Mycological Collections at the University of California, Berkeley
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* John Taylor, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2017
* USD 243,724.00

The fungi are critical components of all terrestrial ecosystems, where they play
important roles as mutualists, parasites, and commensals in both plants and
animals. Most of the world's important plant pathogens, such as chestnut blight,
Dutch elm disease, oak wilt, and white pine blister rust are fungi. In addition,
fungi are the primary decomposers responsible for recycling organic matter such
as fallen leaves and downed trees. In this latter role they directly impact the
global carbon cycle, even on a geological time scale. Herbaria are important
repositories documenting the identity and characteristics of specimens collected
in association with scientific studies. The University Herbarium of the
University of California, Berkeley (UC) has been expanding its mycological
collections to meet the demands for better understanding of fungi in California
and across North America. This award will provide safe storage for fungal
collections that are now housed inadequately in a condemned building. It will
also support local citizen science groups participating in "mycoblitzes" who
need scientific expertise for collecting and identifying material. Public
workshops on various aspects of fungal biology will also be
held.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UC herbarium has been expanding its mycological
collections to support a diversity of research on fungi: Their taxonomy,
geographic distribution, ecology, morphological traits, and DNA. A push is
beginning to survey the continent of North America, and the herbarium will play
a critical role in the North American Mycoflora project as it has many types and
historical collections that are necessary to anchor species names and document
historical ranges. The current fungal collection housed at UC has roughly
215,000 specimens, and contains over 2000 fungal type collections, and many
other collections of historical value. There is insufficient space for all the
specimens, particularly the important, threatened collections currently housed
in a remote storage site in a condemned building. Expansion room to house these
collections exists in the main herbarium space in a modern, recently renovated
academic building on campus, but compactors, carriages, and cases are lacking to
complete the task. Compactor carriages will be installed on existing rails; 108
new cases plus 86 existing cases will be placed on the carriages, completing a
move of the fungal collections into one coherent, safe arrangement.