* 1458151
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Curation, Digitization, Integration, and On-Line Access of Two Exceptional Invertebrate Fossil Research Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Douglas Jones, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 184,557.00

This project seeks funding to salvage two unique collections and permanently
house them in the Invertebrate Paleontology Division of the Florida Museum of
Natural History (FLMNH). These collections were no longer afforded adequate
storage at their home institutions. The larger of the two is an exceptional,
nationally unique inventory of fossil micro-mollusks. The second collection is
composed of critical reference specimens used originally to develop a powerful
technique for numerical age dating of fossils (the amino acid racemization
method). Both collections will be used extensively in research, education, and
training of a new generation of scientists. Diverse audiences will benefit
directly from two new exhibits developed using these collections. Additionally,
two identification guides will be produced and 1,500 specimen images will be
made available through on-line portals and the FLMNH's image galleries. The
project will involve hands-on training of undergraduate interns, result in
newsletter articles and talks to local groups, and contribute important
specimens to public exhibits at the FLMNH and elsewhere.

This project seeks to curate, digitize, and publish data from two unique
invertebrate fossil collections recently acquired by the Florida Museum of
Natural History (FLMNH). The first collection (~30,000 lots) was assembled by
Lyle Campbell (University of South Carolina, Upstate) during 40 years of
fieldwork in Cenozoic deposits of Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia. The
collection is a nationally unique scientific resource representing a
taxonomically diverse bio-inventory of micro-mollusks. The second collection
(~3,000 lots) was assembled by John Wehmiller (University of Delaware) over the
past 35 years during the development of amino acid racemization (AAR) dating
methods. Both collections will be integrated into the Specify 6.6, a relational
database that unifies all FLMNH paleontological and neontological specimen
collections. The project will make two significant collections readily available
to the global research community, thus providing a stimulus for research. The
collection of numerous, rare, and undescribed species of micro-mollusks,
severely underrepresented in FLMNH's holdings, will be of broad value to
malacologists and paleontologists. This collection is particularly valuable for
filling gaps in the fossil record (e.g., tropical Paleogene) and are uniquely
suitable for quantitative macro-ecological studies (e.g., ecological niche
modeling). The second collection contains key reference materials for
geochronological studies needed to validate past research findings and assist
Quaternary geochronologists with the development of new dating strategies. Upon
completion, the project will result in novel high-quality data on spatial and
temporal distribution of Cenozoic invertebrates. These records will be fully
integrated into existing data networks (e.g., iDigBio, GBIF, PBDB, and Earth
Cube).