* 1458158
* Coral-microbial interactions as determinants of disease dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Steven Vollmer, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2020
* USD 659,874.00

The health of numerous animal and plant hosts depends on the composition of
their microbiome. Although the health of hosts is often linked to environmental
factors that favor the growth of pathogenic microbes, the diversity of animal
and plant microbiomes suggests that competition plays an important role in
determining the frequency and severity of disease outbreaks. This project uses
the endangered Caribbean staghorn coral as a model system to understand how the
environment and microbial interactions controls the spread of White Band Disease
(WBD), a bacterial disease that has decimated nearly 95% of Caribbean staghorn
coral populations. A combination of manipulative experiments, field surveys and
mathematical modeling will be used to determine how water temperature, microbial
movement between- and microbial competition within coral hosts influence WBD
incidence. By identifying the environmental and microbial drivers of WBD, this
project will allow managers to (i) predict hotspots of vulnerability to WBD in
space and time, and (ii) identify optimal strategies for restoring these once
prominent members of Caribbean coral reef communities. This research will
address important societal needs by cross-training graduate students in coral
biology, microbial genetics, bioinformatics, mathematical modeling, computer
programming and statistics. Results of this project will be integrated into
undergraduate courses in genetics, ecological modeling and biostatistics in
order to emphasize the importance of quantitative and interdisciplinary STEM
training for addressing important questions in biology. Finally, a series of
interactive web modules will be created to disseminate the results of this
project beyond academic circles, including to Northeastern University's Marine
Science Center K-12 outreach programs and the Smithsonian Tropical Research
Institute's outreach programs in Panama.

There is growing recognition that the processes that structure microbial
communities may scale up to explain disease outbreaks in their hosts. Despite
the complexity of microbial communities, most studies to date have focused on
resolving the direct relationship between the environment, the occurrence of
pathogenic microbes, and the incidence of disease. However, the effects of
microbial species interactions and dispersal on the emergence of host diseases
remain largely unknown. This project will combine microbial genetics and
mathematical modeling to understand the relative influence of the environment,
species interactions and dispersal on the structure of microbial communities and
the dynamics of disease in their coral hosts. This research uses the endangered
Caribbean staghorn coral (Acropora cervicornis) and White Band Disease (WBD) as
a model host-pathogen system. This once dominant, reef-building coral was
decimated by WBD, prompting its listing as an endangered species. Recent work in
this system suggests that (i) bacteria are the cause of WBD, (ii) the microbial
community living within the host can produce antibiotic compounds that suppress
pathogenic bacteria, and (iii) temperature increase promotes infection and
reduces the production of antibiotic compounds. These findings suggest that the
interplay between the environment and host-associated microbial species
determines the structure of the microbial community and the health of the coral
host. To disentangle these processes, a multi-factorial transmission experiment
will be conducted to understand the direct and indirect effects of temperature,
pathogen exposure, and microbial community complexity on disease dynamics. To
determine how these results scale up to natural coral reefs, a spatial coral-
microbial model will be fitted to field survey data. This fitted model will
elucidate how seasonal temperature variation and microbial dispersal jointly
influence coral disease outbreaks and the structure of coral-microbial
communities across spatial scales. The proposed research will integrate research
with teaching and training of undergraduate students.