* 1458633
* Collaborative Research: Impact of saltwater intrusion on C storage in tidal freshwater wetlands: Assessing the amount, age, and fate of mobilized C
* BIO,DEB
* 03/21/2014,02/28/2017
* Scott Neubauer, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 02/28/2017
* USD 255,031.00

Rising sea levels, reduced precipitation in watersheds, and global increases in
water consumption are resulting in widespread saltwater intrusion into tidal
freshwater wetlands. The movement of saline water into these historically
freshwater ecosystems is likely to impact plant productivity, the decomposition
of roots and litter, the metabolism of soil microbial communities, and, as a
result, the rate of organic matter accumulation. Organic matter accumulation is
an important factor determining the rate of vertical accretion in tidal
freshwater wetlands, and whether these wetlands will be able to "keep up" with
rising sea levels. The overall goal of this project is to understand how
saltwater intrusion will impact the fate of organic carbon in tidal freshwater
wetlands. Several tidal freshwater wetlands in Virginia and South Carolina that
cover a range of soil types, plant communities, and potential responses to
saltwater intrusion will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal marshes supply
a number of important ecosystem goods and services, including water quality
improvement, floodwater buffering, and habitat for economically and ecologically
important plants and animals. As sea level rises, it is critical to understand
whether and how freshwater tidal wetlands will be able to keep pace by building
soil volume. This research will allow us to understand and perhaps respond to
the effects of climate change on tidal freshwater wetlands.