* 1458331
* Scholarships for Boosting the Scientific Workforce in Rural Central Indiana
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Roberto Ramos, Indiana Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 08/31/2022
* USD 623,337.00

This project will enhance the quality and quantity of STEM undergraduates by
providing scholarships for talented and financially-needy students in biology,
chemistry, and physics at Indiana Wesleyan University. The program will provide
scholarships for 18 undergraduate students for a period of four years. The
surrounding region of Indiana is economically depressed where only a small
percentage of students obtain Bachelor's degrees. Special effort will be made to
recruit applicants from under-represented groups in the immediate vicinity. The
program has the potential to be highly-transformative by increasing diversity in
the largely homogenous STEM student community in an economically depressed area
and increasing our national economic competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program will be part of a major initiative to improve STEM programs and
resources at Indiana Wesleyan University. These include a new Science Building
with dedicated faculty research laboratory spaces, an Annual Summer Research
Institute, two active NSF-sponsored Research in Undergraduate Institution (RUI)
grants, a new Science Colloquium Series, award-winning science outreach
programs, and new academic programs. Scholarship recipients will be selected
through a holistic review process taking into account motivation, logical and
critical thinking, resourcefulness, and demonstrated aptitude in the sciences.
The recipients will be supported by focused academic and research experiences.
Support services include collaboration spaces for STEM majors, a specialized
STEM student orientation, memberships in professional societies, tutoring by
peers, and extensive mentoring by faculty. This project will offer an innovative
boot camp after students' first academic year to introduce students to the
essential components of the science career path including summer research
opportunities, applying to internships and graduate school, applying for grants,
and an introduction to scientific reading, writing, and presentation. The
program will also forge sustainable connections to local employers through
lunches with STEM industry experts and working with the local chamber of
commerce. All of these support services will receive formative assessment
throughout the project and summative assessment at the conclusion. The project's
web site will report all assessment statistics that are gathered as well as
pictures and video of S-STEM scholars doing research, performing outreach
events, and enjoying social activities. Measureable outcomes will be
disseminated at meetings of professional societies including the American
Association of Physics Teachers and the American Chemical Society.