* 1458392
* Collaborative Research: A Pilot Study for Electromagnetic Surveying of Freshwater Resources Beneath the US Atlantic Continental Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Kerry Key, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2017
* USD 240,000.00

Supplies of fresh drinking water typically come from aquifers deep below the
surface. These aquifer units do not stop at the shoreline, but instead extend
offshore for perhaps hundreds of kilometers, carrying freshwater with them. In
some cases, it is suspected that isolated bodies of freshwater may exist,
emplaced during periods of time when sea level was much lower than it is today.
Although the presence of large volumes of freshwater beneath the continental
shelf is likely a global phenomenon, estimates of the extent of potential
resources vary widely. A recent modeling study suggests that as much as 1300 km3
of fresh water could be trapped off the New England shore. For reference, the
city of New York consumes roughly 1.5 km3 per year. As freshwater resources
become increasingly stressed, many nations will need to exploit these valuable
resources in a manner that does not result in contamination of the freshwater
supply. Although we suspect that extensive freshwater exists offshore, our
knowledge of where the water can be found is limited to drilling sites where
samples have been collected. For example, it has been known for ~40 years that a
substantial body of freshwater can be found offshore New Jersey. However,
drilling gives only point measurements and is prohibitively expensive when large
areas need to be studied. What is missing are tools capable of mapping the
subsurface that are sensitive to fresh groundwater and for mapping deposits in
new areas where water supplies onshore are scarce.

This research takes advantage of electromagnetic surveying tools that were
initially developed by academia, but which have been adopted and expanded by the
petroleum industry. These tools measure how well the seafloor can conduct
electrical current and, as a result, are sensitive to changes in the salinity of
water in the subsurface because fresh water conducts current less than seawater.
The electromagnetic methods that will be used in this projet are the only non-
invasive means available to detect the presence of fresh-water in the subsurface
and to map these layers over length-scales of tens of kilometers. In this
research, the project will characterize the spatial distribution of sub-seafloor
fresh water beneath the continental shelf of the US Atlantic coast in two
locations: off Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts, and the offshore New Jersey.
Broader impacts of the work include providing a proof of concept that
electromagnetics can be effectively used to detect freshwater reserves in the
offshore marine environment.