* 1458266
* Scholarships Advancing Mercer STEM Students (SAMS)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Laura Blinderman, Mercer County Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 599,998.00

Scholarships for Advancing Mercer STEM Students (SAMS) will provide 120
scholarships for full-time STEM students who have demonstrated financial need at
Mercer County Community College (MCCC). The specific goal of this program will
be to provide scholarships for academically talented students who have
demonstrated financial need so that they can successfully graduate and/or
transfer to a 4-year institution in a STEM field. The central New Jersey
community will benefit from the increased quality and numbers of graduates for
the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the SAMS program will
be to: 1) retain at least 75% of the scholars for the duration of the grant; 2)
have 50% of the scholars be underrepresented minorities (URMs) or women in STEM
disciplines; 3) have the scholars be enrolled full-time, participate in
intervention and advising programs as a cohort, and be encouraged to participate
in undergraduate research or be trained as a peer-tutor in their second year of
the program; and 4) have 75% of the scholars successfully graduate or transfer
from MCCC in the field of STEM. Highlights of additional recruitment and
retention activities are: a high school summer bridge program, weekly cohort
meetings focusing on college success and transfer strategies, one-on-one
mentoring, weekly review sessions in STEM gateway courses, STEM seminars with
focused discussion afterwards, undergraduate research with a presentation and
peer-tutoring with certification. The program will be designed as a two-year
selective program for a cohort of students featuring nationally recognized
strategies to promote STEM success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of the broader
impacts, providing scholarship opportunities to students who have demonstrated
financial need will increase the retention rate as well as transfer and
graduation rates in STEM programs. Low-income minority students and veterans
will be a focus for the STEM scholarship program. The proposed project will help
students prepare for employment and/or transfer to four-year programs in the
STEM fields.