* 1458174
* Comparison of Deepglider and RAPID-MOCHA Moored Array Observations
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Charles Eriksen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,253,055.00

The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) is a principal element of
the global climate system. At 26.5 degrees North latitude, the AMOC is
responsible for carrying about sixty percent of the net poleward heat flux
carried by the oceans and about thirty percent of the total heat flux carried by
the atmosphere and ocean together, integrated zonally around the globe. Through
sea surface temperature modulation, the AMOC is linked to climate signals on
interannual to multi-decadal time scales that can have extensive societal
impact. Climate models predict substantial weakening of the AMOC over the next
century, a change with potentially wide ramifications. For the past decade, U.S.
and U.K. scientists have maintained a transatlantic heavily instrumented moored
array to observe fluctuations in the AMOC and its heat flux. Variability on time
scales longer than ten days is dominated by geostrophic current fluctuations
inferred from transatlantic dynamic height differences and boundary current
fluctuations. While effective, the moored array is costly to maintain. This
project is an attempt to assess the effectiveness of very long-range full ocean
depth underwater gliders in measuring aspects of the AMOC side-by-side the
moored array. These autonomous vehicles, named Deepgliders, collect sea-surface
to sea-floor profiles of temperature, salinity, and dissolved oxygen along
slanting trajectories through the ocean in near-real time. They also return
estimates of the full-depth average current. Successful application of
Deepgliders to the 26.5 degrees North latitude line will motivate applying the
technique to other transects of interest (such as in the North Atlantic subpolar
gyre and the South Atlantic subtropical gyre), to address the challenges of
repeat hydrography globally, and reduce the overall cost of such programs in
order that such ocean climate projects can be afforded as a whole by funding
agencies. These together will lead to deeper understanding of earth?s
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to learn how to
assist the sustainable continuation of AMOC monitoring through coming decades.
Learning to measure the AMOC using Deepgliders will help sustain operation of
the current array at 26.5 degrees North for the many decades required to resolve
interannual and multi-decadal variability. Only by operating for several decades
will the signals associated with natural climate variability and anthropogenic
climate change be evident and potentially distinguishable. A Deepglider is
designed to make about 250 dives to as deep as 6000 m in missions lasting as
long as 18 months while traveling as much as 10,000 km through the ocean on a
single set of lithium batteries. It samples temperature, salinity, and dissolved
oxygen along saw tooth paths through the ocean and communicates them to shore
each time it reaches the sea surface via satellite telemetry. Two-way
communication allows commands to be transmitted to Deepgliders so that its
autonomous behavior can be controlled remotely from a pilot anywhere with an
internet connection. As a pilot experiment, four one-year Deepglider missions
are planned over a 2-year period overlapping moored deployments. Two of these
will concentrate on maintaining position close to a RAPID-MOCHA mooring just
offshore Abaco, Bahamas to resolve the principal variability in dynamic height
for use in estimating the interior ocean contribution to AMOC variability. Two
more will repeat a short section intended to capture temporal and spatial
variations in Antilles and Deep Western Boundary Current flow. Deepglider and
moored measurements will be compared to assess relative efficacy.