* 1458293
* CSBR: Natural History: Critical Upgrades, Expansion, and Reorganization of the Wisconsin State Herbarium (WIS)
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Thomas Nash, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2017
* USD 355,025.00

With a collection of more than 1.2 million preserved plant specimens, the
Wisconsin State Herbarium (WIS) at the UW-Madison ranks among the top 1% of the
world's largest and most active herbaria. It is the third largest public
university herbarium in the Americas, and is used extensively by a diverse
clientele, including citizens engaged in ecological restoration, state
biologists, researchers, professors, as well as students who are conducting
independent research or enrolled in any of the nine different university courses
that incorporate the herbarium's collection into teaching. Recently, WIS was
listed as one of 14 herbaria in the world whose online specimen data has been
consulted at least 20 times in studies documenting environmental change; it is a
world class resource. As its holdings have grown, the herbarium reached its
carrying capacity decades ago, and its facilities are now overcrowded,
inadequate for maintaining curatorial standards of specimen storage, and unable
to provide full public access. For example, the mechanized compactor holding 476
cabinets of flowering plants has failed and cannot be repaired.

Critical upgrades will take place on both floors of the herbarium; its 30-year
old motorized compactor system on the main floor will be modified into a new,
more reliable manual system, and a new high-density mobile storage system and
associated cabinets will be installed in the herbarium's newly acquired second
floor. These improvements will allow for consolidation of collections scattered
throughout the building, proper safekeeping and expansion, especially among its
exceptional algae, fungi, lichens, and mosses. A reorganization of the entire
herbarium collection will follow this expansion, including adoption of a
contemporary phylogenetic system of plant classification, which is now taught in
all formal university courses on campus. The acquisition of new real estate on
the Madison campus coincides with the purchase of a collection of ca. 60,000
lichen specimens that complement existing holdings. In addition, WIS is involved
in a number of current regional, national, and international collection
digitization activities, and is the lead institution for two NSF-funded Thematic
Collections Networks. All data resulting from this project will be posted online
(http://herbarium.wisc.edu/databases.htm) and shared with iDigBio
(https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring accessibility to researchers and educators.
Finally, in order to highlight unparalleled natural history museum resources to
senior citizens and pre-college teens, WIS will develop a two-day botany "major"
during UW-Madison's summer Grandparent's University week. Additional information
about WIS and its outreach activities is available at
http://herbarium.wisc.edu/.