* 1458213
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Deciphering Hydroclimatic Convergence Using a Multi-Parameter Tree-Ring Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Edward Cook, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 02/28/2017
* USD 15,236.00

A better understanding of past climatic variability and the extent to which
different climate systems influence moisture availability is essential for
future water resources planning and allocation. This doctoral dissertation
research project will investigate historical drivers of moisture variability
near the intersection of two dominant climate systems in Central Asia. The
doctoral student will use tree-ring data to characterize spatial and temporal
climatic changes and the reasons behind these changes across a region that is
not well understood climatically. She will provide new information regarding how
multiple climate systems dictate the amount of moisture delivered to semi-arid
regions that are susceptible to persistent and severe droughts. The student will
work closely with natural resource offices internationally and will mentor
undergraduate students, many of whom will be from underrepresented groups. The
hydroclimatic nature of this study has important implications for water resource
managers around the world as they develop regional plans for future water
allocations. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.

This project will address the core question of whether shifting climate systems
are responsible for changes in spatial hydroclimatic variability or whether such
convergences are a response to human-related warming. A new multi-parametric
tree-ring approach at a fine temporal resolution (annual) will be used to
understand the drivers of past climate variability. Tree-ring parameters
including ring width, latewood density, carbon and oxygen isotopes will be
analyzed using standard dendrochronological procedures. The analyses will
provide a quantitative assessment of the factors driving large-scale drought
dynamics. The research in an arid region of the world will provide a better
understanding of water resources use and allocation for agricultural,
environmental, and human use in a broad range of locales around the world,
including some in the U.S.