* 1458556
* ABI Innovation: A New Framework to Analyze Plant Energy-related Phenomics Data
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,01/31/2017
* David Kramer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 01/31/2017
* USD 641,429.00

To increase crop productivity, photosynthetic reactions must be tightly
regulated to efficiently capture light energy and to avoid photodamage. This
regulation is especially critical under unpredictable fluctuations in the
natural environment, which could damage the balance between light input and the
capacity of assimilatory reaction to process it. New plant photosynthesis
phenotyping platforms have been developed in Dr. David Kramer (co-PI)'s lab,
allowing one to determine how the photosynthetic machinery is integrated into
cells and is delicately balanced to provide the right amount of energy, at the
right times, in the correct forms without damaging the plant. The current major
step is to extract useful information from massive plant phenotyping
(performance) data to generate testable hypotheses and discover unknown plant
energy-related genes and processes. Specifically, the objective is to develop
new software approaches for processing, modeling and visualizing sophisticated
and overwhelming amount of phenomics data in plant science to forms that are
interpretable computers (to classify plants into genetic and performance
categories) and by humans (through advanced visualization), leading to new
insights on how plants function and new targets for plant improvement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale phenotyping (phenomics) promises to bridge the
gap between genomics, gene functions and traits. Specifically, to meet our
growing needs for food and fuel, new bio-imaging approaches were developed to
allow high-throughput, detailed plant phenotyping, with a focus on improving the
efficiency of photosynthesis. Dr. Jin Chen (PI) and Dr. David Kramer (co-PI) aim
to identify genes and processes that control photosynthesis efficiency in
response to fluctuating environmental conditions, which are critical for
understanding and improving plant energy storage and improving crop
productivity. To achieve this, the research team must resolve a wide range of
interacting factors that respond to environmental factors over very wide dynamic
ranges of frequency, duration and intensity of conditions. Recently, the Dynamic
Environmental Phenotype Imager (DEPI), a novel platform for monitoring responses
of plant phenotypes under dynamic conditions has been developed in Dr. David
Kramer (co-PI)'s lab. Initial data from DEPI reveals previously unseen effects
attributable to genes formerly thought to have no known function. While these
developments on plant phenotyping are exciting, researchers are limited by the
tools to analyze fully the phenomics data. Removing that limitation is the
proposed goal of this project. Dr. Jin Chen (PI) and Dr. David Kramer (co-PI)
will discover, develop, and apply Plant Phenomics Data Analytics (PPDA)
solutions, such that massive phenomics data is transformed into knowledge or
testable hypotheses to identify important genes to improve photosynthesis
efficiency under dynamic environmental conditions. PPDA will ensure high data
quality, identify and visualize important genes from complex plant phenomics
data, and will advance knowledge discovery in the broader community. The project
is comprised of four components: Aim 1. Develop, test and apply phenomics data
quality control program to identify abnormal data and distinguish whether they
arise from noise, artifacts or more interesting cases of altered biological
responses. Aim 2. Develop, test and apply phenomics pattern discovery algorithms
to identify important energy-related genes from photosynthesis phenomics data.
The research team will develop dynamic phenotype network construction and
phenotype module discovery algorithms to turn sophisticated phenomics data to
testable hypotheses, to discover unknown genes, and to connect biological
processes. Aim 3. Develop a data visualization package for complex phenomics
data display using integrative multi-dimensional visualization methods, in order
to facilitate scientific discovery on energy-related genes in response to
changing environmental conditions. Aim 4. Provide proof of utility by applying
PPDA to rationale for testing the G protein activation state regulation on
photosynthesis efficiency. The researchers will phenotype Arabidopsis thaliana a
large informative set of G protein mutants under changing environmental
conditions. Then they will apply PPDA to identify genes with emergent functions
under subsets of the dynamic environmental conditions. They will resolve the
role of G signaling in fluctuation detection. The results of the project can be
found at http://www.msu.edu/~jinchen/PPDA.