* 1458060
* Encouraging rural and Native American students to participate in interdisciplinary Environmental Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2023
* James F Cotter, University of Minnesota Morris
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 02/28/2023
* USD 573,779.00

This NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) project will increase the number of academically talented, economically
disadvantaged students who graduate with interdisciplinary degrees in
Environmental Sciences (ES) at the University of Minnesota-Morris (UMM). The
project will include 20 scholars majoring in ES or Geology,
Chemistry/Biochemistry, or Physics majors with an ES emphasis. Student success
will be fostered through a well-established academic support program, a
dedicated Multi-ethnic Resource staff, academic advising, and peer mentoring.
The project is grounded in the needs of the local and regional community and
should help to increase the participation of Native Americans in the pursuit and
attainment of STEM degrees. The project will address the national need to
increase significantly the number of American scientists with interdisciplinary
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will follow the research-based
recommendations of the Society for Advancement of Hispanics/Chicanos and Native
Americans in Science 2009-2013 Strategic Plan by focusing on transitions to
college life that are critical to the development of underrepresented students
and important for the development of all students. Therefore, it will include
(a) active faculty mentoring starting with pre-college registration and
encouraged participation in the NSF-IUSE supported summer bridge , (b) cohort
activities (shared curriculum, filed trips, and a learning community), and (c)
summer research and professional travel opportunities among others. Formative
and summative evaluation will consist of surveys of students' perceptions of the
project activities and an analysis of the program outcomes and their impact of
those programs on UMM. Dissemination of the results of evaluation and
information about the project in general, will be done at national (American
Chemical Society (ACS)) and regional (Midwestern Association of Chemistry
Teachers in Liberal Arts Colleges and Great Lakes ACS) conferences and meetings.
The work will be submitted to the Journal of Research in Rural Education and the
Journal of American Indian Education. Moreover, a story suggestion about all
University of Minnesota-Morris NSF projects (S-STEM, REU, and IUSE) will be
submitted to the American Indian Science and Engineering Society "Winds of
Change Magazine."