* 1458334
* CSBR: Natural History: Critical cryopreservation upgrades to the University of Alaska Museum's Genomic Resources facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Kyndall Powers, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 491,872.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An award is made to the University of Alaska
Museum (UAM) of the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) to complete the
transition of its Genomic Resources Facility to a state-of-the-art liquid
nitrogen system, the gold standard in modern cryopreservation. UAM is home to
one of the largest research collections of frozen animal and plant tissues in
the world. In addition to its global scope, it features unparalleled holdings of
arctic and subarctic material from a region undergoing profound environmental
change and rapidly increasing human encroachment. Notable holdings include the
largest and fastest-growing collection of marine mammal tissues in the world;
samples from migratory birds that come from six continents to breed in Alaska
each year; and permafrost-preserved tissues from extinct Pleistocene organisms.
The conversion to a liquid nitrogen system will secure an incalculably valuable
scientific resource for ongoing and future research and education efforts.
Nearly all frozen tissues are associated with voucher specimens, adding to their
information content and allowing for research on countless aspects of organismal
biology beyond genetics and genomics. For example, samples from the UAM-GR are
routinely used by scientists globally to investigate questions in evolution,
ecology, toxicology, biomedicine, and numerous other fields. The project will
also train students in modern cryopreservation technology and collection
management and outlines plans to leverage ongoing outreach of the UAM to
highlight the research, education and wider societal benefits of the
collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded to facilitate the
purchase and installation of four Liquid Nitrogen cryovats and associated racks
to replace failing mechanical freezers. Additionally, a liquid nitrogen plant of
sufficient production capacity to maintain eight cryovats will be maintained.
The resulting configuration represents a 68% increase in space efficiency and
will accommodate all samples currently housed in failing mechanical freezers as
well as an anticipated 20 years of continued growth. The transition to a
cryopreservation system entirely based on liquid nitrogen will enhance specimen
security and significantly reduce energy consumption. This project will train
graduate and undergraduate students in cutting-edge cryopreservation methods and
collections-based research in the biological sciences. Outreach at UAM-GR will
continue to target visitors of all ages including K-16 students, researchers,
politicians, and the public. These efforts will be augmented through the
production of podcasts and videos targeting native Alaskans, a group that is
significantly underrepresented in the STEM disciplines.