* 1458301
* Growing Opportunities in Technology and Engineering Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Charles Crabtree, Indian Hills Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 584,460.00

For the Growing Opportunities in Technology and Engineering Careers (GO TEC)
project, the project will award at least 10 scholarships annually to
academically talented, financially needy students pursuing associate degrees in
technology and engineering at Indian Hills Community College (IHCC). GO TEC will
target eleven academic programs, including Agricultural/Biofuels Process
Technology, Bioprocessing Laboratory Technology, Electrical and Renewable Energy
Technology, Computer Software Development, and Engineering. In terms of broader
impacts, important goals include increasing to 80% the proportion of GO TEC
participants earning an associate's degree in one of the targeted programs, and
increasing to 90% the proportion of GO TEC participants enrolling in further
education or becoming employed after earning an associate's degree. Diversity
goals will seek to increase underrepresented minority student enrollment by 25%
and female participation in the targeted programs by 20%. The overarching
outcome goal of the project will be to increase the number of students obtaining
postsecondary degrees and pursuing careers in technology and engineering in
rural southeast Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the scholarship award,
participants will receive comprehensive academic and personal support. These
added support structures include faculty mentoring and participation in an
active learning community through a series of STEM-related courses and
activities for participants. The project design takes into account research on
successful scholarship programs and utilizes best practices such as establishing
an active learning community for participants. Primary project activities
include: recruiting and selecting academically promising students with financial
need; linking participants to program-specific faculty mentors; providing a
community of learning and support for participants through a required series of
courses and activities for participants; and ensuring participants have the
tools and resources needed to further their education or enter the workforce in
a related field after graduation. The project team from numerous areas of the
College includes faculty and staff who each play an integral role in ensuring
the success of the project.