* 1458467
* Workshops for Improving Grant Writing Competitiveness for Faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities
* EHR,HRD
* 05/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 12/31/2017
* USD 802,156.00

This award to the Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network will provide
technical assistance to science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and other
Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs) to facilitate successful participation in
the NSF HBCU-Undergraduate Program and the NSF Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) program. Five workshops will be held for faculty from HBCUs; three of
these workshops will include faculty from other MSIs. Workshops will focus on
enhancing the ability of faculty to prepare competitive proposals to the NSF
HBCU-UP and MRI programs. Experienced consultants will assist QEM in the conduct
of the workshop series.

The workshops will involve a minimum of 160 STEM faculty from HBCUs and 90 STEM
faculty from other MSIs to provide a strong foundation for institutions to
pursue and successfully receive support for HBCU-UP implementation projects,
targeted infusion projects, broadening participation research projects, research
initiation award projects, and NSF MRI projects. The anticipated outcome is the
increased potential for faculty from MSIs to strengthen their research portfolio
and improve their research infrastructure at these institutions. The longer term
broader impact is the production of the Nation's next generation of highly
qualified and diverse STEM educators and researchers.