* 1458791
* Retaining Emerging Alamo Colleges Talent in STEM (REACT-STEM)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* J. Aaron Cassill, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 637,188.00

This student scholarship project will study and refine the important elements
that assist talented biology, chemistry and physics majors at local community
colleges in smoothly transitioning into Bachelor's degree and research programs
at a four-year institution and then on to PhD programs or research careers in
the sciences. The project, Retaining Emerging Alamo Colleges Talent in STEM
(REACT-STEM), will support at least 20 scholars, providing each with up to
$10,000/year for up to 3 years. Students from the Alamo Community College System
will be recruited and provided with support mechanisms to increase retention,
provide mentoring and guidance, help to find undergraduate research laboratory
opportunities, and assist them in applying to PhD programs of national
prominence. The project will conduct assessments to identify the methods that
are most effective in recruiting and supporting students and launching their
careers in STEM.

The Retaining Emerging Alamo Colleges Talent in STEM (REACT-STEM) project will
implement activities to fulfill four objectives: 1) Encourage community college
student matriculation to a four-year university and program recruitment through
effective advertising and interaction with existing student success programs. 2)
Facilitate transfer student transition and retention at the University of Texas
San Antonio through financial assistance, pre-semester boot camp, weekly Strong
Transitions meetings, connections with peer mentors and connections with
research PI mentors. 3) Promote academic excellence through enrollment in the
Honors College, faculty mentoring, peer study connections and professional
guidance and tutoring. 4) Promote STEM career development, self-efficacy, and
identity by creation of Individual Development Plans, attendance at seminars,
field trips to local biotech companies, career services presentations, research
experiences and volunteer outreach activities. Assessment of the efficacy of
these different activities will help contribute to expanding the knowledge base
regarding the circumstances under which scholarship projects of this type are
successful.