* 1458178
* ABI Innovation: Computational Tools for Transcriptome Reconstruction
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Mihaela Pertea, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2019
* USD 662,839.00

This project aims to develop an efficient and accurate new computational method
for identifying novel transcripts and their expression levels. Transcriptome
assembly and gene expression profiling are key components in a vast range of
biological experiments today, playing a central role in unraveling the
complexity of cell types, cell differentiation, responses to stress, and myriad
other conditions. Although transcript assemblers have been developed previously,
most of them perform poorly on real, large-scale RNA sequencing data sets,
severely limiting their impact. To produce better transcript models, an
innovative new method will be developed, combining ideas from several scientific
disciplines. By ensuring that this method works on the very large data sets that
are routinely produced by modern next-generation sequencing instruments, this
project will have an impact on a wide range of studies across the spectrum of
eukaryotic species. It will also enhance the research infrastructure by
providing free, open source software that can be re-used by other scientists for
commercial, educational, or basic research endeavors.

This new method uses an optimization technique known as maximum flow in a
specially-constructed flow network to determine gene expression levels, and it
does this while simultaneously assembling each splice variant of a gene. It also
incorporates techniques from whole-genome assembly, which has the potential to
dramatically improve detection of alternative splice variants. By using pre-
assembled reads, the computational load and memory storage requirements
associated with transcriptome assembly will be greatly reduced, as many of the
short reads will be combined into longer contigs that span multiple exons.
Furthermore, the new method will address a critical need for a transcriptome
assembly method that is able to handle the numerous gaps present in draft
genomes, and to produce better-assembled transcripts by stitching together
portions of transcripts situated on multiple fragments of the genome. The
results of this project will be disseminated at http://ccb.jhu.edu.