* 1458202
* ABI Innovation: Integrated Approach to Improve Detection of Genome Rearrangements
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Andrey Grigoriev, Rutgers University Camden
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 604,475.00

This grant will support the development of an algorithm for finding genome
rearrangements from data produced by the next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technologies. NGS has become an essential tool for the life science research.
These technologies are used to address many fundamental questions in various
fields of biology allowing one to find exact differences between samples (for
instance, related species) via comparison to a reference genome. While single-
nucleotide mismatches are robustly identified in such studies, precise and
reliable detection of more complex changes, genome rearrangements, still
presents a significant problem and solving this problem will benefit a large
number of biological researchers. The expected deluge of available genome
sequences in the near future will require novel approaches for automated
functional predictions dealing with "big data" on a scale unimaginable today.
Reliable identification of rearrangements will be an important step in such
automated genome annotation. Active involvement and a strong interaction of
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral-level participants on Rutgers-Camden
campus is foreseen (including members of underrepresented minority groups) in
these research activities. All of this work will have a strong synergy with the
NSF award supporting the high-performance computational facilities on
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, a novel approach for finding
genome rearrangements will be developed, based on integrating multiple lines of
evidence and logical constraints on mapped paired reads. It will evaluate for
each nucleotide in a reference sequence a likelihood of involvement in a
rearrangement event. Given the rapidly changing filed of NGS the methodology
will also allow for including of novel types of evidence, for example, long
reads, to improve predictions of rearrangements. As a result of this research a
functional algorithm will be implemented with a user interface, displaying
complex rearrangements and highlighting available evidence from the sequence
data in a convenient graphical form, together with genomic context information.
The algorithm will be described in publications and at scientific meetings and
will be made publicly available. This will aid in interpretation of
evolutionary, functional and other roles of the detected genomic changes and
result in substantial improvements in NGS data analysis in many areas of
biology.