* 1458253
* Aerospace and Industrial Engineering Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* RANI SULLIVAN, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Jackman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 601,860.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Mississippi State University
will provide scholarships to academically talented full-time engineering
students with demonstrated financial need who will complete an undergraduate
degree in aerospace or industrial engineering. This program will use existing
partnerships with local industry to motivate and strengthen the educational
experience of the scholars. Through the program scholarship recipients will
develop the personal and professional skills needed to be successful in the
workplace. The program allows Mississippi State University to offer scholarships
to directly address an area of national concern: maintaining US competitiveness
in high technology industries. Scholarships for academically strong engineering
students, who may not otherwise be able to afford college, will increase the
number of engineering graduates prepared to support national, regional, and
local companies. The success of the program will produce a well-trained
workforce that will contribute to the economic growth of Mississippi and the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars will be selected the basis of academic
talent and demonstrated financial need. The Aerospace and Industrial Engineering
Scholarship Program at Mississippi State University will select six freshmen and
six sophomores in the first year of the program. Six additional incoming
freshmen will be added annually through year five of the program. The program
will focus on supporting students in the areas of academics and professional
development. These focus areas will be enabled through a program of mentoring,
networking, and enhanced learning environments. The primary features of the
program include mentoring of scholars by faculty and industry representatives,
enrollment in common courses, and several cohort professional development
activities each semester. Assessment and evaluation will provide insight into
the retention benefits of student scholarships, career development activities,
and faculty mentoring and advising. Lessons learned and effective practices that
emerge from the program evaluation data will be disseminated widely to the
engineering education community and help enlarge the knowledge base regarding
attributes and practices of successful scholarship programs of this type.