* 1458977
* Collaborative Research:  Airflow separations over wind waves and their impact on air-sea momentum flux
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Fabrice Veron, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 369,623.00

When a surface ocean wave field is not in equilibrium with local wind forcing,
which is a common occurrence, the wind stress may deviate significantly from the
bulk parameterization and require sea-state dependent parameterization. Recent
modeling studies suggest that one of the most significant causes of the sea-
state dependence is the enhanced form drag due to airflow separation over
breaking waves, particularly at higher wind speeds. However, the uncertainties
in these model results remain large because our understanding of airflow
separation is limited. While it has been generally accepted that airflow
separation only occurs over breaking waves, recent laboratory observations and
Large Eddy Simulations (LES?s) show that transient separation-like flows (quasi-
separations), characterized by high vorticity layers detached from the wave
surface and separation bubbles below, are ubiquitous and may occur over steep
but non-breaking waves. The proposed laboratory study and its extension to the
open ocean conditions will contribute to development of accurate
parameterizations of sea state dependent air-sea momentum flux, which may be
immediately incorporated in the ongoing coupling efforts for atmosphere wave-
ocean tropical cyclone and climate models. This study will improve heat and
humidity flux parameterizations as well, because airflow separation/quasi-
separation events play an important role in dispersion of sea spray droplets. A
series of outreach activities aimed at three key audiences: graduate students,
high school and undergraduate science educators, and the general public will be
facilitated by education and outreach staff at the Inner Space Center at the
University of Rhode Island. At the University of Delaware, a summer
undergraduate student will participate in the laboratory experiments that will
highlighted in a series of open house events and laboratory visits for the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, laboratory observations
and LES are closely combined to study airflow separation/ quasi-separation
events and their impact on air-sea momentum flux. The main hypothesis of the
project is that: (a) airflow separation/quasi-separation significantly modifies
the wave form drag, the near surface turbulence, and the air-sea momentum flux,
and that (b) LES can reproduce realistic airflow fields provided the wave
shape/speed, the surface velocity field, and the surface roughness distribution
are accurately specified based on observations. To test these hypotheses,
combined laboratory observations and LES of wind over a finite amplitude wave
train will be carried, providing accurate air-water interface boundary
conditions to the LES based on observations, and validating the LES results of
airflow turbulence against observations. Then, the occurrence of airflow
separation/quasi-separation and the resulting impact on wave form drag and air-
sea momentum flux will be quantified. Once the LES methodology of wind over
waves is validated against laboratory observations in this study, the LES can be
extended to open ocean conditions, with multiwave components (short crested
waves), and with misaligned wind and waves. The results will help meet a growing
interest by modeling and prediction centers in coupling ocean surface wave
models with atmospheric and ocean models from global/climate scales to regional
scales.