* 1458114
* Collaborative Research: Unlocking the secrets of slow slip by drilling at the northern Hikurangi subduction margin, New Zealand: CORK observatory development and installation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Evan Solomon, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,109.00

The Hikurangi subduction zone offshore the eastern North Island of New Zealand
has characteristics that provide a globally unique window into a fundamental
aspect of how stress builds up and is relieved as an oceanic plate thrusts (or
?subducts?) beneath continental crust. Recently, seismologists have recognized
that subduction megathrust faults undergo slip in episodic ?slow slip events?.
Prior to the discovery of slow slip events in the last decade, our paradigms of
fault slip were focused on seismic slip in major earthquakes. Since the
discovery of slow slip, most studies have focused on deep (>20-40 km depth) slow
slip events, but we now realize that shallow slow slip events (<5-15 km depth)
exist that are much more accessible to near-source investigations. These shallow
slow fault slip events are centered beneath the ocean so onshore instruments
have not been able to measure how much surface deformation occurs. This study
takes advantage of planned International Ocean Discovery Program drilling to
install sensors in two boreholes that will measure properties indicative of
change in the shallow crust that the episodic fault activity causes. Senior
researchers in borehole instrumentation will mentor mid-early career scientists,
passing along extensive knowledge of such complex implementation and research.
Japanese, New Zealand, and German collaborators will participate with the US
investigators in this international study, and local communities will benefit
from scientist outreach associated with cruises off New Zealand. This study is
being undertaken as a ?community proposal?, whereby all data will be immediately
publicly available. The shallowest, well-documented slow slip events on Earth
occur at the northern Hikurangi margin, offshore Gisborne, New Zealand, at <5-15
km depth. They recur approximately every 1-2 years, with slip on the plate
boundary interface of up to 15-20 cm. The unusually close proximity of the
Gisborne slow slip events to the seafloor, the large slow slip event magnitudes
(equivalent to an earthquake magnitude Mw ~6.3-6.8), and short recurrence
intervals makes this the ideal setting for evaluating the near-source
hydrological, geochemical, and thermal response of the offshore subduction
margin to large, frequent, well-documented deformation transients. The borehole
observatory data will clarify the role that fluid pressures, fluid flow, and
temperature play in the occurrence of slow slip events, as well as the influence
of slow slip event deformation on fluid and geochemical cycling within the
forearc. This project will establish the borehole facility and set-up open data
access. Analysis of the first two years of data, recovered by ROV, will evaluate
the deformation, hydrological, and geochemical responses near the source of slow
slip, as well as document the thermal regime of shallow slow slip. One of the
borehole installations will target the region surrounding the shallow portion of
the megathrust fault , while sensors in a second borehole will target the over-
riding plate ~5 km above the slow slip event source.