* 1458059
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Computational population-genetic analysis for detection of soft selective sweeps
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Noah Rosenberg, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 574,954.00

The molecular process of adaptation-the rise in frequency of genetic variants
that enable organisms to succeed in their environments-is a central process in
evolutionary biology. Surmounting significant challenges such as the ability of
infectious agents to evolve resistance to drugs and the ability of crop pests to
defeat a diverse array of increasingly powerful insecticides requires an
understanding of the nature of adaptation. Recent advances have demonstrated
that adaptation often occurs via "soft selective sweeps," in which an adaptive
genetic variant originates multiple times or has become favored only after it
has been present at a substantial frequency in the population. This project
contributes to advancing knowledge of the fundamental evolutionary process of
adaptation by developing new computational tools to detect and study the
occurrence of adaptation by soft selective sweeps. Through the interactions of a
multidisciplinary team spanning evolutionary biology and bioinformatics, the
project integrates advances in evolutionary simulation with modern and efficient
computational methods in order to produce progress on understanding adaptation,
while simultaneously developing efficient computational tools applicable in the
modern "big-data" era of inexpensive sequencing. In addition, its joint
mentorship efforts from evolutionary and bioinformatics perspectives promote
interdisciplinary training of graduate students and postdoctoral scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has four objectives: (1) To design new tests
for detecting selection in the case in which soft selective sweeps occur from
standing genetic variation; (2) To identify haplotypes that carry a beneficial
allele in genomic regions known to be experiencing positive selection; (3) To
enhance new methods of analysis of natural selection to make them robust to
confounding demographic scenarios; (4) To apply new selection methods in a
series of data sets from multiple species, including humans, Drosophila, and
Plasmodium malaria parasites. The project will use algorithmic techniques from
combinatorial optimization and machine learning, and it will exploit ideas from
population genetics and coalescent theory. It breaks ground on several fronts,
providing a deeper understanding of the patterns in site-frequency spectra and
haplotype data as a basis for selection signatures, and assisting in the design
of subtyping studies for complex regions of the genome. As it becomes
increasingly possible to sequence whole genomes of multiple individuals within a
population, the intellectual challenge of designing tools for detecting
selection to accommodate new phenomena such as soft sweeps coincides with the
computational challenge of incorporating genomic data sets into selection
studies. These challenges are addressed by the project, whose results will be
available at http://proteomics.ucsd.edu/vbafna/research-2/nsf1458059/.