* 1458926
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Moral and Ethical Understandings of Risk, Investment and Financial Loss Following Financial Crises
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Thomas Fricke, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 20,372.00

Financial bubbles are known for the sustained socioeconomic impacts that they
can have on communities. In an attempt to prevent them as well as minimize the
damage that the bursting of such bubbles cause, social scientists have attempted
to understand the moral and ethical factors that motivate the assumption of
unusual risks, as well as propensities for the repayment of debt. This project,
which trains a graduate student in how to conduct rigorous, empirically-grounded
scientific fieldwork, asks how those impacted by financial crises make moral and
ethical sense of risk, investment, and financial loss in their economic recovery
efforts. The research will produce data important in the evaluation and
resolution of financial crises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Andrew Haxby, under the
supervision of Dr. Thomas Fricke of the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor,
will explore how the collapse of financial bubbles influence understandings of
morality, honor and kinship within their homes and communities. The research
seeks to understand this relationship by exploring a housing bubble collapse in
Kathmandu, Nepal from 2007 to 2011, when numerous families in the city assumed
large debts in order to participate in the booming real estate market. The
research takes place in Kathmandu, which is an appropriate social laboratory
because it has undergone rapid urban development in the last decade, prompting
various credit options for households. Families are commonly held responsible
for the debts of all their members, yet creditors do not always agree on who
they consider to be part of a given family, or even what constitutes responsible
behavior for households facing default. Consequently, families in default must
navigate between contradictory understandings of households and perceptions of
responsible behavior. Yet these differences can be a boon as well as a burden.
By moving their debt between creditors, and their assets between kin, families
make it possible to improve their financial position, even if only temporarily.
Thus, the project examines how these families are able to maneuver their way
towards financial stability, hypothesizing that a family's ability to do this
successfully hinges on whether or not they are able to present themselves as
honorable to their creditors. The research will rely on ethnographic methods
(participant observation of carefully selected informants, semi-structured
interviews, and financial diaries) and socio-spatial mappings of local credit
markets and household financial decision-making structures. In this way, not
only does this project explore debt and families in Kathmandu, it also explores
how a housing bubble changes culturally specific values. The research findings
will further discussions on the anthropology of debt and ethics as well as
understanding the rationales informing household financial decision-making.