* 1458133
* Chemistry First Scholars:  Supporting At-Risk First-Generation Students in Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Bert Holmes, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 01/31/2021
* USD 605,117.00

The Chemistry First Scholars program will offer scholarships to 20 students,
with financial need and academic merit, who are seeking to become successful
chemists. The project will attract and support through to graduation at-risk,
first-generation students in chemistry, thereby increasing the number of quality
professional chemists, and the project team will continue to reach across campus
and provide leadership to other STEM departments in promoting best practices for
support systems for STEM students. Such practices include identification of
Faculty Mentors to help students dentify individual chemistry career paths,
opportunities, and professional programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will
use a three-tiered, inclusive academic support program in the chemistry major,
developed through institutionalization of efforts from a prior S-STEM project.
The three-tiered student support structure will rely first on building a natural
student cohort. A Chemistry Learning Community (CLC) will begin in the first
year and last through to graduation. There will be a total of four CLCs over the
project period. The three-tiered model follows best practices in supporting
first generation students through all phases of their college career. The
Chemistry First Scholars program will partner with the existing UNC Asheville
Scholars Program to strengthen community among chemistry majors and to engage
and support at risk, low income, first generation students. The Director of the
Academic Assessment act UNC-Asheville, an independent evaluator, will coordinate
the assessment the project. Success will be measured through the assessment and
evaluation of student academic performance, project activities, and project
deliverables. Project deliverables include the number of scholars funded, the
total number of scholarships awarded, the graduation rate of scholars and career
placement following graduation. To investigate the impact of the program on
student retention, progress, and success in chemistry, relative to past years,
the information and results gathered from the prior S-STEM project will serve as
a pre-project baseline. In so doing, the project will contribute to a growing
body of knowledge regarding attributes and practices of successful programs for
students who demonstrate financial need.