* 1458122
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultures of Sovereignty and Fiscal Order
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Emily Levitt, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2015
* USD 4,763.00

Because American Indian nations are not subject to state and local jurisdiction,
they also are not subject to municipal property tax codes. In addition, the
businesses that they own on sovereign territory are exempt from sales and excise
taxes. Residents in non-native communities that surround Indian reservations and
other sovereign holdings may find this cause for grievance. Understanding the
historic and modern-day circumstances that have brought about these uneasy
relationships is important for mitigating conflict. It is also an excellent lens
through which to understand the changing meanings of sovereignty, citizenship,
and cultural identity in a modern nation state, as they develop through the
institution of taxation.

Cornell University graduate student, Emily Levitt, under the supervision of Dr.
Paul Nadasdy, will undertake an anthropological case study of the fiscal
relations between an Indian nation, their neighbors, and multiple levels of
government. The research will be conducted in the upstate New York town of
Seneca Falls where the Cayuga Indian Nation has bought land, declared it
sovereign territory, established businesses, and claimed tax exemption, thereby
provoking both their neighbors and governmental authorities. Because this is an
emerging situation that can be well documented as it develops, it is an ideal
site to investigate how and why such situations come about and the responses
they engender. The investigator will employ a mix of social science research
methods, including: participant observation, attendance at public meetings,
semi-structured interviews with all stakeholders, archival research, and media
content analysis. These data will allow the investigator to understand how
taxation affects understandings of who belongs and who does not, as well as the
role that fiscal relations play in both Native American and majority culture
understandings of themselves and their relationships with others both as
individuals and as members of a nation.