* 1458729
* Workforce Preparation through Computing Scholarship (We-Prep-CS) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Jean Muhammad, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 05/31/2021
* USD 622,480.00

The Department of Computer Science at Hampton University is creating the
Workforce Preparation through Computing Scholarship (We-Prep-CS) Program. It
will support up to 20 undergraduate students and up to 18 graduate students.
Each student will be awarded up to $10,000 per year based on their financial
need. We-Prep-CS will be part of Hampton University's continuing efforts to
enhance undergraduate education and research in computer science as well as to
increase the number of women and African-Americans who pursue advanced degrees
and careers in computing. These additional technical workers will help increase
the nation's economic competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of
Computer Science at Hampton University has a legacy of contributing to the
diversity of the computer science workforce and works closely with a number of
industry, academic, and government partners. The proposed project adds to the
comprehensive student support services within the department and supports
efforts by the Graduate College to ensure the success of students seeking
master's degrees in computer science. Scholarships will enable undergraduate and
graduate students in computing programs to study full-time, while project
activities will engage students academically and socially by providing research
and internship opportunities, social cohort building activities, career
counseling, and graduate school and workforce preparation. The project will
demonstrate a creative, sustainable model for recruiting, engaging, retaining,
and graduating historically underrepresented students in computing programs that
can guide other institutions in efforts to diversify the STEM workforce. Student
support activities developed through the proposed project will be sustainable
and scalable, and an integrated evaluation plan will identify which activities
should be expanded to meet the needs of all HU Computer Science majors in the
future. The project will contribute to the scholarly understanding of STEM
student perceptions of financial aid and need. Best practices in preparation,
recruitment, retention and engagement strategies will be made available to other
institutions via publications, conferences, and workshops. This will assist them
with their efforts to broaden participation and to facilitate the progression of
students through the pipeline from undergraduate through graduate degree
programs in computing majors and/or into technical areas of national need. Data
from this project will be collected through extensive evaluation processes and
disseminated among the academic and workforce communities, organizations, and
conference attendees.