* 1458272
* IRES: Avatar-based Adaptive Context System
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Avelino Gonzalez, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2020
* USD 231,974.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary partnership between the University of
Central Florida and the Fraunhofer Institute for Digital Media Technology
(FIDMT) in Ilmenau, Germany is focused on adaptive conversational avatars, the
rapidly emerging field crossing computer engineering, computer science,
education, communications, and social science. Immediate applications of this
research field include artificial intellegence and national security (including
cyber-security), interactive robotics, improvement of quality of life for
disbaled, and health and caretaking for children and elderly.&lt;br/&gt;This
project will place students from the University of Central Florida under the
mentorship of the PI (Dr. A. J. Gonzalez) and of Dr. Klaus Jantke, the
counterpart at FIDMT in Ilmenau, Germany. Dr. Jantke is the director of the
Children's Media Department of FIDMT located in Erfurt, Germany and has a long
and illustrious history in research in computing media. The international aspect
of innovative and advanced research is essential in modern research hence the
PIs will work with three cohorts of students, one during each year of the
project's existence. Each cohort will include one graduate student and either
two undergraduates (the first year) or four (in each of the subsequent years).
The research period for each cohort will be 16 weeks - eight weeks in the US and
eight weeks in Germany for each year of the grant period.&lt;br/&gt;This
research project is motivated by an ancient art of storytelling. In our pursuit
of an artificially intelligent computer agent, the IRES project seeks to build a
capability to autonomously synthesize possible scenarios for the system
development and to modify them dynamically upon listener request. More
specifically, the topic of the research in this project is the creation of an
avatar-based system that can synthesize and adapt a scenario according to the
user's request in real time and without any pre-scripted pathways. Good
storytellers were treasured in medieval times, given the lack of other media
through which to relate a story to a mostly illiterate population. Therefore,
the project seeks to embody the storyteller in a lifelike avatar that resembles
an actual person. This avatar will tell the story to the listener in spoken
natural language, and interact with her/him when the latter requests changes to
the story. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;Storytelling media have
evolved over time, from oral stories to modern E-books. Since the development of
the computer, storytelling systems have become a science of their own, and have
evolved from simple systems that can only generate a single short story to
systems that respond to the listener's actions by modifying the story
dynamically in real time. Digital storytelling has therefore become a growing
field within artificial intelligence. The project seeks to take this evolution
of storytelling media one step further by doing research to create a virtual
storyteller who tells a dynamic story. The story is modifiable through a request
by the listener (typically a child, a student, or an elderly person), yet will
seek to remain realistic as well as interesting. Every story has a story space.
That is, only so many things can happen in a story. We use contextual reasoning
to represent the story space. In the real world, courses of action are
influenced by the current context, making some conversational avatars very
attractive while others unattractive when addressing the current situation
within the story space. In a similar manner, the situation faced by the
protagonist in the dynamic scenario will limit the choices of actions that
he/she would otherwise have, thereby taking the story in various directions,
none of which need be specifically pre-scripted. The PIs base the proposed
research on the use of formal methods to manipulate the story space within the
main theme of the story. By formal methods the PIs mean that one represents the
story knowledge formally in terms of strings, interaction sequences such as
storyboards and graphs, formulas (for conditions), and the like. Formal methods,
therefore, will give the ability to reason with formal methods (string
comparison, unification, anti-unification and the like) in the story space.
Formal methods have been used in the literature to manipulate contextual
information.