* 1458362
* Gordon Research Conference Coastal Ocean Modeling: Coastal Ocean Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* John Wilkin, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/29/2016
* USD 20,000.00

This project supports the participation of U.S. based early career scientists in
the quadrennial Gordon Research Conference on Ocean Modeling and its associated
Gordon Research Seminar. This conference brings together a diverse group of
academic, federal and international researchers to share the latest advances and
identify new challenges in coastal ocean modeling. The conference focuses on
novel and recent developments in the application of numerical modeling and
simulation to furthering understanding of coastal ocean processes and our
capabilities for their prediction. It is at the coast that human activities are
most connected with ocean circulation, and ocean modeling offers great promise
for connecting scientific research to societal needs through such efforts as
forecasting for marine operations and maritime safety, monitoring and prediction
of water quality and the transport and dispersal of water borne pathogens,
mapping and characterizing the habitats of marine life, and downscaling global
models of climate variability and climatic change to infer their impacts in the
coastal zone. The most important broader impact of the conference is the
establishment and nurturing of relationships between senior researchers, junior
researchers and students. Nearly half of the conference time is allocated to
informal interactions among participants, to provide numerous opportunities to
build these relationships and exchange ideas among people in different age
groups, different sub-disciplines of the field, or from different geographic
regions. Funds will be used to expand the demographic, professional and
geographic diversity of participants by supporting attendance by under-
represented and under-resourced groups who stand to benefit from the
intellectual environment and networking opportunities of the Gordon Research
Conference and Gordon Research Seminar formats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project provides funding for travel and registration support to U.S. based
early-career professionals and students to attend the Gordon Research Conference
on Coastal Ocean Modeling which will be held at the University of New England in
Biddeford, Maine, from June 7-12, 2015. The Ocean Modeling conference series
highlights the latest research and future trends and recent developments in the
application of numerical modeling and simulation to furthering understanding of
coastal ocean processes and our capabilities for their prediction. Here the term
"coastal" refers to estuarine, littoral zone, continental shelf, and shelf-break
regions, including mesoscale exchange processes with the adjacent deep-ocean or
marginal seas. The topics to be covered are: Boundary layer dynamics, Near-shore
and estuarine processes, Ice shelf-sea-ice modeling, Physics and ecosystem
interactions, Climate change in the coastal ocean, Sub-mesoscale processes and
internal waves, Advanced numerical methods, State estimation and data
assimilation, and Probabilistic approaches and risk assessment. The project also
supports the inaugural Ocean Modeling Gordon Research Seminar to be held June
6-7 in conjunction with the Ocean Modeling Gordon Research Conference. The
seminar, designed for graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and other
scientists with comparable levels of experience and education, emphasizes the
presentation of cutting edge science and includes scheduled discussion time to
foster collegial conversations.