* 1458604
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: An Ontology-Based System for Querying Life in a Post-Taxonomic Age
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Nico Cellinese, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2021
* USD 696,202.00

Improving our understanding of life, whether the biology of individual species
such as our own, or the mechanisms and processes governing biodiversity at
large, critically depends on integrating, querying, and aggregating biological
data from many different organisms. To this day, the most fundamental and common
way to accomplish this relies on organism names, making these one of the pillars
of querying and managing our biological knowledge and data. However, the
traditionally used names for organisms and groups of organisms, which are based
in Linnaean nomenclature, suffer from two major limitations to their usefulness
when it comes to integrating and communicating data. First, because they are
simple text-strings, the meaning intended by those who coin a name and those who
apply it is inaccessible to machines. As a result, exactly which organism a name
is or is not meant to include is often ambiguous, and names are therefore often
applied inconsistently. Second, there are many groups of organisms that do not
yet and may never have a Linnaean name, but for which molecular or macroscopic
characteristics have been discovered that constitute valuable biological
knowledge. This project aims to address these issues by generating a mechanism,
called phyloreferencing, that allows referring to any group of organisms of
shared evolutionary descent by a machine-interpretable definition of the unique
pattern of descent that distinguishes the group from all others. This project
builds on more than a decade's worth of theoretical and applied research into
phylogenetic taxonomy. With the recent synthesis and continuous update of a
universal phylogenetic Tree of Life, phyloreferences will have immediate and
broad practical applications for communicating, integrating, and querying
biological data across the Tree of Life. In contrast to authoritative
nomenclatural naming, the goal for phyloreferences is that users can construct
them instantly for any group of shared evolutionary descent for which they wish
to communicate discoveries. In addition to developing the phyloreferencing
standard and supporting tools, this project also aims to create classroom-ready
teaching materials and curricula for training biology students in the
theoretical underpinnings and practical applications of phylogenetic
nomenclature.

The phyloreferencing mechanism that this project will develop uses standards and
tools developed for the Web, specifically the Web Ontology Language (OWL),
ontologies, and machine reasoning. Specifically, this work aims to develop
phyloreferences as OWL class expressions consisting of sufficient and necessary
conditions, which machine reasoners can use to identify subclasses and class
instances. Ontology and reasoning technologies have already shown their power
for biological knowledge integration and discovery and are increasingly being
adopted for evolutionary research as well. As part of this project, a
specification for constructing and computing with phyloreferences within an
ontological framework will be researched, implemented, and tested.
Phyloreferences will be designed with the goal that any element, whether node,
branch, or clades, on the Tree of Life can be referenced in a way that is
unambiguous and has fully computable semantics defined by patterns of
evolutionary relatedness. The main objectives of this research include creating
a formal specification for phyloreference and phylogeny encoding and reasoning
in OWL; ascertaining correctness of the specification using small-scale tests
verifiable by domain experts; and finally scaling the approach to a large-scale
biodiversity data resource navigation proof-of-concept application. Specifically
phyloreferences will be developed and integrated into Open Tree of Life, ARBOR
and projects newly funded by the Genealogy of Life program. Results of the
project will be available at http://www.phyloref.org.