* 1458980
* Advanced Nanomaterials for Energy Research and Applications (ANERA)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Bizuneh Workie, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2019
* USD 999,240.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) activity within the Centers of Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the development of
research capability at HBCUs that offer doctoral degrees in science and
engineering disciplines. HBCU-RISE projects have a direct connection to the
long-term plans of the host department(s) and the institutional mission, and
plans for expanding institutional research capacity as well as increasing the
production of doctoral students in science and engineering. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Delaware State University (DSU) will implement
comprehensive strategies designed to expand DSU's research and educational
capability in an effort to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups
in the Applied Chemistry doctoral program and growing the diverse STEM
workforce. The HBCU-RISE program at DSU will enhance the research infrastructure
in Materials Chemistry, increase faculty recruitment and increase the number of
Ph.D. courses offered. This project has the potential to be a model for
increasing the number of minority students pursuing STEM degree programs and
careers and addressing the lack of minority faculty members in the discipline of
Materials Chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed project is
to develop advanced nanomaterials for renewable energy applications while
strengthening DSU's research and educational capability in the Department of
Chemistry by: 1) focusing on catalytic nanomaterials synthesis and
characterization toward energy applications; 2) providing faculty development to
foster growth in material chemistry research areas; and 3) developing new
courses in materials chemistry and a network of material scientists in Delaware.
The HBCU-RISE program will leverage resources through partnership with other
NSF-funded programs on campus, and serve as a model for successful partnership
among HBCUs and thus contribute to the White House Materials Genome Initiative.
The proposed project will contribute to the institutional transformation and is
aligned with the institution's strategic plan and initiative of becoming a
research-intensive university and increasing and sustaining excellence in
research.