* 1458499
* Opening Pathways, Engaging, and Networking in Chemistry in Northern New Jersey (OPEN-NJ)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Katherine Herbert, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 06/30/2021
* USD 603,999.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Montclair State University in
New Jersey will provide scholarships for talented students with demonstrated
financial need pursuing Master of Science degrees in Chemistry, and
Biochemistry. The program is called Opening Pathways, Engaging, and Networking
in Chemistry in Northern New Jersey (OPEN-NJ). The program will provide pathways
for supporting Biology B.S. graduates to transition into M.S. degree programs in
Chemistry and Biochemistry. Program graduates are expected to contribute to the
continued success of the chemical, pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries
located in Northern New Jersey. Scholarships for academically strong students,
who may not otherwise be able to afford college, will increase the number of
graduates prepared to support national, regional, and local companies. The
success of the program will produce a well-trained workforce that will
contribute to the economic growth of New Jersey and the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OPEN-NJ will award approximately 51 yearly
scholarships to students admitted to the M.S. programs in Chemistry, Chemistry
with a concentration in Biochemistry, and Pharmaceutical Biochemistry. The
program will serve as a model for enabling Biology B.S. graduates to transition
into M.S. degree programs in Chemistry and Biochemistry. Many recent biology
B.S. graduates would like to pursue M.S. degrees in Chemistry or Biochemistry at
MSU. However transitioning to Chemistry and Biochemistry from other STEM fields
is difficult because these are fields where topics build on prior knowledge and
a solid foundation is critical for success. The OPEN-NJ program creates a
solution to this problem by creating a practical and easy-to-adopt track for
biology graduates (and other related majors) to enter Chemistry and Biochemistry
M.S. programs. OPEN-NJ will offer students support services including review of
general chemistry during summer orientation, dedicated tutoring services,
dedicated faculty mentors, and a learning community. OPEN-NJ program will enable
students to move between disciplines and in the process come to chemistry with a
new perspective, understand applications and make connections, and apply what
they learn. Students will learn about careers and explore their interests via
weekly exchanges with a mentor. Students will take part in a set of workshops on
resume preparation, interviews, and on different aspects of professional skills
development. The lessons learned, as determined through the program evaluation,
will provide useful data for other field-to-field transitions within STEM.
Effective practices that emerge from the program evaluation data will be
disseminated widely to the STEM education community and help increase widespread
understanding of the attributes and practices of successful student scholarship
and support programs.