* 1458541
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Evolutionary Preference Revelation Dynamics under School Choice Mechanisms
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2015,11/30/2017
* Alexander Brown, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 11/30/2017
* USD 27,369.00

Children in the United States are traditionally assigned to public schools based
on where they live. However, a growing number of public school districts now
allow parents to indicate which schools they want their children to attend.
Since each school can support only a limited number of students, it is often
impossible to give every student her top choice of schools. To resolve such
shortages, policy makers employ student assignment mechanisms that assign each
student to a school based on the reported preferences over schools and the
legally determined student priorities at each school. In this study, we conduct
laboratory experiments to investigate dynamic behavior under continuous-time
variants of three widely employed school choice mechanisms. In these continuous-
time mechanisms, participants adjust their preference reports asynchronously and
receive instantaneous feedback regarding their assigned school. By providing
considerable opportunity for learning and adjustment, these continuous-time
mechanisms can promote rational behavior and achieve higher allocative
efficiency. Accordingly, this study can help policy makers to select the best
possible school choice mechanism for their district and improve educational
outcomes for children who attend public schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
manipulable mechanisms, such as the widely employed Boston mechanism,
participants frequently have an incentive to strategically misreport their
preferences. To encourage truthful preference reports, mechanism designers often
employ strategy-proof mechanisms under which participants never have an
incentive to misreport preferences, so truthful preference reporting is a weakly
dominant strategy. In contrast to these theoretical predictions, previous
experimental studies find that even strategy-proof mechanisms frequently fail to
induce truthful preference revelation. Unlike previous studies, we consider
assignment mechanisms under which participants adjust their preference reports
asynchronously and receive instantaneous feedback regarding their assigned
school. In particular, we consider continuous-time variations of three widely
employed school choice mechanisms: the deferred acceptance mechanism, the top
trading cycles mechanism, and the Boston mechanism. Since these continuous-time
mechanisms provide considerable opportunity for learning and adjustment, they
may promote rational preference revelation behavior, leading to more stable and
more efficient outcomes under strategy proof mechanisms.