* 1458305
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Arctic Section: Radium and Thorium Isotopes as Natural Geochemical Tracers in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Matthew Charette, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2019
* USD 1,244,524.00

In this project, investigators participating in the 2015 U.S. GEOTRACES Arctic
expedition will measure radium and thorium isotopes in the western Arctic Ocean.
In common with other national initiatives in the International GEOTRACES
Program, the goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to identify processes and
quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key trace elements and
isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of these distributions
to changing environmental conditions. Some trace elements are essential to life,
others are known biological toxins, and still others are important because they
can be used as tracers of a variety of physical, chemical, and biological
processes in the sea. The radionuclides to be measured as part of this project
are important because they are oceanographic tracers that provide information on
rates of cycling of other trace elements. The project will involve training
opportunities for graduate student researchers and for undergraduate students
from under-represented groups. Results from the study will be shared publicly
through the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution?s Center for Marine and
Environmental Radioactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While other GEOTRACES projects
will map the distribution of numerous trace elements and their isotopes (TEIs),
their distribution cannot be properly interpreted without concurrent measurement
of tracers capable of providing rates of internal TEI cycling processes and
fluxes at boundaries and across interfaces. The isotopes to be measured in this
project include a suite of uranium/thorium series radionuclides, including the
shorter-lived 234-Th and 228-Th as well as the radium quartet (224-Ra, 223-Ra,
228-Ra, 226-Ra). These tracers have the appropriate half-lives and reactivities
to allow for study of horizontal and vertical transport and mixing, as well as
removal at ocean boundaries, supply via rivers and submarine groundwater
discharge, surface scavenging and export and subsurface remineralization. The
researchers have considerable experience developing and implementing the most
efficient methods to sample and quantify this suite of tracers, which includes
use of battery powered in-situ pumps for large volume sampling. Hence, in
addition to the proposed work on uranium/thorium series radionuclides, the team
will also provide a service to other GEOTRACES researchers by coordinating pump
use and sampling for many essential particulate TEIs.