* 1458267
* ABI Innovation: Discovering Elements of Extreme and High Conservation in Eukaryotic Genomes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Dmitry Korkin, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 02/28/2019
* USD 768,279.00

The project seeks to address a fundamental problem of finding regions of
eukaryotic genomes that share a remarkable property: when compared between
genomes of two and more species, the sequences from these regions appear
identical or perhaps with a very small number of errors (mutations). Discovered
more than 10 years ago, the origins of this phenomenon and its functional
implications for the living organisms remain a mystery. This is not surprising
as until now, cataloging all such regions between all species was a
computationally unfeasible task, requiring a conceptually different
computational approach. In this project, a series of such novel algorithms will
be developed that take a full benefit of the kind of biological data being
processed and the type of hardware that it is run on. The algorithms will be
optimized guided by a biological hypothesis on the distribution of the extreme
genomic elements. The algorithms will also be designed to optimally use the
internal memory of the computing processors, one of the main bottlenecks of the
conventional software. The success of this project will have important
implications. It will provide new insights into the eukaryotic evolution and
introduce new functional class of genomic elements. Moreover, based on the
recent literature and the preliminary data from this project's team, these
extreme elements may be implicated in a number of complex genetic disorders in
humans. Another important advancement is introducing a new computational
paradigm in genomics and bioinformatics of designing algorithms that are
biological data- and computing hardware-optimized. The project also proposes a
series of interlinked educational activities targeting not only undergraduate
and high-school students, but also reaching towards high-school teachers to help
them integrate bioinformatics and computational genomics into the high school
biology curriculum. By including both, the teacher and student components, the
goal is to further broaden the impact by encouraging females and
underrepresented minorities to pursue careers in genomics and informatics and
involve them in outreach to their parents and high-school peers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop computational
methodology for a fast and comprehensive detection of the regions of extreme and
high conservation in one and across multiple eukaryotic genomes. The two main
classes of genomic elements targeted by this study are long identical
multispecies elements (LIMEs) that include but are not limited to UCEs, and
near-identical multispecies elements (NIMEs), the highly similar genomic regions
that allow only a few mismatches. The project includes three main research aims.
Aim 1 is to develop new tools and improve existing tools for genome-wide
comprehensive determination of regions of extreme and high conservation, LIMEs
and NIMEs. Aim 2 is to apply the developed algorithms to determine a complete
atlas of elements of extreme and high conservation in eukaryotes and test
biological hypotheses on their evolution, structural organization, and
relationship with the genetic variation within species populations. Finally, Aim
3 is to disseminate data on regions of extreme and high conservation and
computational tools for their detection. The educational activities will include
three components: (1) attract high-school students to the computational
undergraduate sciences by educating them about the research in computational
genomics and bioinformatics, (2) attract new and retain existing undergraduate
students to the Ph.D. program in informatics by involving them in the
interdisciplinary research, and (3) provide support for high-school teachers
with the implementation of bioinformatics and computational genomics into the
high school biology curriculum. The datasets and software tools will be freely
available to public at http://korkinlab.org .