* 1458071
* Targeted Interventions for Enhanced Retention of Chemistry Graduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2015,10/31/2021
* Stephen Weber, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 10/31/2021
* USD 637,433.00

This NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) project will increase the number of students who complete a Ph.D. in
chemistry and contribute to the vital national chemistry enterprise. The project
has four objectives (a) increase the retention rate of graduate students who
most commonly encounter barriers in their first year, (b) use carefully targeted
interventions to reduce the average time-to-degreee, (c) increase the number of
graduate students in the department from groups that are underrepresented in
Chemistry, and (d) improve the overall graduate experience by adding coherence
and breadth to skills development, reducing teaching workloads, and supporting
students seeking non-research careers upon Ph.D. completion. The immediate
outcome of the project will be the awarding scholarships to at least 52 graduate
students. The long-term outcome will be more, better prepared, advance-degreed
professionals for the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are
aligned with challenges to the chemistry graduate program that were identified
in a self-assessment. Thus, the three new student support mechanisms
(Professional Develop Workshops, Proposal Writing Course, and Near Peer
Mentoring) were chosen carefully to focus on key attrition points, all
predominant in the first year of study. The topics covered in the workshops will
help the students to develop their identities as professional scientist, while
the writing course will help them to develop their abilities to design a viable
research plan. Grounded in the literature, these strategies will both provide
the S-STEM students with strong academic support and further inform the research
on recruitment and retention of graduate students in the sciences. Moreover, all
of the project components are examples of sustainable, transferrable tools for
training graduate students. The Evaluation Plan includes validated, baseline and
follow-up surveys meant to assess the development of participants' self-efficacy
(research and academic) and STEM Identities. The individual support structures
will also be evaluated using qualitative, focus group discussions. Both
mechanisms should result in rich information regarding the attitudes,
motivation, and beliefs of budding graduate students. The qualitative
assessments, which will be expanded to a group of students who have not been
exposed to the student supports for comparison, should build on current research
related to challenges to persistence in graduate school. Results will be
disseminated to the university, national chemistry, and broader STEM communities
through a variety of mechanisms including PittCon meetings, annual American
Chemical Society meetings, and the Journal of Chemical Education.