* 1458854
* Thematic Scholarships in Engineering Education (SEE): A Project Focused on Retention and Graduation through Student Support and Career/Professional Development
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Vanessa Valentin, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 741,278.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at the University of New Mexico
will provide scholarships and support services to academically-talented students
who are pursuing degrees in engineering and computer science and who demonstrate
financial need. This project is called Thematic Scholarships in Engineering
Education (SEE): A Project Focused on Retention and Graduation through Student
Support and Career/Professional Development. The students will include both
first-year students and students transferring from community colleges. A total
of 24 students will be supported each year. The scholars will participate in one
of four learning communities created around the topics of Bioengineering,
Green/Renewable Energies, High-Tech Materials, and Aerospace Engineering.
Talented engineering graduates skilled in these areas of emerging technology
help US industries to compete and innovate in a global
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Thematic Scholarships in Engineering Education
Project will identify, select, and evaluate talented students entering
engineering or computer science majors. The program will provide academic
support services such as advising, mentoring, and tutoring to ensure that the
S-STEM program students maintain satisfactory academic progress. Students will
participate in at least one learning community in areas of technological focus
within the College of Engineering. The learning communities will be directed by
faculty members with expertise in the learning community topic. Activities will
include discussion groups and guest speakers. Students have the option of
participating in research experiences or internships with industry. Professional
career development will form an integral part of the program. These activities
foster student progress and interest in their chosen fields of study. Program
assessment will monitor participant need, the type and amount of services to
meet that need, and semester goals and objectives. Lessons learned and best
practices that emerge from the program evaluation data will be disseminated
widely to the engineering education community and help enlarge the knowledge
base regarding attributes and practices of successful scholarship programs of
this type.