* 1458735
* Lipscomb University--Enhancing Engineering Talent in Tennessee
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Allen Gwinn, David Lipscomb University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 611,517.00

This project at Lipscomb University involves implementing a scholarship program
to serve 30 undergraduate students. This project is motivated by the Tennessee
Promise initiative which will provide free tuition at all state community
colleges beginning in 2015. This initiative is projected to initially decrease
rolls at the 4-year colleges in the state, therefore the project team will
recruit community college pre-engineering program graduates directly into one of
their three engineering major programs in civil, electrical, or mechanical
engineering. Lipscomb plans to graduate at least 20 of the scholars, thereby
increasing the number of engineering graduates at Lipscomb and in the state of
Tennessee and contributing to the pool of engineers needed nationwide. Lipscomb
has proven very successful in preparation of engineering graduates as they
reported 90% first-time passing rates for the Fundamentals of Engineering exam
and almost 100% placement of graduates into the workforce or graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five cohorts of six students each will be selected
from a pool of students at area community colleges chosen due to historic trends
of students/graduates transferring to Lipscomb. The cohorts will benefit from a
residential living and learning community and several activities intended to
support their learning environment. Traditional student support and career
development services will be available to all students including project
scholars. Student support services include tutoring, academic workshops, study
groups, and academic advising, etc. while career development services such as
professional societies, service trips, design competitions employer networking,
and mock interviews, etc. will also be available. A broader impact of this
program is the potential to provide information to similar schools as it is
anticipated more states will adopt plans similar to the Tennessee Promise.
Program evaluation will focus on two research questions: 1) what are the effects
of the program supports on student, faculty, and staff perceptions of known
barriers to success for community college students and community college
transfers interested in an engineering career and 2) what are the effects of the
program on community college student interest, application, admission,
enrollment, retention, and graduation from Lipscomb's engineering program? In
addition, the project will explore the impact of the program on transfer support
services and engineering career pathways at the participating community colleges
and Lipscomb, as well as the impact of the program on community college tracking
of pre-engineering student outcomes.