* 1458490
* An Integrated and Ownership-Focused Approach to Student Success in Science
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Staiger, Mount St. Mary's University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 601,830.00

The Mount St. Mary's University MOSS Project (Mount Opportunities for Success in
Science) will provide 14 scholarships for high-achieving, financially-needy
students as they pursue a B.S. degree in Biology, Biochemistry, Chemistry, or
Environmental Science. Beyond scholarships, the project will include resources,
support, and development opportunities designed to promote future success in
STEM careers and graduate-level education. As the project builds a community of
learners, cultivates academic achievement, and provides professional development
opportunities, MOSS Scholars will be empowered to take ownership of their
social, academic, and professional lives. In particular the scholarship
recipients will participate in peer mentoring; take part in an expanded college-
orientation program; receive intensive faculty advising and goal setting; obtain
individualized career counseling and mentoring by external STEM professionals;
and participate in a shared service learning experience that will promote access
to STEM for the next generation of students. The MOSS Project will also broaden
the participation and success of underrepresented minority students in science,
thereby increasing the size and diversity of the STEM workforce.

The measureable outcomes of the MOSS Project are to: 1) recruit and financially
support two sequential cohorts of seven students; 2) retain Scholars to
sophomore year at a rate of 85% or higher; 3) attain a 4-year Scholar graduation
rate of 70% or higher; 4) to see 100% of the Scholars complete an undergraduate
research experience and present at a scientific conference; and 5) to help 100%
of graduated Scholars be employed in STEM jobs or enrolled in STEM graduate
programs within 12 months of graduation. To achieve these outcomes, the MOSS
Project will enhance existing structures and programs to build a community of
learners, cultivate academic achievement, and provide professional development
opportunities. As aspects of the MOSS project are made available to all MSMU
Science students, overall retention rates, graduation rates, and post-graduate
achievement in STEM should improve. The project will also examine the effect of
service-learning on student persistence in STEM and enhance the understanding of
the role of mentoring (by peers, faculty, and external STEM professionals) in
supporting STEM students. As outcomes are disseminated among STEM educators, the
MOSS Project will serve as a model for other institutions. Assessment of the
efficacy of the comprehensive, integrated, and ownership-focused approach of the
MOSS Project will advance our understanding of effective strategies and expand
the knowledge base for supporting student success in STEM.