* 1458261
* The Science Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2022
* David Clark, Alma College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 01/31/2022
* USD 622,430.00

To increase the number of academically talented and financially disadvantaged
Biology, Biochemistry, Biotechnology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Computer Science,
and Physics graduates at Alma College, this project will provide financial
support along with the tools and experiences the scholarship recipients need to
achieve academic success. The project will build on lessons learned from an NSF-
STEP project (now fully supported by the institution) that was designed to
enhance the first-year experience. Evidence-based practices such as peer support
generated in Learning Communities, early access to faculty through mentoring,
and integration into the institution's rich undergraduate research culture will
be central to the project's approach to retaining 20 participants in the STEM
majors. The project is grounded in the needs of the local and regional community
and should help to broaden the participation of first-generation students in the
pursuit and attainment of STEM degrees. Scholarships for academically strong
STEM students, who may not otherwise be able to afford college, have an impact
on the number of STEM graduates prepared to help national, regional, and local
companies. Talented STEM graduates help US industries to compete and innovate in
a global economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on research that shows that
students' identities as scientist can be cultivated by their participation in
disciplinary research, the project will incorporate the following activities:
(a) an invitation to take part in pre-college experiences designed through the
NSF-STEP project (a series of courses, seminars, and community building
activities that culminates with a summer research project), (b) a special first-
year seminar designed to introduce scholars to interdisciplinary research topics
such as biotechnology and environmental monitoring, (c) mentor matching to
professionals in industry, and (d) guaranteed, paid research opportunities. It
is expected that the findings from the project evaluation will help to
contribute to the knowledge base regarding the correlation of STEM retention to
student's self-identification as scientists and researchers. Formative and
summative evaluation will consist of an analysis of how well the project
components align with successful attainment of this goal. Standardized survey
instruments that are used college wide (the National Survey of Student
Engagement [NSSE] and the Cooperative Institutional Research Program-survey
[CIRP]) will be used along with customized assessment and evaluation
instruments. In addition, participants who do research, present papers, and
enter graduate and professional programs in the sciences will be tracked upon
graduation. Dissemination of the results of evaluation will be done through
webinars, brown bag lunches, and at national meetings like the Annual CUR
Institute on Initiating and Sustaining Undergraduate Research Programs and the
National Conference on Students in Transition. Discipline specific presentation
venues will include the annual meetings of the American Chemical Society, the
Annual Meeting of the Association of College and University Biology Educators,
and the American Association of Physics Teachers National Meeting.