* 1458337
* Santiago Canyon College STEM Scholars Academy
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Jeffrey Wada, Santiago Canyon College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 02/29/2020
* USD 621,913.00

Santiago Canyon College (SCC) is a community college in Southern California,
with 8,978 students, of whom 44% are Hispanic, 56% are low-income, 68% place
below college-level math, and 75% are first-generation college students. The
Santiago Canyon College STEM Scholars Academy will enable low-income STEM majors
with the greatest need and greatest potential (based on grade point average and
faculty recommendation) to enter or maintain full-time enrollment, increase use
of academic and support services, participate in educational and internship
opportunities. Recognizing its role to address the workforce needs of STEM
industries in the region and to provide access to higher education and high-wage
employment for disadvantaged and underrepresented students, SCC has instituted a
STEM initiative to increase the college's capacity to strengthen STEM pathways
through improved outreach and college preparation, advisement, enhanced
instructional programs, support services, and transfer partnerships.

Through this S-STEM project, SCC will award 17-28 scholarships each year to low-
income STEM majors and connect recipients to the STEM support services and
programs on campus to achieve the following objectives: (1) increase the number
of low-income STEM majors enrolled full-time; (2) increase the number of
underrepresented minority STEM majors enrolled full-time; (3) reduce work hours
and/or increase participation in STEM services and resources; (4) increase the
number of students who graduate or transfer with a minimum 3.0 grade point
average; and (5) increase the participation of underrepresented STEM majors in
internships. Because many low-income and minority college students start their
higher education pathways at a community college, the results of this project
are pertinent to a wide audience of community colleges serving as pathways to
STEM degrees and employment. Project findings regarding the impact of financial
support integrated with extensive support services to increase completion of
STEM degrees, a model to help decision makers identify students with the
greatest potential to benefit from scholarship and support services, and
transfer and entrance into employment (especially among low-income and
underrepresented students) will be used to inform community college strategic
planning and guide program development. Targeted dissemination will be used to
engage STEM faculty and deans, and financial aid and foundation officers to
share best practices with those most likely to adopt or adapt effective
practices of the project.