* 1458400
* ABI Development: An ontology of evidence types to support biological data management
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Michelle Giglio, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,420,341.00

Researchers generate biological data from many diverse methods that range from
laboratory experiments to computer-based analyses. These data serve as the
evidence that researchers use to make inferences and draw scientific
conclusions. The process of biocuration seeks to capture these conclusions and
the evidence that led to them in a standardized way so that the information is
readily accessible to the entire scientific community. The most efficient way to
accomplish this is to use an ontology to describe the evidence types. An
ontology is a controlled vocabulary of terms where each term is carefully
defined and linked to other terms by precise relationships. The Evidence
Ontology (EO) is a community standard for describing types of research evidence
used to support scientific conclusions in biological research. The EO is used by
some of the world?s most prominent protein databases and genomic resources to
capture evidence information. The goal of this project is to improve EO and
promote its use by a larger community of researchers. The EO will be promoted
through outreach, training, and education efforts, including workshops and
internships. Broader impacts will include outreach efforts to Baltimore City
Public Schools students focusing on teaching the importance of structuring
information in a controlled way. Summer interns will engage in EO development
and bioinformatics activities. A vast number of scientists researching a wide
range of biological topics will benefit from the continued development and
expanded use of the EO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to describe both
evidence and assertion method (i.e. whether a human or a machine makes a
statement) in a consistent and computable fashion is essential for multiple
reasons. Capture of methodology is central to the scientific method and can
impact evaluation of results, associating structured evidence with stored data
allows for selective data queries and retrieval from even the largest databases,
and structured evidence systems make automated quality control possible, which
is essential for large-scale data management. Nearly 30 biological resources
including protein databases, model organism databases, phenotype resources, and
gene expression databases currently are using the Evidence Ontology (EO) to
capture evidence information, support structured data queries, group related
data, or establish quality control mechanisms. EO will be developed further to
address structural issues, clarify the main axis, add logical constraints, and
map EO to related resources. New evidence types will be continually added to the
ontology based on the needs of the research community. A web resource will be
created that includes improved visualization tools for evidence and data
associated with EO terms, complete user documentation, and downloadable content.
EO will also develop quality assessment methodologies to enable researchers to
better evaluate evidence. Outreach, training, and education will be conducted to
grow the EO user base and educate researchers and students about the value and
means of capturing evidence. EO developers will present at scientific
conferences, publish papers, host interns, and conduct workshops and science
outreach activities. By improving EO and increasing user awareness, researchers
will be better able to make the most of evidence and associated data. For more
information, please visit: http://evidenceontology.org.