* 1458321
* Seeking Educational Endeavors for Degrees in Science (SEEDS)
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Larry Gould, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 01/31/2021
* USD 613,347.00

Northern Arizona University Yuma branch campus (NAU-Yuma) has received an NSF
Scholarships for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM)
award for their project entitled Supporting Educational Endeavors for Degrees in
Science (SEEDS). The school, a federally designated Hispanic Serving
Institution, was founded in 1988 and is the only STEM bachelor degree granting
institution directly serving southwestern Arizona and is a transfer institution
by design. SEEDS will identify and recruit 30 promising, underrepresented, and
financially-needy students seeking to study Biology and Environmental Sciences
into NAU-Yuma. The project will actively recruit STEM-oriented students from the
region, including graduates of nearby 2-year community colleges in Yuma and
Imperial, California. Students enrolled through SEEDS will benefit from extended
student services including: tutoring in organic chemistry, biochemistry, and
writing; comprehensive advising; a cohort-based learning environment; learning
outside the classroom; and preparation for relevant post-graduate pursuits such
as graduate school or STEM-based employment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SEEDS
scholars will complete upper division coursework, obtaining baccalaureate
degrees, and will be competitively prepared for relevant employment or graduate
school. The project's four objectives are to broaden opportunities for
university access to underrepresented and financially needy students, to enhance
high quality, comprehensive STEM learning, to increase student success,
retention, and graduation through student services, and to improve student
advancement to relevant employment or graduate school. Career placement services
will include institutional support for placement in internships and/or STEM
research experiences, paid travel to a job fair, and use of career advising
services. SEEDS assessment and evaluation will be comprehensive and ongoing and
will be designed to improve student support. The project external evaluator will
use both formative and summative evaluations to assess student progress to
degree, participation in project activities, and graduation rates. Particular
emphasis will be placed on the surveys to assess and improve the elements of the
program that include the design and delivery of academic content, resources that
enhance student learning, and services that promote success after graduation.
The data gathered will inform the larger undergraduate STEM education
enterprise's understanding of the resources needed by students to overcome
barriers faced in the transfer from a two-year institution to a four-year school
and and of the type of academic and co-curricular support that will enable them
to complete a B.S. and be prepared for the STEM workforce or graduate school.