* 1458262
* CSBR: Living Stocks - The Escherichia Coli Genetic Stock Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* John Wertz, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 498,749.00

This award supports the E. coli Genetic Stock Center (CGSC) at Yale University.
Escherichia coli is an important model organism and is perhaps the best
understood cellular organism from a genetics and biochemistry standpoint. This
high degree of understanding has made E. coli not just an important subject of
research, but also the laboratory workhorse for studying a broad variety of
organisms as well as an invaluable tool for biotechnology. The mission of the
CGSC is to act as a central repository for genetically modified strains of E.
coli created by the research community, so that they may be readily available to
other researchers and educators. To that end, the CGSC maintains a collection of
~28,000 cultures of genetically defined derivatives of E. coli K-12. There are
over 8,000 different mutations represented in this strain collection with
verified mutations in over 90% of the 4,111 identified genes in the sequenced E.
coli K-12 genome. These cultures are distributed to researchers and educators in
the US and over 65 countries worldwide. In addition to the distribution of
cultures, the CGSC is also an information resource, and provides information
about strains, mutations, genes, gene products and genetic maps, in a fully
searchable database on the web. Importantly CGSC also acts as a source of expert
information and advice for those researchers who have questions about using the
E. coli strains in the collection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CGSC will continue
to maintain and expand its publicly available database on strain genotypes,
phenotypes, histories and pedigrees, which is unique to the Stock Center.
Information systems will be upgraded to more seamlessly integrate with other E.
coli web resources, including the EcoliWiki project, EcoGene and EcoCyc. The
CGSC is collaborating with other international culture collection databases such
as StrainInfo and the World Data Centre for Microorganisms (WDCM) so that the
collection can be indexed by these global strain databases. Over the period of
this award, capabilities will be expanded to distribute large systematic strain
sets, which are useful for users interested in genomic and proteomic research.
Strain construction services will be offered for those users who require a
genetically modified strain, but lack the capability of constructing it
themselves, particularly to those outside of the traditional bacterial genetics
community. Access to the strain collection database, including genotypes, gene
function and map location, as well as an extensive bibliography are available at
(http://cgsc.biology.yale.edu/).