* 1458353
* Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Connections
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2021
* Jason Keleher, Lewis University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 03/31/2021
* USD 613,428.00

The Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) Connections project
at Lewis University will contribute well prepared graduates to the STEM
workforce with advanced training in chemistry, biochemistry, physics, and
chemical physics. It is designed to enhance physical sciences education through
an experiential learning model based on real-world experiences. The scholars
will be provided with a solid foundation for employment and graduate school in a
competitive landscape. Specific emphasis will be placed on skills relevant to
pressing societal issues, such as alternative energy, novel materials for
information storage, next generation health care materials, and advanced optical
technology. The college will leverage its relationships with nanotechnology
companies, Argonne and Fermi National Laboratories, and the community to provide
students with experiential learning opportunities. It will also expand its
research collaborations with the labs and both domestic and international
companies working in these advanced fields. Outreach and recruitment strategies
will focus on academically qualified students from minority populations and
thereby contribute to the diversity of the STEM workforce. The university will
pilot several enhancements to its physical science programs through STEM
Connections, providing evidence to support future expansion throughout the
physical science programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM Connections will prepare
students for physical science careers through an innovative process that
emphasizes interdisciplinary connections in the context of real-world problem
solving and workforce requirements. A special focus will be placed on
interdisciplinary fields such as nanotechnology, materials science, and
alternative energy. Connections will be strengthened among scholars to improve
peer support and retention, and between students/faculty and outside
institutions to improve engagement. STEM Connection will develop student
understanding of interdisciplinary science, research methods, and how to apply
science to real-world problems, as well as necessary skills in critical
thinking, communication, and collaboration. An external evaluation will
determine the impact of these strategies on enrollment, retention, graduation,
and engagement. Extensive faculty and administrative support, up-to-date
facilities, and a redesigned science curriculum will provide the resources to
enable the university to accomplish its program objectives. Recruitment
strategies will include using student and alumni networks, web-based marketing,
and an on-campus mini-expo to connect with area high school students and their
parents, teachers, and guidance counselors. Scholars will be supported
financially through scholarships, and academically through first-year project-
based experiences and foundational coursework linked to problem solving in
industry and the community.