* 1458903
* Collaborative Research: Sea-level variability during the Common Era
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Simon Engelhart, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2018
* USD 44,980.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The research to be performed will help inform projections of
regional and global mean sea-level rise as well as contribute to the climate
change impacts assessment. The investigators will reconstruct the relative sea-
level variability during the Common Era (~ last 2000 years) along the Atlantic
coasts of Newfoundland and Florida and the Florida Gulf coast at higher
resolution and in greater detail than is now available. The investigators will
work with the National Estuarine Research Reserves Coastal Training Program, the
Rutgers Climate and Environmental Change Initiative, and Rutgers Cooperative
Extension program to develop applied use of the information from this project.
The project seeks to offer an Earthwatch IGNITE project to high school students
to provide them with the opportunity to participate in field trips and
experience the scientific research firsthand. Results will be showcased to the
local community at Tufts Research Days and Rutgers Day, annual events held on
campus which will allow the public to engage with the researchers. Undergraduate
students will be involved in the research, in both field work and laboratory
analysis. Two early-career investigators will be supported by this work and
partial support will be provided for postdoctoral scientists from Rutgers
University and Tufts University and for graduate students at Rutgers University
and the University of Rhode Island. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will use geological proxies to
reconstruct Common Era relative sea level variability along the Atlantic coasts
of Newfoundland and Florida and the Florida Gulf coast at ~&lt;0.2m vertical
resolution and decadal-to-centennial temporal resolution. To estimate global
mean sea level and the spatio-temporal field of eastern North American Common
Era relative sea level, the new relative sea level reconstructions will be
combined with existing relative sea level reconstructions and tide gauge
measurements in an empirical Bayesian statistical framework. The data and
statistical model would be used to test the following research questions: 1)
whether sea level along the North American Atlantic and Gulf coasts has varied
as a direct consequence of a warmer climate during the Medieval Climate Anomaly
and cooler climate during the Little Ice Age; 2) whether spatial variability of
sea level during the Common Era can be attributed to static-equilibrium effects
of land ice changes and/or ocean dynamics; 3) whether Earth models with depth-
varying Earth structure are sufficient to capture the spatio-temporal geometry
of Glacial Isostatic Adjustment along the east coast of North America; and 4)
whether the rate of sea-level rise since ~1850 in eastern North America has been
greater than any other centennial trend during the previous two millennia. The
proposed work is of significant societal relevance as it will provide more
accurate data for use in the projections of regional and global mean sea-level
rise as well as contribute to the climate change impacts assessment.