* 1458430
* Supporting Community College Transfer Students to Earn STEM Baccalaureate Degrees
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Victor Benassi, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2021
* USD 629,003.00

The College of Engineering and Physical Sciences (CEPS) at the University of New
Hampshire Durham will collaborate with the Community College System of New
Hampshire to enhance emerging state and national initiatives, improve alignment
between community colleges and four-year institutions, and increase the numbers
of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) graduates. This
scholarship program will be designed to provide community college transfers the
level of commitment necessary for their success through scholarships to meet
financial need, assertive and pro-active advising during their entire university
career, and a classroom and research based cohort-building seminar experience.
The high level of initial engagement is critical to overcome transfer shock,
which is reported in the literature and reflected in university statistics;
however engagement of the scholars in on-campus activities until graduation is
planned. The project will increase learning opportunities through the proactive
engagement of community college and university faculty and improve teaching
methods via engagement with the STEM Pedagogy Academy. Due to the nature of the
institutions involved, the project will increase the diversity of university
STEM graduates. Lessons learned from these efforts will be incorporated into
state planning and can be replicated by other state universities partnering with
state community college systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities will:
(1) expose community college students to the STEM research enterprise and
generate applications from community college students intending to major in CEPS
disciplines; (2) increase retention, academic performance, and graduation rates
among community college students transferring to the CEPS; (3) prepare scholars
for career placement in the STEM workforce and/or further studies in STEM
disciplines; and (4) provide university and community college faculty with the
necessary resources to effectively teach, advise, and mentor community college
transfer students. To address the project objectives, in addition to financial
support, the project will provide the following student support services and
programs: (1) structured and on-going academic support, advising, and mentoring;
(2) an introduction to STEM culture and university academic resources, community
building activities, research experiences, career preparation, and counseling
through the cohort experience of a special seminar course for community college
transfers; (3) academic support regarding cognitively-based study skills and
study skills instruction; (4) support to encourage faculty to undertake better
student learning practices through the STEM Pedagogy Academy; and (5) exposure
to research and careers in STEM disciplines in introductory courses at the
community colleges.