* 1458361
* Broadening Opportunities for Biologists by Bridging the Gap for Transfer Students
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Kathleen Wilson, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 01/31/2020
* USD 619,983.00

Oklahoma State University has received an NSF Scholarships for Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) award for their project
entitled The Broadening Opportunities for Biologists by Bridging the Gap for
Transfer Students. This project will improve recruitment, retention, and
graduation rates for students transferring from 2-year schools and pursuing
bachelor's degrees in the life sciences at OSU and will provide 58 two-year
scholarships to 29 academically talented and financially disadvantaged students.
Program activities will increase interactions within and across cohorts and
strengthen the support network and sense of community for S-STEM scholars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S-STEM scholars will receive financial, academic, and
professional development support. Academic support will include a peer-led
orientation workshop; a 1-credit seminar class focused on career awareness,
communication skills, and peer interactions; advising; peer mentoring; and
tutoring (including supplemental instruction for courses identified as
challenging for S-STEM scholars). Regular checkpoints encourage student
participation in academic support services. A diversity of professional
development activities will allow scholars to adapt program experiences to their
interests, needs, and schedules. Professional development activities will focus
on career awareness, job search strategies, and balancing professional and
family life, as well as optional internships, research projects, professional
society meetings, graduate school related activities, and outreach
opportunities. Visits to previous (graduated) S-STEM scholars in graduate school
and at job sites will provide direct connections to future careers. Other
support services will include group-building activities before the start of the
academic year so incoming students can build connections with current S-STEM
scholars, as well as informal, family friendly activities. Project evaluation
will focus on formative and summative assessment with qualitative and
quantitative data collected from multiple sources to assess recruitment,
retention, and graduation rates, as well as student experiences in and
perceptions about the S-STEM program. Overall, the project will provide
information on the resources needed by students to overcome barriers faced in
the transfer from a two-year institution to a four-year school and on the
support that will enable them to complete a B.S. and be prepared for the STEM
workforce or graduate school.