* 1458840
* Bilateral BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Collaborative Research: ABI Development: Seamless Integration of Neuroscience Models and Tools with HPC - Easy Path to Supercomputing for Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Amitava Majumdar, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2020
* USD 774,000.00

This project is a collaboration between the University of California San Diego
and Yale University to develop a science gateway for the computational
neuroscience community. A gateway such as this helps improve our understanding
of how the brain works by making it easier for neuroscientists to use complex
digital models of brain cells and circuits in their research. Powerful software
has been developed for building and using models, and on-line resources such as
Open Source Brain (OSB), ModelDB, Neuroscience Information Framework (NIF), and
OpenWorm have been created to help neuroscientists find existing models,
collaborate in developing new ones, and share the results of their work with
others. However, models are becoming too complex for the computer hardware that
is available to most neuroscientists, resulting in a critical need to use high
performance computing resources (HPC). This work extends an existing
Neuroscience Gateway (NSG), which was developed with support from NSF to
eliminate or reduce many of the technical and administrative difficulties that
previously limited neuroscientists' access to HPC (http://www.nsgportal.org/).
That said, NSG users must still log in, upload models, launch simulations, and
download results--a process that involves many time-consuming, error-prone
steps. The expanded NSG-R will eliminate these steps by enabling on-demand,
automated communication between itself and familiar working environments
including resources like OSB and others mentioned above, and even with neural
simulation software running on neuroscientists' own laptop and desktop
computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This seamless access to HPC is implemented in
NSG-R by a software infrastructure that uses REpresentational State Transfer
("REST", the R in NSG-R). NSG-R utilizes set of web services which expose the
capabilities of NSG for access via publicly available application programmer
interfaces. This will allow users of neuroscience resources such as OSB,
ModelDB, NIF and OpenWorm to readily access HPC from their respective websites
via NSG-R. This enhances the usefulness of NSG-R, other neuroscience resources
like OSB, and widely used neural simulators such as NEURON, GENESIS, PyNN, NEST,
Brian and MOOSE. It also results in greater research productivity and enables
wider use of large scale computational modeling by scientists and students.
NSG-R will accelerate progress in brain science, and have far-reaching
beneficial effects on related fields such as robotics and engineering of
adaptive and learning systems. It will widen opportunities for educational and
career advancement in neuroscience and engineering. Furthermore, by removing
barriers that traditionally have limited access to HPC, NSG-R levels the playing
field for all students and researchers regardless of their institutional
affiliation. NSG-R, a free and open neuroscience gateway infrastructure, will
naturally be a ready entry point for students and researchers from historically
underrepresented schools and colleges. NSG-R workshops will be hosted at
minority serving institutions (MSI) and opportunities for students to do
internships with the NSG-R team at the University of California San Diego will
be provided.