* 1458375
* Scholarship Program in Manufacturing Engineering Leadership Development
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Pankaj Mallick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2022
* USD 620,260.00

The Scholarship Program in Manufacturing Engineering Leadership Development will
provide tuition scholarships to 25 academically talented full-time freshmen
engineering students with financial need who will complete an undergraduate
degree in manufacturing engineering at the University of Michigan-Dearborn.
Scholars will also develop leadership experience through career development
activities targeting leadership skills and opportunities for internships in
industry. The leadership experience will build skills in communication, critical
thinking, teamwork and professionalism. The program allows the University of
Michigan-Dearborn to offer scholarships to directly address an area of national
concern: maintaining US competitiveness in manufacturing. Scholarships for
academically strong engineering students, who may not otherwise be able to
afford college, have an impact on the number of engineering graduates prepared
to help national, regional, and local manufacturing companies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Manufacturing Engineering Leadership Development at
the University of Michigan-Dearborn will recruit students in two groups. Each
group will form a cohort that will take several engineering courses together,
work on common projects, share experiences and learn from each other, both
inside and outside of the classroom. In addition to the tuition scholarship, the
program will include academic support, mentoring and career guidance so that the
student cohorts will successfully complete their degrees in four years.
Graduates will find employment in the manufacturing field or enroll in graduate
studies. The STEM scholars will also be given the opportunity to participate in
industry visits and projects in Fall and Winter semesters, which will provide
engineering experience and enrich their education with practical knowledge. The
STEM scholars will receive mentoring and academic support from faculty, graduate
students, alumni and practicing engineers throughout the four years of their
studies in the University. The STEM scholars will also have the option of
participating in the University of Michigan-Dearborn structured engineering co-
op program in their junior and senior years, which will provide them with
practice-oriented education and experiential learning that will help them in
their career. Assessment and evaluation will provide insight into the retention
benefits of student scholarships, learning communities, career development
activities, and faculty mentoring/advising. Lessons learned and effective
practices that emerge from the program evaluation data will be disseminated
widely to the engineering education community and help enlarge the knowledge
base regarding attributes and practices of successful scholarship programs of
this type.