* 1458967
* Collaborative Research: A metabolic index to predict the consequences of expanding oxygen minimum zones for midwater ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Curtis Deutsch, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2018
* USD 166,963.00

With climate change, ocean temperatures are expected to increase which in turn
will reduce oxygen availability and increase metabolic oxygen demand in marine
organisms. The investigators will conduct shipboard physiological experiments
for various marine organisms and determine their distributions in relation to
environmental conditions within an oxygen minimum zone (OMZ) in the Eastern
Pacific Ocean. The goal will be to model and map a Metabolic Index (MI) to
predict how vertical and horizontal distributions for these species might change
throughout the world's oceans in the future. The MI is defined as the ratio
between environmental oxygen supply and temperature-dependent oxygen demand.
Oxygen supply includes both the environmental oxygen concentration across a
habitat range and the physiological features of organisms that facilitate oxygen
uptake, such as gills and circulatory systems. Thus, the MI will integrate
measured tolerance and environmental exposure to low oxygen with environmental
data. The investigators will measure tolerance to low oxygen, focusing on under-
studied organisms, including the effect of temperature and organism size. They
will sample along a natural gradient in oxygen content south of the California
Current in the Eastern Pacific. The science team and a videographer will develop
a blog about deep-sea biology and climate change using web-based and video
technologies. Four graduate students will be funded on this project, and in
conjunction with a recently developed course in pelagic ecology, several
undergraduates will have the opportunity to participate in seagoing research.

This research fills a critical need for a physiology-based metric that can be
used to predict changing marine communities as the oceans warm and hypoxic zones
expand. Modern OMZs are extensive and characterized by deep-water (300-800 m)
oxygen partial pressures lethal to most marine organisms, yet thriving
communities exist there. Climate change is predicted to further deplete oxygen.
The investigators will model and map a Metabolic Index (MI) for diverse marine
species to help predict how in vertical and horizontal distributions of species
may change throughout the world's oceans in the future. The MI will derive
oxygen supply and demand data from published and planned measurements of the
minimum environmental partial pressure of oxygen to which individual species are
exposed (based on their distributions in the water column) and the minimum
requirements to support routine aerobic metabolic demand (from shipboard
respiration measurements of individuals). During research cruises in the Eastern
Pacific along a gradient of OMZ intensity, the investigators will conduct
shipboard physiological measurements to determine metabolic demand for
understudied mesozooplankton and gelatinous taxa and determine the size- and
temperature dependence for diverse species for incorporation into the MI.
Vertically-stratified net sampling and in situ photography will identify and
characterize unique OMZ community features, such as the lower oxycline biomass
peak present in some OMZs and the oxygen-dependence of day and night habitat
depths for vertically-migrating species. The MI will be mapped using
climatological data to both test and generate hypotheses about the response of
oceanic communities to climate change. In preliminary analysis, the MI suggests
a metabolic constraint at a MI of ~2 that may act to limit vertical and
horizontal habitat ranges.