* 1458476
* STEM Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Chris Farmer, Southwestern Illinois College
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2021
* USD 604,670.00

There is an established need in the United States to increase the number of
American scientists in the workforce. This NSF Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project will improve the
completion rates for math, computer science, biology, chemistry, physics,
engineering and earth science transfer students from Southwestern Illinois
College. Approximately, 50 scholars will participate in a two-year project that
includes (a) targeted recruitment, (b) intensive mentoring and advising, (c)
specialized cohort building activities and (d) exposure to career and transfer
opportunities. As a new model for thorough, results-driven student support and
mentoring the project will act as a template for future retention projects
throughout the institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach for this project,
which is grounded in relevant theory and research, recognizes that multiple
factors contribute to low STEM enrollment and completion rates among financially
needy students. These factors will be addressed through a curriculum that
focuses on self-efficacy in STEM, identification with and opinion of STEM
fields, and development of metacognitive skills in STEM subjects as well as
structure academic and social supports. The program will be evaluated by an
education researcher using a logic model that captures the program's theory of
change, outputs and activities, midterm outcomes, and long term outcomes.
Formative evaluation will address student progress, use of support services, and
satisfaction (journaling). Student attitudes will also be assessed using a
standardized instrument (STEM-CIS). Summative evaluation will be performed using
a logic model (inputs, outputs, mid-term outcomes, and end outcomes). Internal
dissemination of the results of evaluation will be done through the
institution's annual newsletter. Results will also be reported at meeting of the
National Science Teachers Association and eventually submitted to the Journal of
College Science Teaching.