* 1458867
* ABI Innovation: Quantifying, simulating, and visualizing the tree growth and its antecedent endogenous and climatic predictors
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Kiona Ogle, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2021
* USD 818,660.00

Past environmental conditions are likely to be important for predicting current
processes such as ecosystem productivity and tree growth. Moreover, past
environmental conditions may interact with past tree growth patterns to affect
current tree growth. Understanding the role of past conditions for predicting
current and future growth responses of trees is expected to be important for
predicting how trees, forests, and the terrestrial biosphere in general, may be
impacted by future environmental changes, such as those anticipated to occur in
tandem with climate change. However, methods for inferring the importance of
past conditions for current processes (e.g., tree growth) are not well
developed. Thus, this study develops statistical and computing methods for
quantifying the past (antecedent) factors governing tree growth, with specific
focus on identifying the time scales over which past climate conditions and past
tree growth patterns affect current tree growth. This study draws upon large
amounts of existing data on annual tree growth ("tree rings") available on-line
for multiple tree species across the southwestern US, and it will contribute
additional data via a focused field study that will sample several species in
this region. The project will train at least three graduate students from
diverse disciplines (ecology/biology, modeling/statistics, computing/software
development) and several undergraduate students. Results and data generated by
this study will be used to develop education modules related to new
undergraduate coursework and short courses aimed at training early career
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental conditions averaged over past
days, weeks, months, seasons, or years are important predictors of plant and
ecosystem productivity. For example, tree-ring studies indicate that tree growth
is affected by antecedent exogenous (e.g., past climate) and endogenous (e.g.,
past ring widths) factors, but existing analysis methods do not explicitly
evaluate the role of each factor.To address this need, this study will (1)
develop a stochastic antecedent model (SAM) for quantifying antecedent climatic
and endogenous conditions and their influence on tree growth, (2) apply the SAM
to estimate the time-scales over which antecedent factors affect tree growth for
multiple species across multiple sites in the Southwest, (3) identify potential
physiological mechanisms underlying the antecedent effects on tree growth, and
(4) develop software for more general applications of SAM and for simulating and
visualizing tree growth. This study combines large datasets, field studies,
literature data, Bayesian synthesis, and an individual-based model (IBM) of tree
growth and physiology. This study is expected to lend insight into the role
trees play as integrators of past environments and physiological states, and the
SAM approach should improve our ability to forecast plant and ecosystem
responses to climate change, disturbances, or other perturbations. Importantly,
the general SAM framework for quantifying the temporal properties of the
antecedent conditions and their effects on the process of interest will be
broadly applicable to a wide range of fields. To address the aforementioned
research objectives, this project will provide interdisciplinary training for a
post-doc, 3 graduate students (ecology, statistics, computer science), and
multiple undergraduates. Products from this study will be incorporated into a
new undergraduate seminar at ASU, a Bayesian modeling workshop organized for
annual ecology meetings (ESA), and a 2-week summer course in Bayesian methods
aimed at early career and senior ecological scientists. Two software (R)
packages will be developed, one for SAM and one for the IBM. Data generated from
this study will be made publically and globally available via data repositories.
Results from the project can be found at: www.ogle.lab.asu.edu.