* 1458425
* Enhancing Undergraduate Success in Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Caroline Simpson, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 05/31/2021
* USD 609,058.00

Florida International University is an urban public university in Miami, Florida
with over 53,000 students, the seventh largest university in the country. The
university serves a large population of economically disadvantaged students as
nearly 50% of all undergraduate students receive financial aid and nearly 60% of
those recipients come from families with annual household incomes under $30,000.
It is also a Hispanic-Serving Institution and awards the most baccalaureate and
master's degrees to Hispanic students in the country.. The Physics Department
alone has over 150 undergraduate majors and is one of the country's largest
producers of Physics baccalaureate degrees awarded to Hispanic students. To
ensure their timely and successful degree completion, this project will offer
scholarships to undergraduate physics majors and will provide a unique
opportunity to increase the success of historically underrepresented groups in
physics, as well as to develop deeper understanding of practices that support
these groups. The project will also impact the physics department as a whole, as
recruitment activities will engage faculty teaching the introductory physics
courses and the project will regularly report results to the faculty in the
department. Broader dissemination of the results to the university community, as
well as nationally via journal publications and conference presentations, will
provide important insights into how to best support historically
underrepresented groups in physics.

This project will provide renewable scholarships of up to $10,000 and academic
support to two cohorts of financially needy, academically talented students. The
student cohorts will be integrated into an academic learning community that will
provide the academic and social support necessary to foster timely undergraduate
degree completion. Participants will enroll in a one credit seminar to prepare
for science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers and
graduate school as well as receive mentoring from the project team.
Complementing their academic program will be a series of other activities to
further integrate them into the learning community. Recruitment into the program
will be through multiple channels, including introductory physics courses at the
university, physics and astronomy student groups, and direct email and web
presence. Monitoring will continue throughout the project and an evaluation
component will examine persistence through graduation, graduate school
acceptance rates, and persistence proxies including Rovai's Sense of Community
Scale.