* 1458096
* Supporting Undergraduates for Careers in Computing and Engineering with Scholarships and Supervision
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2022
* Dulal Kar, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 02/28/2022
* USD 609,857.00

The goal of the S-STEM project, Supporting Undergraduates for Careers in
Computing and Engineering with Scholarships and Supervision (SUCCESS), will be
to expand the STEM pool by providing scholarships to academically talented and
financially needy entering freshmen or transferring regional community college
students into Engineering and Computer Science (ECS) at Texas A&amp;M
University-Corpus Christi (TAMU-CC). Project objectives will be to recruit at
least 21 students as SUCCESS Scholars with majors in engineering and computer
science at TAMU-CC and retain 100% of these students through graduation. In
terms of the broader impacts, many of the students will likely be from
underrepresented groups (reflecting regional population demographics), thereby
increasing the diversity of the nation's professional workforce in these
critical fields. Some may also pursue doctoral degrees and serve as role models
for future STEM students. Texas ranks second nationally for Hispanics, who are
37% of its population, 60% in the region served by TAMU-CC; SUCCESS will be
well-placed to bring Hispanics into ECS fields, where they are underrepresented.
SUCCESS will recruit from regional high schools and community colleges with
large Hispanic student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The five-year project
will be designed as a recruitment tool providing each SUCCESS Scholar up to four
years of funding, which may be augmented by other scholarships and financial
aid. The project will retain scholars through a learning-community cohort
experience within an existing infrastructure of student services (mentoring,
academic advising, research opportunities, career counseling, professional
development)augmented by support services tailored for freshmen and transfer
students. Retention strategies will incorporate experiences of other TAMU-CC
S-STEM projects. SUCCESS Scholars will be integrated into established student
communities through participation in research, internships, mentoring, support
activities, and campus professional organizations. SUCCESS evaluation strategies
include both internal and external evaluations to determine programmatic
adjustments (formative) to project strategies and summative information to
determine the project's impact.