* 1458341
* Math Plus One: A Scholarship Program Enabling Young Mathematicians to Achieve Their Academic and Career Goals Through Dual Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Thomas Blum, La Salle University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 583,260.00

La Salle University's Math Plus One (M+1) program will recruit students into
mathematics through a focus on career preparation, strong student support
services, and scholarship funding that will make college more affordable. The
M+1 program will recruit 16 students (two cohorts of 8) who will major in
mathematics and one other related area, with an emphasis on the fields of
computer science, economics, finance, and chemistry. M+1 graduates will have a
competitive advantage when seeking post-graduate employment and will fill
critical workforce needs in the Greater Philadelphia
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;La Salle will provide four years of scholarship
assistance to each M+1 student. Students will participate in undergraduate
research, attend regional and national conferences, complete internships, and
receive career mentoring from members of the Mathematics Advisory Board. The
Mathematics Advisory Board will consist of local business and educational
leaders that, in addition to mentoring scholars, will guide and help shape the
M+1 program. The goals of the M+1 program are to increase the enrollment of math
majors, ensure a diversified math student population, provide strong support
services to S-STEM recipients, and ensure that S-STEM students graduate in a
timely manner and obtain positions in their fields after graduation. Recruitment
efforts will target students underrepresented in the field, particularly women
and minorities.