* 1458689
* Collaborative Research: ABI Sustaining: The National Center for Genome Analysis Support
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Philip Blood, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2018
* USD 132,867.00

The study of genomes is a critical and rapidly growing component in
understanding the variability of life, biological functions, population
dynamics, and how organisms respond to external influences. Genomics has
qualitatively improved our ability to investigate biological dynamics and to
make important discoveries that are the foundations for understanding topics
such as environmental change, developing and protecting crops, and improving
health outcomes. Genome analysis, however, is a significant challenge for the
practicing biologist. Most biologists who need to undertake genome science are
not sufficiently expert in the relevant analytical tools, or understand the
complex workflows required to get from the initial data generated by sequencers
to a biologically meaningful analyzed result. In addition, few have access to
the supercomputing resources and large-scale storage required for processing and
managing genomics data. The National Center for Genome Analysis Support (NCGAS)
addresses these challenges by providing an integrated service comprised of
expert consulting and educational services, hardened and optimized software
available through easy to use web-based workflow management tools, large memory
supercomputers, and large scale data storage and publishing facilities. These
resources are particularly useful for researchers from smaller, and minority
serving, institutions that typically do not have access to the required
expertise and cyberinfrastructure, yet whose investigations are equally
important. Since its inception in 2011, the NCGAS has supported over 80 research
projects representing over $61M in funded research. It engaged in 51 training
events that served 691 individuals, of which 241 were from traditionally
underserved populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NCGAS (http://ncgas.org) was
established in 2011 through a National Science Foundation ABI development award
to help the national research community complete genomics research that requires
data management and computational infrastructures at scale. NCGAS is a
partnership among the Indiana University Pervasive Technology Institute, the
Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, the Texas Advanced Computing Center, and the
San Diego Supercomputing Center. It meets the technology challenges of modern
genome science by providing excellent bioinformatics consulting services for
genome analysis, particularly genome and transcriptome assembly, including
research design, data analysis and visualization. It optimizes, supports, and
delivers genome analysis software on national supercomputing systems such as
those funded by the NSF eXtreme Digital (XD) program and coordinated by the
eXtreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) and the Open
Science Grid (OSG). The NCGAS maintains and supports easy-to-use gateways,
including Galaxy web portals, for genome analysis workflows that lower barriers
for scientist to create, execute, document, and share genomics analyses. It
distributes software tools for genome analysis to research computing facilities
and the general research community so that IT managers can more easily install
these tools on their systems. It provides long-term archival storage services.
The NCGAS provides a digital library resource for the dissemination of data
sets, publications, reports, or collections of files that will allow research to
be visible and data to be re-used for decades to come. It delivers education and
outreach programs on genome analysis, interpretation, and data management to
biology faculty and students nationally. These programs will enhance the
technology literacy of practicing scientists and help grow the bioinformatics
workforce. These services are particularly available to smaller institutions
across the country without access to supercomputers, bioinformatics expertise,
or training. The NCGAS will enable breakthroughs that would not be possible
without advanced cyberinfrastructure support.