* 1458290
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Essential Improvements for the Arthur Fungarium at Purdue University
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Mary Aime, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 414,327.00

An award is made to Purdue University to support the 125 year-old Arthur
Fungarium, which houses ca. 110,000 specimens of plant rust fungi and their
hosts. Holdings span more than 250 years and 171 countries and include more than
4,000 type specimens. The collection includes specimens collected during the
first around the world voyage of Captain James Cook, as well as specimens
collected by famed American scientist George Washington Carver. This project
will assist with repatriation of 25,000 recently returned specimens and provide
long-term collection security. The project will provide curatorial support for
reorganization and damage assessment of the collection, as well as internship
opportunities for students interested in herbarium/curatorial/museum sciences.
In addition, societal benefits include workshops, exhibits, and improved digital
data access for scientists, educators, students, and members of the general
public to this important resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
perform critical improvements for the Arthur Fungarium (PUR), which after an 18
year lapse in curatorial activity, is now being revitalized through
reinvestments by the Department of Botany and Plant Pathology at Purdue
University. The Arthur Fungarium is unique as a global resource, and this
project will help to return it to its former status as the premier institution
in the world for the study of rust fungi (Pucciniales) and their host plants.
Not only are the data and specimens at PUR of importance for the study of rust
fungi, but they are doubly valuable in that they also preserve material and data
for all host specimens (across the breadth of vascular plants), further
broadening the use and impact of this collection. This project will address an
urgent need for reorganization of the collections within the Arthur, both in
keeping with new taxonomic principles, but especially to safeguard and
accommodate ca. 25,000 recently repatriated specimens. Specific goals include
performing a curatorial upgrade, including repairs and reorganization of the
collections; safeguarding, databasing, and reintegrating the repatriated
material; complete barcoding and databasing of the entire holdings of PUR
(including capture of host data); and increasing public and scientific awareness
of the Arthur Fungarium collection. All data resulting from this project will be
shared with iDigBio (https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring accessibility to
researchers and the public.