* 1458941
* CYCLING OF DISSOLVED ORGANIC MATTER IN THE PACIFIC AND ATLANTIC OCEANS USING RADIOCARBON
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Ellen Druffel, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2019
* USD 640,119.00

Dissolved organic carbon is the largest pool of carbon in the ocean, comparable
to the total carbon content in the atmosphere. Radiocarbon, a radioactive
isotope of carbon, can provide information on the source and timescale of carbon
cycling in the environment. Therefore, knowing the carbon isotopic signatures of
dissolved organic carbon is important for understanding the biogeochemistry and
dynamics of dissolved organic carbon cycling, and is essential for the carbon
cycle modeling community. The main objective of this research is to determine
the radiocarbon values of dissolved organic carbon in seawater samples from
areas in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans for which little or no data is
available to provide much needed, quantitative information on the timescale of
dissolved organic carbon cycling in the ocean. Atmospheric carbon will end up in
the ocean, and it is critical to improve our understanding of the processes that
influence its long-term storage in the deep sea. Results of this research will
be made available for use in models that assess present and future
concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide and its impact on ocean
biogeochemistry. This research will also support the work of one graduate
student and two undergraduate students and provide hands-on experience that will
prepare them for careers as scientists and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
average radiocarbon (14C) age of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the deep
ocean ranges from 4000 to 6500 years. Previous research indicates that DOC 14C
in the deep South Pacific is equal to that in the deep North Pacific, suggesting
that there is a sink for labile DOC in the subtropical South Pacific, In
addition, findings suggest that the content of post-bomb DOC has decreased in
Sargasso Sea waters on decadal timescales. These findings indicate that
processes other than water mass circulation controls DOC 14C in the deep sea. In
this study, a researcher from the University of California, Irvine, will use
seawater samples from the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans to test two hypotheses:
(1) Radiocarbon of bulk DOC is similar at all latitudes of the deep Pacific
basin, and values are higher in the Southern Ocean, suggesting the dual
governance of DOC aging, remineralization, and young DOC injection concomitant
with deep ocean circulation; (2) Deep DOC radiocarbon values in the North
Atlantic Ocean reflect the presence of variable amounts of post-bomb carbon. To
test these hypotheses, seawater samples will be analyzed for DOC isotopic
signatures in profiles from Pacific and Atlantic Oceans to establish a
quantitative understanding of the timescale of DOC cycling in the ocean. This
study addresses fundamental gaps in knowledge of the global carbon cycle and the
dynamic nature of DOC in the ocean.