* 1458644
* A Scholarship Project to Increase the Recruitment and Retention of Students in the Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Istvan Urcuyo, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 605,609.00

This project will award scholarships to 26 students, in three cohorts, in the
following STEM disciplines: Biology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Mathematics, and Physics. In its selection, the
college will take heightened interest in academically-promising underrepresented
minority and first-generation students with financial need. By carefully
targeting recruitment efforts and providing mentoring during the first two years
at college, the project will create a constructive environment to nurture
students in order to increase retention and persistence in their chosen STEM
majors. The project will increase the number of talented STEM majors with the
potential to contribute to the advancement of knowledge in a broad range of
scientific endeavors, and will train a diverse group of students for eventual
employment in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to successfully retain
students, the project will include a recruitment plan that integrates
individualized outreach to students identified in collaboration with Community
Based Organizations, enrollment in an exclusive First-Year Seminar taught by
STEM faculty, STEM Faculty Liaisons in each of the science departments serving
as academic advisors, mentors, and facilitators, and a variety of on- and off-
campus learning activities. The project's objectives during the Scholars' first
year are: (1) to prepare and support the S-STEM Scholars for a successful
undergraduate career, (2) to provide continuing practice for the skills
necessary for STEM, and (3) to build and nurture a sense of community among the
S-STEM Scholar cohorts. During their sophomore year, each S-STEM Scholar will
continue to be closely mentored by their STEM Faculty Liaison advisor, who will
support and encourage their participation in various STEM opportunities
including faculty-student research, peer-mentoring, colloquia, preferential
residence in Gettysburg College's Science House as well as work-related
internship opportunities with institutional industry partners. Assessment of the
efficacy of these different activities will help contribute to expanding the
knowledge base regarding the circumstances under which scholarship projects of
this type are successful.