* 1458766
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation:Large-scale Analysis of the Evolution of Organellar Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Srinivas Chennubhotla, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 768,834.00

This project will design and implement a high-throughput, large-scale
computational pipeline to identify and track changes in organellar shape,
quantity, and spatial distribution over large sequences of Z-stack microscope
images and digital videos, and provide a causal and/or non-causal interaction
map of how the subcellular structures evolve individually and as a group. Two
well-studied intracellular bacterial pathogens, Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)
and Legionella pneumophila (Lp), known to induce dramatic organellar changes in
host cells they infect, will be used to test the framework. Accurately
characterizing the spatio-temporal evolution of the organellar changes in a
large collection of time-lapse videos from different genetic mutants and
controls will provide significant insight into the host response as a function
of the specific stimulus. This can have a positive impact on large-scale
genotype-phenotype association studies and the efficient screening of large
genomic libraries. The analytical framework will be implemented using open
source tools and integrated with standard tools available to the imaging
community, thus increasing the accessibility of these tools and the transparency
of the analysis. Open source development will facilitate enrichment of
undergraduate education, through synergies with an NSF and Department of Defense
funded REU program, TECBio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of isolating and
tracking spatiotemporal changes in individual organelles is extremely
challenging, subject to significant sources of noise and variability under many
possible conditions. This project relies on a novel approach of considering
subcellular components as vertices in a social network. Ensembles of cellular
machinery will be characterized as networks to study organellar response to
stimuli within the framework of interconnected elements whose collective
behavior influence local and global social network topologies. The team will
develop spectral graph analytics to characterize global network evolution and
identify local dynamics, thus providing powerful algorithmic tools for isolating
cohesive regions of subcellular evolution. This framework will be designed from
the ground up to be highly scalable, capable of processing arbitrary amounts of
high-resolution 4D confocal microscopy image data. Open-source, distributed
software for "big data" analysis, such as Apache Spark and Hadoop, will be used
to build the framework. The framework will be developed and released under an
open source license, providing biology researchers with a powerful tool for
performing large-scale spatiotemporal condition-response studies. The results of
this study will be disseminated from: http://www.csb.pitt.edu/faculty/chakra/.