* 1458118
* The Computer Science Academic, Retention, and Enrichment Program (CARE)
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Lisa Frye, Kutztown University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2020
* USD 614,375.00

The Computer Science Academic, Retention, and Enrichment (CARE) program at
Kutztown University will address a common challenge in computer science
programs, namely creating a student body that is representative of the general
population. The CARE program will recruit highly capable academically talented
students who have financial need, and will provide academic support and
resources to retain and graduate these students. Extra-curricular activities
will encourage skill development that will prepare students for their
profession, and will create a culture that is more welcoming to a diverse
community of students. The project will generate evidence regarding what
actually attracts and retains students in computer science, which can then be
used by other programs to address the challenge of attracting and retaining
woman and underrepresented groups to computer science.

The CARE will provide an opportunity to study how to recruit more academically
talented students, including underrepresented students, into computer science,
how to help them persist, and how to graduate them as competent and confident
professionals. The primary focus will be on retention and graduation, which will
be supported by building a sense of community among scholarship recipients. The
program will be structured to include "High Impact Educational Activities,"
expanding existing student supports, such as the Computer Science learning
community, and building upon outreach activities for high school students.
Students will receive advising, mentoring, tutoring, supplemental instruction,
internship and externship opportunities, and research opportunities. The lessons
learned from the curricular and co-curricular activities will be of value to
other STEM disciplines, especially those with little diversity.