* 1458847
* Energy Systems Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Lawrence Beaty, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2020
* USD 612,375.00

The overall goal of the Idaho State University's Energy Systems Scholars (ESS)
project will be to recruit, retain, and graduate 35 academically promising
students and place these graduates in high skill/high wage jobs in energy and
related fields. The project will serve students with significant financial need
from Idaho and surrounding states. This scholarship initiative will be managed
by the Energy Systems Technology and Education Center (ESTEC), a provider of
energy education that prepares individuals for careers as technologists. ESTEC
received an ATE project award in 2007 that helped to launch the energy education
center, which operates in close collaboration with the Idaho National
Laboratory. ESS is an initiative that will broaden the participation of students
in two-year energy systems programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key support services
for ESS participants will be: 1) 1-1 faculty mentoring for scholars; 2) a
Personal Effectiveness Program; 3) ENERGIZE ESS group meetings to address
academic and professional issues/opportunities; 4) 1-1 matching of scholars with
ESTEC alumni using a distance mentoring system; 5) expanded work experience
opportunities; 6) supported energy conference attendance; 7) participation in an
enterprise development seminar; and 8) career placement assistance. The project
will increase the visibility and influence of S-STEM graduates seeking energy-
related careers. The ESS program will focus on increasing the average
mathematics strength of ESTEC students and expanding the number of ESTEC
graduates from surrounding states. Efforts to recruit underrepresented
populations to STEM-related energy systems programs will create more role models
and mentors, and will help to increase the diversity of the energy workforce.
ESTEC industry advisory council will help disseminate the results of the
project. Content will be placed in STEM education and related journals,
websites, blogs, and social media. Formative and summative evaluation efforts
will identify key challenges, lessons learned, and promising practices that will
serve to enlarge the knowledge base regarding the attributes of successful
scholarship programs that are tied to regional industry needs.