* 1458286
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Informality and Flexibility in Loan Networks and Debt Dispute Resolution
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Samil Can, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 12,095.00

It was once the widely held belief among practitioners of economic development
that economic growth was frequently hindered by the existence of traditional
cultural practices and attachments, which could prevent the emergence of more
formal institutions. That position is no longer so widely held, as several
decades of globalization have produced ample evidence of culturally blended
patterns in instances of robust economic development, as informal economic
structures have developed with local cultural notions of fairness, flexibility,
risk and trust. As a result, informality is now celebrated as a model of
flexible economic growth and practitioners are increasingly encouraged to adopt
parameters reflecting the diversity of economic development strategies.
Scientists remain challenged, however, as to how to identify and model the
pathways through which informality and flexibility benefit economic growth. This
project, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct rigorous,
empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, will explore the ways in which
informality, as a fundamental cultural pattern of this new flexible economy,
influences existing economic structures and the propensities for economic
growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Samil Can, under the supervision of Thomas Hansen
of Stanford University, will explore debt relations and dispute resolutions by
tracing loan networks and practices of resolving debt disputes. The research
will be conducted in Delhi, India, a commercial center in one of the world's
most important and largest emerging economies. Based on preliminary research,
the researcher holds that India has diverse moral and religious notions of
exchange, credit, obligation and authority working to maintain informal and
flexible economic structures. Based on this claim, the project whether and how
these moral and religious notions socio-culturally undertake and diversify the
roles fulfilled by the state, the banking system, and the regulations in an
idealized formal economic model. The project investigates how Muslim traders,
shopkeepers, warehouse suppliers, and retailers establish social networks to
find debts and resolve debt disputes using formal and informal authorities (e.g.
religious leaders, elders, court system, and police). Preliminary data suggests
Muslims of Old Delhi heavily rely on religious and moral notions in their
transactions, but also maintain access to other local and transnational economic
networks. Therefore, this project seeks to provide generalizable insights on how
flexible economic growth relies on various and ever-changing cultural notions.
The project will utilize ethnographic methods (participant observation of
carefully selected informants, in-depth interviews, oral histories) and spatial
research methodologies (social network analysis, socio-spatial mapping) in order
to document how these cultural economic transaction patterns among Muslims in
Delhi relate to the larger informal economy of Delhi. The findings will
significantly inform academic and intellectual debates over "flexible economic
growth" by outlining its everyday practical implications and exploring the ways
in which debt obligation is culturally framed. It will contribute significantly
to a pressing global debate on the concept of "debt" among anthropologists,
economists, political scientists, and a wide range of non-academic policy-
makers. Amidst recent debates on the authority and legitimacy of creditors and
debt-giving agents, the study on cultural frames of new local and global
economic patterns shall also provide vital intellectual and practical insights
on how current initiatives to restructure debt in financial markets should be
formulated in relation to informality.