* 1458108
* Integration of Two Large Orphaned Lichen Collections into the Oregon State University Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Joseph Spatafora, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2019
* USD 499,945.00

The Oregon State University (OSU) Herbarium is a major regional collection of
approximately 425,000 specimens of plants and fungi. It is an actively growing
and heavily utilized research herbarium, and is the primary resource for the
documentation and study of Oregon's diverse plants and fungi. This project will
enable the addition of approximately 220,000 lichen specimens permanently
transferred from the USDA Forest Service (USFS). These specimens were collected
as part of the USFS Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) and Air Resource
Management programs. They comprise a unique and voluminous source of data and
specimens not available in regular herbarium collections. The extensive, fine-
grained sampling framework for the FIA program provides an exceptional basis for
species distribution modeling, phylogeography, and measuring biological
responses to environmental change. The need to secure these specimens is urgent
because they are currently housed in non-archival conditions and are
inaccessible to researchers. Incorporating the USFS specimens into the OSU
Herbarium will protect them for the future by virtue of OSU's commitment to
long-term preservation and use of biological collections. In addition, a popular
educational resource developed at OSU for learning about lichens
(http://ocid.nacse.org/lichenland) will be revitalized and enhanced as part of
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accommodate the USFS lichen collections,
54 steel herbarium cases will be added to the OSU Herbarium. The lichen specimen
labels will be photographed in order to capture information that is not
maintained in the FIA and Air Resource Management electronic databases. The
specimens will then be repackaged in archival materials, organized
taxonomically, and integrated into the OSU Herbarium. Specimen label data and
images will be made available online via the Consortium of Pacific Northwest
Herbaria (http://www.pnwherbaria.org) which is based at the University of
Washington Herbarium, Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture, and with the
digitization HUB iDigBio. More information about the OSU Herbarium and this
project is available at: http://oregonstate.edu/dept/botany/herbarium.