* 1458712
* Liberal Arts Science Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Judith Nagel-Myers, Saint Lawrence University
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 03/31/2020
* USD 618,524.00

There is an established need in the United States to increase the number of
American scientists in the workforce. The NSF Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at St. Lawrence
University (SLU) will address this need and contribute to the national effort to
produce more STEM graduates by providing financial, academic, networking, and
personal support to twenty (20) (two cohorts of ten each) academically-talented
and financially needy students with majors in chemistry, computer science,
geology, mathematics, physics, statistics, or a non-clinical track of biology at
SLU. Students will be recruited into the program in their first-year, and can
remain eligible for scholarships through their senior year. The investigators
will pursue a promising approach towards recruiting, retaining, and graduating
STEM majors with baccalaureate degrees by nurturing their interests and
scholarly activities in the sciences, establishing a close and caring network of
faculty and peer mentors, and creating enhanced educational opportunities.
Special attention will be given to underrepresented groups, including women and
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of SLU's Liberal Arts Science (LAS)
Scholars Program include: (i) increasing the numbers and percentage of SLU
students from underrepresented groups who attain STEM degrees, and strengthening
SLU academic support services for low-income and underrepresented students in
STEM in the process; (ii) helping the Scholars find and develop their identities
as scientists; (iii) creating and correlating a strong network of faculty and
peer mentors and support services to help Scholars persist in the critical first
two years of undergraduate study; (iv) building a strong sense of community
among the Scholars through regular cohort-centered activities; (v) promoting and
facilitating an appreciation and understanding of the interdisciplinary nature
of STEM fields; (vi) introducing SLU's S-STEM Scholars to research, real world
problem solving, and other enhanced educational opportunities; and (vi) exposing
the students to a variety of careers in STEM fields as well as assisting them in
transitioning from SLU to a STEM graduate program or career. To meet the goals
of the project, the Scholars Program investigators will implement several
interesting and innovative strategies, which include but are not limited to: (a)
a unique orientation experience, "STEM in the Adirondacks," for incoming
Scholars; (b) a new first semester course on scientific discovery, complementary
cohort courses, and a second semester seminar on statistical reasoning; (c) peer
and faculty mentoring; (d) skill-building, professional development workshops,
and workshops and seminars to expose students to a variety of careers; and (e)
cohort-building activities and enhanced education opportunities to engage
participants. These initiatives will work in concert with existing and
strengthened support services at SLU. The investigators will research and assess
the effectiveness of the various components of the project, considered
individually and working in combination with each other. Their findings will add
to the overall knowledge base of STEM education and will create a national model
leading to productive student intervention strategies, especially related to
understanding and improving successes of underrepresented and/or low income
students, thereby broadening participation by expanding diversity in STEM fields
that can be shared with other institutions, especially at liberal arts colleges.
Program partners will help enhance student engagement in research and other
endeavors. These partners include Clarkson University, the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation, and the Cornell Cooperative Extension
of St. Lawrence County.