* 1458978
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mapping Socioeconomic Vulnerabilities to Coastal Hazards
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Marguerite Madden, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 03/31/2017
* USD 15,998.00

Research has shown that socioeconomic status affects a population's
vulnerability to environmental hazards, yet little scholarship exists regarding
how such groups understand their own vulnerability to coastal hazards. This
doctoral dissertation research project will investigate how a diverse populace
understands and visualizes coastal hazards and how these understandings align
with depictions of their vulnerability as represented by U.S. Census data. The
project will provide new insights on how socioeconomic status affects
participation and resource allocation for coastal hazard adaptation and
mitigation projects. It will expand hazards theory to include elements of
critical race theory and bring to bear the political ecology concepts of
marginalization and facilitation. The doctoral student will work closely with
several local organizations, state agencies, and nongovernmental organizations
to enable findings to help guide policy makers in mitigating social
vulnerability via adaptation planning projects. Project findings also will
assist resource planners in their long-term management of coastal resources. As
a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.

Using a mixed methods approach, the doctoral student will analyze inequalities
in social vulnerabilities to environmental hazards. The project will address two
core questions: (1) What populations are vulnerable to hazards along the coast
of Georgia? (2) How do these populations conceptualize and understand these
hazards? Census-based modeling methods such as the Social Vulnerability Index
(SoVI) will be used to identify and map vulnerable populations and their
exposure to multiple coastal hazards. Furthermore, the student will investigate
alternative understandings and conceptions about vulnerability through semi-
structured interviews, participant observation, and sketch-mapping of livelihood
use spaces across a diverse population. The analyses will inform policy makers
and planners about existing inequities in vulnerabilities and provide guidance
regarding policies that would minimize the impacts on marginalized or
underrepresented populations.