* 1458617
* Advancing Indiana Math and Science
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2015,05/31/2022
* Bhaskara Kopparty, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 05/31/2022
* USD 618,311.00

During the course of this project Indiana University (IU)-Northwest will provide
scholarship and educational support to 26 academically talented students,
financially disadvantaged students, pursuing Bachelor of Science degrees in the
disciplines of biology, chemistry, computer information systems, geosciences,
and mathematics. Students will be drawn from two groups: 1) two-thirds of the
scholars will be freshmen recruits from local high schools with high average SAT
and ACT scores who are in a Dual Credit/Early College attendance program; and 2)
the balance of the scholars will be transfer students from area community
colleges in Indiana and neighboring Illinois. In addition to receiving financial
support, students will also have internship opportunities with area industrial,
government, and non-profit entities, thus helping to answer local and regional
STEM workforce needs. The university administration and local and regional
business communities have indicated strong support for sustaining the program
beyond the term of this grant funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the provision
of financial assistance, the project's principal activities will be guided by
four objectives: effective recruitment; support for high academic performance;
persistence and retention in the major; and excellent preparation for jobs or
graduate school. To this end the project will initiate Seminars toward Effective
Placements (STEM STEPS) to help students advance through their selected program
at the highest possible academic level using a combination of cohort style
activities, remediation as appropriate, workshops, and peer-led instructional
and leadership opportunities. Each year specific classes will be designated as
cohort classes (though open to all students) to provide a common educational
experience for the scholarship recipients and to build upon the camaraderie
established during STEM STEPS. Each cohort will become the peer leaders for the
next cohort group, thus providing a continuing cycle of academic and social
support during each year of the program. Evaluation of the project will be
conducted by an experienced evaluator with a first-hand understanding of
academic programs on a regional urban commuter campus. Direct measures of
student outcomes will include student performance in STEM courses on various
assignments and tests that are related to student learning outcomes as stated on
the course syllabi. Evaluation will also examine the results of involvement in
internship and faculty mentoring and research activities. The scholarship
recipients will form an experimental group whose outcomes will be compared to
those of a matched group of students who do not participate in the activities
provided through this project. Indirect measures of program success will include
anonymous surveys, interviews, and focus groups with students and other
stakeholders. Findings will help to advance understanding of what program
activities work and the conditions and circumstances under which they work, to
improve the success and persistence in STEM learning of the scholarship
recipients. As appropriate, student research results from faculty mentored
research will be presented at discipline specific scientific meetings at the
local, regional, or national level. In addition findings of the program
evaluation will be disseminated to the larger scientific community through
broadly attended venues such as the annual meeting of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science.