* 1458165
* Advancing Science and Technology in Eastern Oregon
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2022
* Shaun Cain, Eastern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 06/30/2022
* USD 597,223.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Eastern Oregon University (EOU)
will provide scholarships and support services to academically-talented students
majoring in biology, chemistry-biochemistry, computer science, and mathematics
who demonstrate financial need. EOU is a 4-year, public institution serving
economically and technologically disadvantaged rural communities across Oregon.
Thus, the project will recruit potential scholarship recipients via visits to
local high schools and community colleges, as well as community outreach to
other Pacific Northwest regions and events that bring prospective students and
parents to the EOU campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the Advancing
Science and Technology in Eastern Oregon (ASTEO) S-STEM project are to (a)
increase the enrollment of academically talented students with financial need in
STEM majors; (b) increase retention and graduation rates, while reducing time to
graduation, for ASTEO scholars relative to similar populations within the
university; (c) increase the number and diversity of STEM graduates from EOU who
enter and remain in the STEM workforce or enter graduate school in a STEM
discipline; and (d) contribute to regional economic development by preparing
well educated graduates who enter STEM-related professions. The program will
support a total of 23 students, including 11 incoming freshmen (four-year
awards) and 12 transfer students (two-year awards). Key elements of the program
will include opportunities for residential students to live together; a freshman
seminar; academic support services; faculty and peer mentoring; high-quality
enrichment activities; opportunities for research and internships; and a STEM
Ambassadors program, in which more senior ASTEO scholars serve as peer tutors
and participate in recruiting, mentoring, and networking for the S-STEM project.
Evaluation of the success of the project will inform institutional practices for
recruiting, design of first-year courses, and student enrichment and academic
support services.