* 1458034
* An integrative approach to quantifying the response of ecological assemblages to anthropogenic stressors
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Benjamin Baiser, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2020
* USD 896,107.00

Ecological stressors such as deforestation, climate change, habitat
fragmentation, and invasive species are pervasive throughout the world and can
be driven in part by human (anthropogenic) activity. The ability to detect and
quantify the impact of these stressors on species communities is critical for
maintaining and managing biodiversity and the health of ecosystems. The
assessment of anthropogenic impacts on these species communities, however, is a
challenging problem given the multivariate nature and multiple facets of
biodiversity data. Species differ not only in their taxonomic identities but
also in their abundances, evolutionary history, and their role and function in
ecosystems. Predicting and understanding how species communities are altered by
anthropogenic change and how novel communities function is key to sustaining
biodiversity and ecosystem function. This project aims to develop a
computational approach for quantifying anthropogenic impacts on ecosystems. The
application of these tools to pressing ecological questions will generate much
needed information regarding how biological communities are responding to
multiple globally important anthropogenic stressors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop new computational methods that integrate multiple
sources of biodiversity information to delineate constituent units within
species assemblages (defined from here onwards as component communities) and
quantify the impact of anthropogenic stressors. The project has two specific
aims. The first is to integrate phylogenetic information with species
interaction and composition data to identify component communities within
ecological assemblages in heterogeneous biodiversity data. The second is to
apply these integrative methods to diverse datasets to characterize the changes
in composition of ecological assemblages based on responses of these component
communities to anthropogenic stressors. For more information on this project
visit the PI's lab page at http://denisvalle.weebly.com/.