* 1458514
* Geoscience Scholarships to Improve Recruitment and Retention of Academically Talented Students
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Benjamin Laabs, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 03/31/2021
* USD 639,136.00

This project at SUNY Geneseo will address the national need for more and better
trained geoscientists by increasing recruitment, retention to graduation, and
preparation for and placement in careers or geosciences graduate programs and by
combining scholarships and academic and career services. Through many student
support and enrichment activities, this project will enhance interactions
between SUNY Geneseo and academic institutions including SUNY Buffalo and SUNY
Binghamton where many new geosciences graduates from the college pursue M.S. or
Ph.D. degrees. In addition, connections to regional geosciences industries,
including the American Rock Salt Company and Stell Environmental Enterprises, as
well as government and academic research programs such as NASA, DOE, and a
variety of National Laboratory and Research Experience for Undergraduates
programs, will be strengthened through the development of opportunities for
student research and internships. Together, these improvements will increase the
number and quality of research opportunities for undergraduate geosciences
students, increase opportunities for students to participate and present at
professional and scholarly conferences, and address the national need to
increase the number of geosciences students to fill jobs in oil and gas,
environmental service, and mining industries.

The project will target students majoring in geology, geochemistry, and
geophysics at SUNY Geneseo and is designed to meet three objectives: (1)
increase recruitment and enrollment of academically talented students with
financial need by at least 20%, (2) enhance retention and graduation within four
years by at least 10%, and (3) increase placement in a geosciences or related
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) career or graduate
program by 13%. The project leadership will work with the Office of Admissions
and twenty alumni who are geoscience teachers at high schools in western New
York to recruit academically talented scholars with financial need to the
program. Cohorts of scholars will be brought together by (a) taking the same
classes, (b) engaging in supplemental instruction programs, (c) participating in
field trips, (d) interacting with graduate students and alumni, and (v) engaging
in research and/or internships. The program goals will be accomplished through
two primary components: (i) enhanced student support programs, and (ii)
experiential learning opportunities. Career placement-related program components
will be supplemented with support from the Office of Career Development. The
scholarship program will allow SUNY Geneseo to implement and assess support
services for geosciences students, including Supplemental Instruction (SI),
Workshops with Graduate Students, a Geology Alumni-Student Program, field trips,
research experiences, and internships. SI is a proven method to increase
retention and graduation rates in many STEM disciplines; however, the
effectiveness of SI has not been tested in the geosciences. This program will
fill that void and provide insight into best practices and effective measures
for promoting retention, graduation, and placement in the geosciences.