* 1458294
* Manhattan College Engineering Scholarship Initiative (MCESI)
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Anirban De, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 10/31/2020
* USD 589,296.00

The Manhattan College Engineering Scholarship Initiative will provide
scholarships to a total of twelve (six in each of two cohorts) academically
qualified and financially needy students to pursue accredited four-year
undergraduate degree programs in Civil and Mechanical Engineering. Nationwide,
there is a need to increase the numbers of students in the field of engineering
especially from women and minority groups. Manhattan College recognizes this
need and is committed to helping diversify the engineering workforce and produce
opportunities for students with financial needs. The students will be selected
from existing summer outreach programs at Manhattan College. These programs,
some running continuously for over 30 years, specifically encourage high school
students who are either female and/or considered underrepresented minorities and
most of whom reside in low-income neighborhoods and qualify for financial aid.
The selection process will ensure that the program will attract qualified women
and underrepresented minority students with documented financial
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will be selected to meet academic
eligibility criteria and support activities and programs will be instituted to
ensure student retention and success. The support system will include
preparatory and annual workshops, living-learning communities, and mentorship
(peer, professional, and academic). The proposed project will interact with the
ACE (Architecture, Construction, and Engineering) Mentorship Program, where the
scholarship students will have the opportunity to serve as junior mentors to
high school students, while they themselves concurrently receive professional
mentorship from industry leaders. Optional activities, such as study-abroad
program and undergraduate research, will enrich the students' college experience
and inspire them to consider pursuing graduate degrees, in addition to careers
in engineering industry. A strong external-evaluation program will inquire into
the effects of individual co-curricular and extra-curricular activities on
student retention and eventual success of each student, by comparing scholarship
students with a comparable general student population. The benefits and
challenges of each activity will be enumerated, along with resources required in
each case. The results of this part of the study will help educators and
administrators identify activities where they may utilize their resources most
efficiently.