* 1458015
* Scholarships to Support STEM majors Computational Sciences Minors
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2021
* Dawne Page, Point Loma Nazarene College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 576,750.00

This proposal will award scholarships to academically talented Biology,
Chemistry, and Physics majors interested in careers and graduate education, who
also demonstrate financial need. The scholarship recipients will form a cohort
of students who undertake pursuit of a Computational Science minor that will
expose them to computational techniques relevant to their major field of study.
New and existing support structures will be used to ensure the success of each
scholar. Key academic features of this project will include opportunities for
participation in undergraduate research, conference presentations and/or
publications on this research, and a senior capstone interdisciplinary project
in computational science. Talented STEM graduates with a background in
computational sciences will help U.S. industries by contributing to a workforce
able to compete and innovate in a global economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
has shown that a computational science curriculum can benefit STEM students in a
variety of ways including (a) expanding employment options for those who enter
college loving science without knowing how they will use the degree when they
graduate, (b) providing them with a compelling context in which to learn
mathematical and computing concepts thereby, aiding retention, and (c) requiring
them to work in interdisciplinary teams and subsequently learn how to
communicate science more effectively. Formative and summative evaluation will
consist of comparisons of S-STEM participant retention rates and satisfaction
with students in the STEM Honors Program and the general STEM population at
PLNU. Dissemination of the results of evaluation and information about the
project in general, will be done through a website and national meetings
sponsored by the Special Interest Group for Computer Science Education or the
Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics. The work will also be presented
at Joint Mathematics Meetings (attended by special interest groups on
mathematics in industry and mathematical biology). The results will be submitted
to disciplinary educational journals such as PRIMUS: Problems, Resources, and
Issues in Mathematics Undergraduate Studies, The Journal of Chemical Education,
and Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research.