* 1458759
* Rain-formed Fresh Lenses in SPURS-2
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Andrew Jessup, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 822,486.00

Heat, freshwater and momentum enter the ocean from the atmosphere through the
air-sea interface, and are then dispersed laterally and vertically by dynamical
processes. Knowledge of how surface fluxes of momentum, freshwater and heat
fluxes affect the upper ocean is critical for understanding the exchanges
between the atmosphere and the ocean. In the tropics, heavy rainfall produces
buoyant fresh "lenses" at the sea surface that can modulate upper ocean heat
content, currents, and turbulent kinetic energy dissipation. It is necessary to
understand how these fresh lenses form and decay in order to assess their role
in coupled air-sea processes. This project will examine the impacts of these
rainfall events on the salinity and turbulent kinetic energy dissipation of the
upper ocean. The novel aspects of the research include making simultaneous
measurements of surface and near-surface turbulence in the field, quantifying
the lateral evolution of fresh lenses, and relating rain rate to surface thermal
structure. The experiment will provide new insights into how the surface and
near-surface ocean are linked, which has the potential to improve representation
of coupled air-sea processes in weather and climate models, particularly in the
rainy tropical regions. The broader impacts of the project include increased
public scientific literacy and public engagement with science through hands-on
outreach activities designed to engage both youth and adult members of the
community. The investigators will also mentor a graduate student and three
different undergraduate students, contributing to the development of a globally
competitive STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the
project is to quantify the spatial and temporal evolution of rain-formed
freshwater anomalies in the upper ocean. In particular, the aim is to understand
the relationship between variability at the air-sea interface and variability in
the meter just below the surface. Measurements would be collected during two
field experiments in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean in conjunction with
NASA?s Salinity Processes in the Upper ocean Regional Study (SPURS-2) project.
The components of the proposed experiment are: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)
tracking the horizontal evolution of fresh lenses using a balloon-mounted
infrared (IR) camera system;&lt;br/&gt;(2) applying the "controlled flux
technique", which involves heating a small patch of the sea surface with a
carbon dioxide laser and computing the rate at which the heated patch cools, to
infer near-surface turbulent kinetic energy dissipation;&lt;br/&gt;(3) making in
situ measurements of turbulent dissipation using temperature and conductivity
microstructure probes mounted on a towed surface salinity profiler; and
&lt;br/&gt;(4) observing the structure of sea surface thermal variability during
rain using a high-speed IR camera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements will be
made during the SPURS-2 field experiments, which are expected to take place in
the rainy (summer) season of 2016 and 2017. The observations will be used to
understand the relationship between turbulent dissipation at the air-sea
interface and within the top meter of the ocean; to quantify the role of
different processes in driving the build-up and decay of fresh lenses; to force
and validate a turbulence model in order to assess the impacts of rainfall on
the upper ocean throughout the tropics; and to investigate the relationship
between rain rate and the structure of ocean skin temperature. The results from
the project have the potential to significantly improve our understanding of
near-surface dynamics and hence their representation in coupled models.
Integrating the findings from the project into the General Ocean Turbulence
Model will also lay the foundation for extrapolating the results to other rainy
regions in order to assess the role of rain-formed fresh lenses in air-sea
interaction throughout the tropics.