* 1458913
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Land Trusts, Conservation Easements, and the Growth of Private Land Protection in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* James McCarthy, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2017
* USD 15,446.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will focus on the ways that the
governance, ownership, and financing of protected areas have changed within the
United States since the late 1970s as well as the impact of those changes.
Special emphasis will be placed on the growing use of legal agreements called
conservation easements negotiated with private landowners on private property,
often by non-profit conservation land trusts. The project will contribute new
knowledge about the ways that conservation easements by land trust groups have
altered the geographies and social outcomes of conservation efforts. It will
provide new information about the geographic dimensions of such activity, and it
will enhance basic understanding about evolving forms of environmental
governance and changing forms of property rights. Because the doctoral student
will work closely with a wide range of land trust organizations across the
country as well as umbrella groups that help guide land trust policy making,
project findings will have direct utility by groups and others actively using
this new form of governance to protect environmental quality and private
property rights. Because land trust-related conservation easements have been
adopted in many other nations, project findings should contribute new insights
regarding the recent emergence of large-scale privatized conservation around the
globe as well as other novel forms of the commodification of nature. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.

Non-profit conservation land trusts now protect more than 47 million acres in
the U.S., an area that is more than twice the combined acreage of all the
national parks in the lower 48 states. This total increased by 10 million acres
between 2005 and 2010. The core questions on which the project will focus are
(1) how land trusts emerged as major actors in land conservation in the United
States over the past three decades and (2) what were the consequences of land-
trust activity for property relations, governance, and the financing of
conservation. The doctoral student will employ a three-part qualitative
methodology consisting of expert interviews; a national-scale survey of
U.S.-based land trust groups; extended case studies in San Francisco,
California; Denver, Colorado; and Grand Lake Stream, Maine. Among key issues to
be examined through the case studies are increases in the frequency of legal
challenges to the perpetuity of land trust lands that constitute new risks to
this form of conservation; reliance on federal and state tax credits to
incentivize conservation, which means that government agencies not charged with
oversight of the environment or natural resources like the Internal Revenue
Service have come to play a significant role in defining, governing, and
regulating nature; and the increasing involvement of institutional investors and
private equity firms in collaborations with land trusts, which has led to new
approaches to the commodification of conservation landscapes and new metrics for
measuring success.