* 1458082
* CSBR: Natural History: Curation and Digitization of Significant, Newly Acquired Fish, Amphibian, and Reptile Collections at the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Bryan Stuart, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2019
* USD 499,998.00

Natural history specimen collections play an essential role in science, from
facilitating the discovery of new species to understanding how human activities
impact global biodiversity. The specimens in these collections are associated
with data of interest to researchers, resource managers, educators, and the
general public, such as when and where each specimen was found. Most specimens
are irreplaceable because they represent a population or species at a time and
place in the past. The North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences (NCSM)
recently acquired three significant natural history collections of fishes,
amphibians, and reptiles that date back to the early 1800's. The NCSM will
assimilate these collections to ensure their long-term preservation, and will
curate, catalog, verify species identifications, and digitize the specimens to
improve their research value and accessibility. Through a custom-built web app,
members of the public (citizen scientists) will participate in entering data
into the collection database at NCSM, which helps develop public awareness and
appreciation for the value and importance of natural history collections.

The three-year project will incorporate the newly acquired collections from the
Charleston Museum, Appalachian State University, and the S.W. Ross deep-sea
expeditions (University of North Carolina - Wilmington) into the holdings of the
North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences (NCSM). Due to the precarious
curatorial status and lack of accessible associated data for these three
collections, there is an urgent need to secure their future and provide for
their full utility. Over 57,000 lots will be curated and digitized, making them
research ready and web accessible. Citizen scientists will be recruited to use a
web application with validation mechanisms that provide the transcriber with
real time feedback. This accelerates the goal of incorporating specimen data
into the NCSM collection databases and making the collections globally
accessible. All data resulting from this project will be shared with iDigBio
(https://www.idigbio.org/), ensuring accessibility to researchers and educators.
Additional information about the NCSM Fishes, and Amphibian and Reptiles
databases is available at http://collections.naturalsciences.org.