* 1458721
* Software Engineering Master's Program for Liberal Arts Graduates
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2021
* Linda Laird, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 03/31/2021
* USD 632,002.00

This project plans to increase the number of highly skilled and talented
software engineers in the workplace through scholarships. Stevens Institute of
Technology proposes an 18-month Software Engineering (SwE) Master's Degree
program to accomplish this in conjunction with offering 35 S-STEM scholarships
over a 4 year period. The master's program will consist of 10 required courses,
two electives, a summer bridge program, and a recommended summer internship. The
program will build upon Stevens' nationally ranked career center and strong
connections with local industry. Graduates will be well-qualified to enter the
STEM workforce as software developers, testers, architects, and requirements
engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment of scholarship applicants will
focus on students from liberal arts colleges. These students are often of very
high ability, but find themselves under or un-employed with substantial student
debt. Liberal Arts graduates have a higher percentage of women so that this
program should improve the diversity of the STEM workforce. Recruitment efforts
will include information sessions, mini-courses, and direct advertising to
students and alumni. No formal computing background will be assumed, but
students are expected to have strong quantitative skills. Evaluation data will
be collected during recruitment, while students are applying, and while they are
in the program. The collected recruitment data will focus upon the mini-courses
and will be used to refine the courses. The application data will be collected
by the Stevens' Graduate Admissions Office for both accepted and rejected
students and will include applicant demographics, educational background,
exposure to recruitment efforts, and admission decision. Extensive survey data
will be collected during the two years students are in the program. The success
of the entire program will be evaluated in recruitment, in retention, and in
successfully placing students in long-term careers in software engineering.
Results will be disseminated through conference presentations and journals and
there are plans for a workshop to teach faculty members from other schools how
to replicate the program.