* 1458930
* RISE: Embedded Systems Security via Reverse Engineering and Countermeasures
* EHR,HRD
* 04/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 10/31/2018
* USD 999,450.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) activity within the Centers of Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the development of
research capability at HBCUs that offer doctoral degrees in science and
engineering disciplines. HBCU-RISE projects have a direct connection to the
long-term plans of the host department(s) and the institutional mission, and
plans for expanding institutional research capacity as well as increasing the
production of doctoral students in science and engineering. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Morgan State University will implement
comprehensive strategies designed to transform teaching and learning in an
effort to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in electrical
engineering. The project, designed to address vulnerabilities in cyber security,
will impact a large population of minority students and provide opportunities
for collaboration and career development for faculty. This project has the
potential to contribute significantly to the pool of minority electrical
engineers trained in technology that is vital to the nation's cyber
infrastructure.

The goal of the proposed research project is to enhance the security of cyber-
physical systems while enhancing the research capability of the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering at Morgan State University by: 1) providing
Internet of Things (IoT) device security at the physical layer and
countermeasures to prevent attacks and ensure secure data exchange between IoT
devices; 2) developing Electrical and Computer Engineering faculty research
expertise and increase competitiveness regarding security of IoT devices; 3)
enriching the educational and research experience of students; and 4) increasing
the production of underrepresented minority students with doctoral degrees in
electrical engineering. This project will equip engineering students with
innovative techniques vital for tackling challenges in national
cyberinfrastructure, develop the institution's research and educational capacity
and productivity, and contribute to the institutional transformation. The
project is aligned with the institution's strategic goal of enhancing its status
as a Doctoral Research University.