* 1458311
* CSBR: Natural History: Reconstructing the lost field notes of Royal D. Suttkus using the notes of other collectors in the Royal D. Suttkus Fish Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,310.00

An award is made to Tulane University to reconstruct the field notes of R.D.
Suttkus and associate them with specimens in the fish collection. The collecting
efforts of Suttkus and his collaborators amassed over 6 million specimens that
is recognized as a National Center for Ichthyology Research. The field notes
documenting critical environmental and locality characteristics for collected
specimens were destroyed as a result of flooding by Hurricane Katrina. This
project will facilitate the addition of rich sampling and environmental data, of
the kind Suttkus and his associates recorded in their field notes, with the
specimens housed in the Tulane University fish collection. This will enhance the
value of the collection allowing researchers to use the data to address
important scientific and societal needs such as research on fish species
distribution, habitat conservation, environmental restoration, and species
response to global change. The project will build on the researchers
achievements in student training and broadening participation in collections-
based endeavors.

The R.D. Suttkus Fish collection database at Tulane University, currently hosted
on a Microsoft SQL Server, will be extended to support the additional fields and
tables needed to capture the images and information contained within the field
notes and logbooks. Field logbook and transcribed data sheet images will be
captured using a NIKON Coolpix p90 v.1.0 camera mounted on a copy stand. Each
image will be 4,000 pixels wide by 3,000 pixels wide with a bit depth of 24,
horizontal resolution of 300 dots per inch and vertical resolution of 300 dots
per inch. The RAW image file for each page photographed as well as an
uncompressed TIFF will be preserved. A project technician and a number of
student interns working in the summer will enter data from the field notes to
the fish collection database and produce web content of Suttkus's professional
career for an expanded Suttkus Memorial Website.