* 1458447
* Closing the STEM Divide: Opening Access to STEM Careers.
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Martha Jackson-Carter, Community College of Aurora
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ferrara
* 08/31/2020
* USD 570,000.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at the Community College of Aurora
in Aurora, Colorado will provide scholarships to students enrolled full-time in
STEM disciplines. Twelve scholarships will be offered at the beginning of each
academic year to begin a new cohort of STEM scholars. The program includes
comprehensive support and transition services, with a particular emphasis on
cohort development and support. These activities will increase STEM course
success, program retention, and graduation and four-year transition rates.
Program graduates will contribute to the continued success of the aerospace,
software, and other technology-based industries in the region. Scholarships for
academically strong students, who may not otherwise be able to afford college,
will increase the number of graduates prepared to support national, regional,
and local companies. The success of the program will produce a well-trained
workforce that will contribute to the economic growth of Colorado and the
nation.

Through this S-STEM program the Community College of Aurora (CCA) will conduct a
five-year effort to recruit, support, and graduate students with academic talent
and demonstrated financial need. The program will provide twelve scholarships in
years one and five of the program, and twenty-four in years two, three, and
four. A new cohort of STEM scholars will begin at the start of each academic
year. Scholarships will renew for a second year provided scholars meet academic
targets and other program requirements. CCA will encourage applications from
first generation, women and students from groups currently underrepresented in
STEM professions. Improved retention and increased graduation rates will be
achieved through comprehensive support and transition services, with a
particular emphasis on CCA-based STEM faculty and cohort support. Mentoring will
include regular meetings with an assigned STEM faculty mentor. Learning
community activities organized around cohorts will focus on study and tutoring
needs, guest lectures on STEM careers, visits to STEM companies and four-year
academic programs, and other career development activities. Lessons learned and
effective practices that emerge from the program evaluation will be disseminated
to the STEM education community and help increase widespread understanding of
the attributes and practices of successful student scholarship and support
programs.