* 1459173
* Storm-Driven Near-Inertial Waves and Mixing in the Western North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Ren-Chieh Lien, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,446,349.00

Quantification and understanding of ocean mixing remains one of the most
challenging problems in physical oceanography and ocean climate. The accurate
representation (parameterization) and distribution of mixing in ocean
circulation models is critical to correctly reproduce a wide range of processes
from precipitation in the western equatorial Pacific to the strength of the
meridional overturning cell and biogeochemical cycles. Near-inertial waves are
one of three major sources of deep-ocean mixing. Little is known about their
energy pathways beyond their wind generation and that only 15-25% of the wind-
forced near-inertial wave energy radiates equatorward as low mode waves. These
waves contain half the kinetic energy and most of the vertical shear in the
ocean. About a terawatt of inertial wind power is injected by a few dozen mid-
latitude fall and winter storms. While numerical and observational evidence
points to the bulk of the inertial wind power being lost in the near-field of
storm forcing, dissipating and mixing immediately below the surface layer, there
has been little observational work to investigate this major piece of the
inertial energy budget in detail. As well as determining the fate of wind-forced
near-inertial waves, the proposed work will quantify the climatologically-
important depth dependence of turbulent mixing in the pycnocline. The project
investigators will consult with numerical modelers to how to improve
parameterizations for internal-wave-driven turbulent mixing based on their
observational findings. A graduate student will be trained in data analysis and
interpretation and the project scientists will continue their local public
outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An innovative observational strategy is
proposed to determine the zero-order near-field fate of inertial wind power and
the vertical distribution of upper-ocean mixing following storms. An array of
twelve profiling floats with electro-magnetic current meters and temperature
microstructure sensors will be deployed in the western North Pacific near the
inertial wind power gain maximum for a fall-winter season. Using bi-directional
Iridium communications, dynamic sampling will focus on storm responses. The
instruments will repeatedly profile every three hours between ~ 3 m of the
surface and 500-m depth, collecting roughly five thousand profiles of
temperature, salinity, horizontal velocity and turbulent temperature-variance
dissipation rate. These measurements will provide about fifty independent depth-
time series of the surface mixed-layer and upper pycnocline storm responses
following five to ten fall and winter storms for a random variety of ocean eddy
states. Harmonic fits will separate near-inertial, sub-inertial and higher-
frequency signals. The measurements will quantify where and how near-inertial
shear contributes to turbulence mixing, as well as estimate radiative losses.