* 1459996
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Can We Coexist?  The Enactment of Professional Jurisdiction in Daily Work Life
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Peer Fiss, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2017
* USD 14,999.00

As modern organizations face greater complexity, the degree of specialization
and coordination within organizations also increases. Accordingly, an effect of
complexity is seen in the proliferation of Specialist professionals, and
consequently, Generalists who coordinate Specialists' work. Prior research on
the coordination of specialized work discusses the role of an integrator who
serves to manage the functions of various Specialists. The literature on the
integrator's role views this type of Generalist solely as a manager, and does
not acknowledge the reality that greater complexity often yields overlapping
work domains between Generalist integrators and the Specialists they coordinate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explore this issue, the researchers study how
Generalist and Specialist jurisdictions are established in the daily practice of
work, and the performance outcomes that result from such negotiated work
domains. This research is conducted at a metropolitan children's hospital where
the integrator is represented by a relatively novel, yet prevalent profession:
the Hospitalist, a Generalist physician devoted entirely to the hospital
setting. There are three studies in this project, the first of which involves
collection of ethnographic data to analyze the various factors that contribute
to physician assignment decisions. The second study uses a survey the researcher
administered to physicians in eight different specialties that asks what the
"ideal" physician assignments should be for various diagnoses. The final study
uses statistical analysis of patient data from electronic medical records to
look at the quality and cost outcomes of assigning Hospitalist or Specialist
physicians to treat different types of patient
diagnoses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes several contributions,
including (1) deriving attributes of professionalization at the workplace level
(whereas the vast majority of prior work focuses on the institutional level);
(2) examining professionals' performance outcomes that result from actual versus
ideal jurisdictions; and (3) applying multi-method and multi-level analyses to
study core theoretical problems. Further, this project has broader implications
for healthcare delivery and inpatient care. In particular, an immediate goal of
this study is to enhance workplace processes at the children's hospital where
this research takes place. Beyond the field site, this research seeks to improve
processes that may be affected by physicians' negotiated work domains, such as
the timeliness of treatment decisions, communication among medical
professionals, coordination of care, and monitoring patient outcomes.