* 1459263
* An Establishment-Level View of the Great Depression
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Nicolas Ziebarth, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 11/30/2017
* USD 231,239.00

The Great Depression was the most serious economic crisis in American history
and so has attracted great interest from economists. For good or bad, the
Depression serves as a litmus test for numerous economic policy debates. For
this reason, any contribution to our understanding of this period strengthens
the quality of debate surrounding these issues and will lead to better policy.
Almost all existing studies of the Depression have relied on aggregate data,
leaving economists with an incomplete understanding of the decline and
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is collect two comprehensive sets
of micro-level observations from the Great Depression. The first source is the
Census of Manufactures taken in 1929, 1931, 1933, and 1935. The comprehensive
sample, which would be released publicly, would combine a newly collected set of
industries with previously collected data on particular states and industries.
In total, the sample proposed here will comprise more than 10% of the extant
schedules. A limitation of the Census records is a lack of information on the
financial position of the establishments or their parent companies. Our second
source of data is the records of Dun &amp; Bradstreet (D&amp;B), a major credit
rating agency at the time, which fills that gap. In particular, this source
provides a measure of creditworthiness, similar to modern credit ratings, and an
estimate of the establishment's net worth. The end product of this project will
be a true public good serving as a central resource for economic historians and
macroeconomists studying the Depression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We then plan to
answer some simple though crucial questions regarding the declines in key macro
aggregates, including employment and the price level. We also will link the
owners of the establishments to the population censuses of 1920 and 1930 to
obtain demographic information. This will allow us to study, particularly for
small business owners, what characteristics of the owners themselves helped
predict survival. This will offer insights into the role of credit constraints
in the Depression. Finally, we will use the ability to link the establishments
into their parent companies to study the role of "markets" for resources inside
of the firm. In particular, we will address whether they can act as a substitute
for the malfunctioning external capital markets at the time. For these last two
projects, the D&amp;B records will be crucial in providing information on the
dependence of businesses on external credit.