* 1459811
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Critical Investigation of the Factors that Influence the Collection of Suicide Surveillance Data
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Ashley Hagaman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 24,457.00

Suicide is one of the fastest-growing and least-understood causes of death. The
scientific literature on suicide has long been dominated by the fields of
psychology and sociology. While such insights are important, they are often
rooted in socioeconomically and culturally narrow biomedical frameworks, and
recent research has revealed that the risk profiles for suicide do not hold true
across different social and cultural groups. This project, which trains a
graduate student in how to conduct rigorous, empirically-grounded scientific
fieldwork, explores how cultural understandings of suicide shape the processes
designed to record and study these deaths. The data generated by this research
will be of value to scientists who advise medical and law enforcement officials
about how to resolve disparities between suicide propensities and risk profiles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ashley Hagaman, under the supervision of Dr. Amber Wutich
of Arizona State University, explores how suicide is perceived, categorized and
documented. This research will take place in Nepal, where community reports
speculate suicide to be the leading cause of death for women of reproductive
age. However, national-level data do not corroborate with these findings.
Therefore, suicide may be a much greater problem than nationally aggregated data
suggest. National mortality data are filtered through reporting systems shaped
by social, cultural, legal, and medical institutions. Data collected in Nepal
would be representationally significant in helping understand suicide; more than
60% of the world's suicides occur in Asia. This study seeks to understand how
suicide is perceived, contested, categorized, and documented in institutions
ranging from the local (i.e., family, community) to the professional (i.e.,
medical, law enforcement) in Nepal. To untangle these processes, this research
will investigate the following questions: (1) What are the material, social, and
cultural factors that shape the understanding of suicidal acts in Nepal? (2) How
do actors representing familial, community, legal, and medical institutions
perceive, contest, and negotiate suicide documentation? (3) What accounts for
the convergence or divergence of suicide data in local-level community reports
and higher-level official suicide reports? The research will include a discourse
tracing of suicide definitions, reporting, and documentation in law enforcement,
health, and community institutions. The findings will advance anthropological
and other social scientific theories related to suicide, knowledge production,
and the institutional shaping of local lived experiences.