* 1459007
* NSF-RISE: Enhancement of Research and Educational Infrastructure in Nanobiomaterials Science and Engineering at Tuskegee University
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) activity within the Centers of Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the development of
research capability at HBCUs that offer doctoral degrees in science and
engineering disciplines. HBCU-RISE projects have a direct connection to the
long-term plans of the host department(s) and the institutional mission, and
plans for expanding institutional research capacity as well as increasing the
production of doctoral students in science and engineering. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Tuskegee University (TU) will implement
comprehensive strategies designed to expand TU's research capabilities and using
the research projects to enhance the educational experiences of the students.
The combined research and education efforts are expected to expand the
participation of groups underrepresented in Materials Science and Engineering
and support the nation's efforts in building a robust STEM workforce. This
project has the potential to be a model for increasing the number of minority
students pursuing STEM degree programs and careers and addressing the deficit of
female and minority faculty members in the discipline of Materials Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be carried out in TU's
Department of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) with three components:a)
research in nanobiomaterials from natural waste, b) development of a minor
course for undergraduates in MSE, and c) support the careers of young faculty
members in MSE. The research projects will generate new knowledge about the use
of waste materials to produce sustainable products and address the serious
environmental issue of dealing with waste products by conducting the following:
1) chemical synthesis and analysis, surface studies, processing and performance
evaluation of a variety of nanobiomaterials derived from natural waste; 2)
development of biocompatible and biodegradable polymer scaffolds for biomedical
applications and 3) development of food packaging polymer composite films with
antimicrobial and pathogen resistance. The project will provide start-up funds
for junior faculty members and offer a minor in Materials Science and
Engineering for all STEM undergraduates at TU with the intention of increasing
the pool of students entering the graduate program.