* 1459359
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ecologies of Water Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Maira Hayat, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 12,713.00

Water scarcity has been widely linked to political and economic instability. As
new methods for water extraction, delivery, and management are explored and
implemented, evaluating the efficacy and effectiveness of water governance
structures becomes critical to preventing water stress. This project, which
trains a graduate student in how to conduct rigorous, empirically-grounded
scientific fieldwork, explores how water governance unfolds on the ground,
through formal and informal means, under conditions of increasing resource
scarcity and growing population sizes. The lessons this research produces can be
of value in deepening understanding of similar situations, especially in
economies where agriculture is irrigation-dependent and where water access is
stressed between the demands of a large urban population and the demands of an
extensive irrigation-dependent agricultural sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maira
Hayat, under the supervision of Dr. William Mazzarella of the University of
Chicago, will explore water governance focusing on two locales: the drinking
water market in an urban setting, and the public canal irrigation network in a
village context. The research will take place in Pakistan, home to the world's
largest contiguous irrigation network fed by the river Indus and its
tributaries. Concentrated in the Punjab province, this network has roots in 19th
century colonial policies aiming, in parallel, at increasing tax revenue from
agricultural production, and 'settling' the region by converting the
predominantly nomadic locals to sedentary agriculturalists. This research will
deepen understanding of the relation between law and political economy;
bureaucracies, markets and the intersection of knowledge and value regimes; and
resource governance worldwide. It will contribute to analyses of law and
economic life through charting the relation between economy and sovereignty, and
contemporary water governance. This research will further understanding of the
successes and failures of public irrigation, and enable policymakers to design
better-informed policy, and help make policy less top-down at a time of
extensive water-sector reform in many water-stressed contexts. This research
combines fieldwork, interviews, focus groups, archival research, collection of
oral histories, and legal textual analysis.