* 1459004
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Enterprising Value: Cultural Models of Entrepreneurship in Diverse Economic Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Amber Wutich, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2017
* USD 25,200.00

Entrepreneurship is fundamentally about creating and articulating value through
the identification, evaluation, and exploitation of market-based opportunities.
However, research is needed to understand how this process unfolds and whether
it differs cross-culturally and/or in different economic, political, and social
environments, both within the United States and within the broader global
economy. This study aims to ethnographically investigate how cultural schemas
(i.e. shared ideas of reality and causality) of entrepreneurship differ across
cultures and material environments, with specific attention to the economic,
social, and cultural behaviors used in the process of value creation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in South Africa?s Western
Cape among active entrepreneurs in the Cape Town metropolitan area. This is a
particularly apt research site for two reasons. First, while South Africa is one
of the most robust economies on the African continent, the country still suffers
from high rates of unemployment and inequality due to the lasting effects of the
apartheid regime that ended only 22 years ago. The concept of "high impact
entrepreneurship" to encourage new businesses to alleviate unemployment and
poverty, and address South Africa?s socio-economic problems with market oriented
solutions. Second, the investigators have done research in the region since
2012, and therefore have the local cultural knowledge of the region that is
necessary for ethnographic work, as well as the professional contacts necessary
to leverage the support needed to make significant research impact with a small
amount of funding. Using participant observation and semi-structured interviews
the researchers aim to discover one or more cultural models (i.e., ?schemas?) of
entrepreneurship in the Cape Town metropolitan area, and to understand how these
cultural schemas differ among (1) entrepreneurs who belong to different cultural
groups and (2) entrepreneurs with differing levels of resources and support.
Findings from this research will provide insight into how cultural models and
understandings of entrepreneurship vary across different cultural environments,
and how this may impact human understandings of value.