* 1459220
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Crystallizing Value: Mining and Market Making
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Josef Wieland, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2016
* USD 25,200.00

This project investigates how material objects, which may or may not have
practical utility, come to have commercial value as commodities. To highlight
the processes involved, the researcher will focus on an object whose
significance has changed over time. This will clarify which features are
inherent in the object and which are added through marketing and consumer
cultures. Quartz crystals mined in Brazil were once marketed to the United
States for their piezoelectric properties and highly valued for their use in
World War Two military radio equipment. Over the past 70 years, the quartz
market has shifted from producing for the military to producing for semiprecious
gemstone markets. The research asks how this transformation in meaning has come
about and what causative factors and agents are involved. Findings from this
research will have relevance to multiple commodities that are traded
internationally as well as to the general theoretical question of how value is
created and sustained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by
University of California, Irvine, doctoral student Josef Wieland, who is
supervised by Dr. William M. Maurer. Wieland will base his study in the mineral-
rich state of Minas Gerais, Brazil, the epicenter of Brazil's mining industries.
This is an appropriate research setting given that this region has remained the
world's largest producer of many strategic mineral resources for nearly 100
years. The investigator's goal is to determine what factors in Brazil and the
United States generate what types of economic, cultural, and social value in the
commodity networks, and how these factors affect global quartz markets more
broadly. To measure value transformation the researcher will track quartz as it
passes from mines to consumers. He will conduct interviews with the producers,
processors, wholesalers, trade show venders, and consumers who comprise the
quartz commodity chain that stretches from rural Brazilian mines through
international markets to North American sales points and consumers. He also will
carry out observations at different sites in the commodity chain and do archival
research on the quartz industry in Brazil over the past century. By examining
the extent to which local environmental policy, social history, and global
demand impact mineral values, findings from this research will provide insight
into the factors that create and sustain value as well as those that promote the
stabilization of mineral markets. Stable access to mineral resources will likely
be among the most salient national security and socio-ecological issues of the
twenty-first century.