* 1459827
* Collaborative Research:  RUI: Development and application of a method using coralline algae to reconstruct past changes in pH and impacts on calcification
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Branwen Williams, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McCorkle
* 09/30/2019
* USD 289,171.00

The impacts of recent and future human-caused increases in atmospheric CO2 on
the acidity (pH) of shallow cold-water marine environments (a process known as
"ocean acidification"), and on the organisms that inhabit them, are poorly
understood. This is due, in part, to the difficulty in reconstructing past
changes in ocean chemistry in these remote environments. This research seeks to
develop and apply a technique to reconstruct past seawater pH from boron isotope
signatures in long-lived crustose coralline alga that are widespread throughout
shallow, cold-water marine environments. In addition, the research will evaluate
the impact of changing seawater pH on the growth rate of these ecologically
important organisms, which are thought to be particularly vulnerable to ocean
acidification because of the high magnesium content of their skeleton. Overall,
this project will advance understanding of ocean acidification in shallow, cold-
water environments, and provide key information to evaluate the impact that
changes in ocean pH have had on organisms inhabiting these environments. The
outcomes of this work will provide important information to policy makers and
legislators seeking to mitigate the negative effects of rising atmospheric CO2
on these fragile, high-latitude marine ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding
supports a graduate student, numerous undergraduate researchers, and a new
collaboration between two early career faculty members. Outreach includes
mentoring high school students from groups underrepresented in the sciences
through the Scripps College Academy and production of an educational film on the
biological impacts of ocean acidification. The research team will strengthen
international ties through collaboration with Canadian and UK scientists, while
helping maintain US-based scientists at the forefront of this important sub-
field of ocean acidification research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work plan
includes three main parts: (1) developing the first laboratory-derived and
field-verified calibration of the delta11B-proxy of paleoseawater pH for
coralline algae, (2) generating the first high-resolution, multi-centennial
dataset of high-latitude seawater pH before (ca. 1365 to 1760 AD; i.e.,
"baseline") and after (ca. 1760 AD to present; i.e., "anthropogenic signal") the
Industrial Revolution, and (3) evaluating the impact of anthropogenic ocean
acidification on the linear extension, density, and ultrastructure of skeletons
produced by an ecologically important, habitat-forming coralline red alga. The
associated objectives are: (1) to provide a new tool for reconstructing paleo-
seawater pH, (2) to generate historical records of ocean acidification that
would elucidate the rate and magnitude of high-latitude ocean acidification that
could be used to verify predictive models, and (3) to establish empirical
relationships between ocean acidification and coralline algal calcification that
would inform predictions of future impacts of ocean acidification on high-
latitude marine calcifiers.