* 1459476
* Workshop: Examining Overlooked Issues in Wrongful Convictions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Allison Redlich, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,807.00

It is well established that innocent persons sometimes are arrested and
convicted for crimes they did not commit. It is also well established that in
many of these wrongful conviction cases, the actual perpetrator went on to
commit other crimes, including murders and rapes--crimes which may have been
prevented if the wrong person had not been identified and the right person had
been prosecuted. Although the exact definition of wrongful conviction and
exoneration varies between sources, most scholars agree that the wrongful
convictions that have been identified are the mere tip of a much larger iceberg,
and likely represent a considerably larger body of cases involving the
conviction of innocent persons. If this premise is correct, several limitations
necessarily exist concerning our knowledge of the incidence of wrongful
convictions, the factors that contribute to miscarriages of justice, and their
consequences.

The overarching goal of the workshop is to advance wrongful conviction
scholarship by enlisting theoretical perspectives and focusing on issues
important to the administration of justice which have not garnered commensurate
research attention. The workshop will bring together diverse scholars to discuss
important topics that have largely been overlooked or ignored. These "elephants
in the courtroom" in the study of wrongful convictions include: 1) the
intersection of race and miscarriages of justice; 2) how and why guilty pleas,
which account for the vast majority of convictions, contribute to miscarriages
of justice; 3) wrongful convictions for misdemeanors, which account for roughly
80% of criminal charges; and 4) data needs and methodological constraints
important to the scientific study of wrongful convictions and the effective
dissemination of research findings for use by policymakers and practitioners.
The specific objectives are: (1) To examine wrongful conviction issues that loom
large but have not yet received sufficient attention by wrongful conviction
scholars and policymakers; (2) To bring together scholars and professionals from
varying disciplines (e.g., law, criminal justice, sociology, psychology,
political science) to enhance understanding of wrongful convictions and to
communicate new theories to test and methods to employ; and (3) To foster the
translation of science into practice and policy by generating new programs of
research into unexplored issues of wrongful conviction that could ultimately
provide insight into the effectiveness and integrity of the criminal justice
system. The workshop has the potential for broad impact through the achievement
of desired societal outcomes (e.g., a reduction in wrongful convictions and
correction of the corresponding problems caused when the truly guilty
perpetrators remaining at large), fostering interdisciplinary collaborations,
and the dissemination of resulting work products to academic and non-academic
audiences.