* 1459834
* Unraveling the controls of inorganic carbon dynamics in the Gulf of Alaska with a regional three-dimensional biogeochemical model
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Katherine Hedstrom, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2021
* USD 533,077.00

The Gulf of Alaska ecosystem provides significant socio-economic benefits
through tourism and through subsistence and commercial fisheries. However, the
combined effects of climate change and ocean acidification, which is caused by
the oceanic uptake of anthropogenic carbon dioxide, are altering the habitat of
commercially important species. Climate induced enhancement of glacial melting
may accelerate the progression of ocean acidification in the Gulf of Alaska even
further. Due to a limited number of measurements in the Gulf of Alaska, little
is known about the current state and rate of change of the chemical habitat of
key species. Researchers from the University of Alaska Fairbanks propose to
develop models of the ocean circulation, chemistry and biology for this region
that will enable better understanding of environmental controls on ocean
acidification in the Gulf of Alaska. In addition to communicating the science
through a collaboration with the Alaska Ocean Observing System, the project will
support a field course called "Girls in Icy Fjords", which is designed to
inspire young women who have had limited opportunities due to life circumstances
to pursue college educations and, possibly, careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify the dominant controls and patterns of high
carbon dioxide environments in the northern Gulf of Alaska. The few available
observations document a seasonal manifestation of aragonite undersaturation in
subsurface waters on this continental shelf. Particularly if it expands in time
and space, such undersaturation could engender detrimental consequences for
carbon dioxide sensitive organisms and potentially lead to altered food web
structures, ultimately imparting large ecosystem and socio-economic
consequences. However, the currently limited spatial and temporal data coverage
precludes a detailed conceptual understanding of the physical and biological
mechanisms controlling the local carbon dynamics and thus impedes our ability to
anticipate and mitigate future changes. In this study, researchers will conduct
high-resolution physical-biogeochemical hindcast model integrations and use
neural networks, dye tracers and Lagrangian floats to detangle the complex
interplay of mechanisms that drive aragonite undersaturation in the study
region. The proposed physical-biogeochemical model configuration, which uses
carbon and nitrate as model currencies, has been extensively evaluated for the
greater North Pacific region at moderate (10 km) resolution. This model will be
tailored to the Gulf of Alaska with a high (1.5 km) horizontal resolution,
explicit forcing of coastal freshwater discharges, and modeled iron limitation.
Such improvements will make this setup an attractive choice as a foundation for
many other high-latitude biogeochemical modeling applications. The proposed
experiments and analytical methods will take advantage of the three-dimensional
model output and will provide insights into seasonal and interannual variability
of enhancing and inhibiting controls of ocean acidification.