* 1459930
* Study of the Emission Heights of White-Light Solar Flares and their Hard X-Ray Sources
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Hugh Hudson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 05/31/2020
* USD 390,000.00

A solar flare is the most energetic explosion observed in the solar system.
Different ways of viewing solar flares include X-rays, radio and chromospheric
spectral lines. A large percentage of flares are recognized as a result of
associated brightening in the visible light spectrum, and thus are called white-
light flares. White-light emission is a signature of large solar flares and can
be observed even on other stars. Though the white light emission was the first
manifestation of a solar flare ever detected, in the famous so-called Carrington
event of September 1, 1959, its origin is still not understood. This study will
compare observation and modeling of the heights in the solar atmosphere where
the white-light and hard-X-ray flares originate and through this be able to
elucidate and distinguish between competing flare generation mechanisms. In this
way, the investigation tackles fundamental issues related to flare energy
transfer in the lower solar atmosphere and the results will provide important
information about the generation, energetics and dynamics of solar flares and
coronal mass ejections, providing crucial understanding of the initiation of
space weather events. The research effort will also have major consequences for
the study of flaring stars, since the same acceleration and radiation generation
processes are at work. These stellar flares are detected in white light, but
hard X-ray emission from accelerated electrons is too faint to be directly
measured. The results from this effort will better define the relationship
between white light and hard X-ray emissions from solar flares. This
information, in turn, will aid the investigation of stellar flares, including
particle acceleration and atmospheric conditions of flaring
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is puzzling that the actual mechanism by which
solar flares generate white-light (WL) continuum radiation in the lower
atmosphere is not better understood. The association of WL continuum with the
impulsive phase of a solar flare, that is, the phase in which particles are
accelerated, has been interpreted as an indication that non-thermal particles
accelerated in the corona can penetrate deep into the lower solar atmosphere,
heating those layers and causing intense WL emission. However, flare-accelerated
electrons hitting the chromosphere have relatively short collisional ranges, and
so their ability to penetrate deeply, as indicated by the close correlation of
WL and hard X-ray (HXR) time profiles, is surprising. Other methods of
generating the observed WL continuum include energy deposition by protons
(instead of electrons) or "radiative back-warming" by the UV or X-ray continua.
Alfvenic wave transport of energy could also be significant, as could
recombination radiation in the chromosphere. Comparison between the heights of
WL and HXR emissions in the solar atmosphere will support or rule out many of
these proposed generation mechanisms, thereby providing a greater understanding
of WL flare generation as well as the overall energetics of solar flares. The
main objective of this study is the determination of the heights in the solar
atmosphere of white-light and hard X-ray (HXR) sources for a large sample of
flares. Both absolute heights in the solar atmosphere and heights of the two
types of emission relative to each other will be studied. The observed heights
will be compared with the results of theoretical modeling performed via the
radiation hydrodynamic model RADYN and the 3D radiative MHD model RADMHD. The
derived heights and model comparisons will reveal in which layers of the outer
solar atmosphere WL flare sources originate and will provide new insight into
the generation of WL flare emission, an important and poorly-understood problem
in solar physics. Source heights will be determined using data from the HMI
instrument aboard the SDO spacecraft (for white-light sources), the RHESSI (for
hard X-ray sources), and the EUVI instruments on the twin STEREO spacecraft, as
context data, in order to provide an alternate viewing angleand thus precise
height measurements. The ground-based GONG++ network will be used to validate
the modeling results. Multiwavelength observations from the ROSA and IBIS
instruments will be used to characterize white-light flare energetics.