* 1459159
* Increasing Graduates of Online STEM Master's Degree Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* D.W. Bill Haskins, University of Wisconsin-Platteville
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 04/30/2020
* USD 630,410.00

The University of Wisconsin-Platteville's (UW- Platteville) "Increasing
Graduates of Online STEM Master's Degree" program will increase the number of
students entering Distance Education online master's programs in STEM related
fields. The project will provide students with the opportunity to expand upon
their STEM knowledge by providing increased access to online STEM Master's
programs. The online environment allows flexible scheduling, so students can
fulfill employment and family obligations. Providing scholarships will alleviate
the financial burden and increase accessibility for students pursuing advanced
STEM knowledge. This project will review best practices for supporting on-campus
undergraduate students in STEM majors and apply these to graduate programs in an
online environment. Anticipated outcomes include increased student retention in
full-time programs, and placement and advancement in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UW-Platteville Distance Learning Center (DLC)
will award 10 annual scholarships for five years to online students pursuing
graduate education in STEM fields, and it will improve support services for
first-time online students. Practices such as faculty advising/mentoring, peer
mentoring, faculty/student research, and networking with STEM professionals will
be utilized and their impact on retention of online students reviewed. Career
guidance and placement will assist graduates who are either advancing their
careers or just entering the STEM workforce. The goal of the project will be to
increase the number of students in STEM disciplines and the number of employees
in STEM fields, especially underrepresented populations.