* 1459219
* Collaborative Research: The Role of People with Disability in the Innovation of Online Technology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Thomas Boellstorff, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 279,041.00

How is the internet changing the ways that Americans think of themselves as
individuals and interact as members of communities? While there has been
considerable scientific research on this question, there has been far less
attention paid to the experiences of people with disabilities. This is
unfortunate because the effects of these technologies may be more pronounced for
them and therefore easier for us to observe and analyze. This project focuses on
the experiences of people with disabilities in on-line, virtual worlds. In these
three-dimensional, immersive online spaces, people with disabilities can appear
as they choose and do things they may not be able to do in the physical world.
The researchers also will study other dimensions of the on-line lives of people
with disabilities, including interactions on social network sites, blogs, and
e-commerce venues. The research will contribute to improving health care and
social support for people with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thomas
Boellstorff of the University of California, Irvine and Donna Davis of the
University of Oregon, Eugene, will collaborate to explore: (a) how people with
disabilities use digital media with regard to embodiment and social interaction;
(b) how this changes self-understanding as disabled and affects physical-world
experiences of disability; (c) what aspects of embodied online social
interaction are linked to specific disabilities; (d) the role of digital making
and the effect of differing platforms and devices. The research will involve a
range of ethnographic methods conducted in online digital media, as well as
interviews with a subset of people with disabilities provided with devices like
3D goggles. Virtual world interviews will be conducted with at least 80
individuals, and a smaller subset of intensive, ethnographic interviews will be
conducted to address issues of how online embodiment is conceptualized. In
addition to offering scholarly contributions to disability studies, science and
technology studies, media studies, and cultural anthropology, this project
explores the experiences of an underrepresented group, and offer insights into
increasingly relevant public debates about the role of digital culture. The
project's investigation of the insights of people with disabilities will help us
better understand how new online technologies influence the relationship between
the human body and technology, how we think about social interaction in light of
these massive technological innovations, and how we think about the role of the
internet in everyday life.