* 1459211
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social Production of Space for Individuals with Disabilities Who Are Residing in Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Janet Smith, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 01/31/2019
* USD 12,581.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will focus on understanding how
individuals with disabilities experience space if they have physical and
mobility limitations and they have been relocated from institutional settings to
live in the community. The doctoral student will analyze the ways in which these
individuals experience and view community facilitators and barriers as they
navigate through their everyday life in socially produced spaces of uneven
development. The project will help enhance basic understanding of the ways that
people with disabilities integrate, face their challenges, and live in the
community. It also will have methodological implications, because it will
provide a test for the use of a new research approach called grounded critical
visualization, which creates a framework for studying lived, conceptual, and
perceived spaces. The project will have direct societal benefits by providing
new information and perspectives about socio-spatial dimensions of the
disability community as well as other communities experiencing physical
limitations. It will expand the participation of underrepresented groups by
directly engaging people with disabilities in the research, and it will provide
new insights to help realign policy and program delivery to maximize
accessibility and engagement in communities by people with disabilities. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the U.S. increasingly relocates people with
disabilities from institutional to community settings, greater knowledge is
needed about the complexity of their experience living in the community. The
student will employ the multi-method approach of grounded critical
visualization, which incorporates aspects of photovoice (an approach using
photographs taken by participants to "voice" their experience), questionnaires,
interviews, spatial analysis, and statistical analysis to help answer the
overarching research question: "What is the relationship between the local,
everyday practices of people with disabilities who are living in the community
and their social production of space?" The student will conduct her work in two
locations in the Chicago area, the city of Oak Park just west of Chicago and
neighborhoods in the southeast side of Chicago. In addition to helping the
student to complete her doctoral dissertation, project findings will be
disseminated through conferences, peer-reviewed journals, and local discussions
in focus groups. A town hall meeting involving all participants will build
awareness, expand understanding of people with disabilities, and contribute to
further research on the production of disability space.