* 1459504
* IRES: U.S.-Poland Student Research Experience to Study Plant Species Interactions in the Unique Ecosystem of the Bialowieza Forest
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Jordan Zjawiony, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 12/31/2018
* USD 249,126.00

This U.S.-Polish International Research Experience for Students (IRES) project
creates a unique three-year opportunity for U.S. students to acquire early
career research experience abroad in the fields of biology and chemistry of
natural products. Through a combined program of field and laboratory research
this IRES provides a rare opportunity to prusue discovery of new species, new
chemical diversity, and insights into environmental interaction and biological
synergy in one of the best preserved medieval forests in Europe, the Bialowieza
Forest of Poland. The engagement of U.S. and Polish mentors with expertise in
ecology, forestry, biology, chemistry, plant sciences, and mycology will assure
the scientific success of this interdisciplinary project. By focussing on
biological and biochemical characterization of select plants and fungi, the US-
Polish team expects go gain a better understanding of novel plant and fungi
biodiversity. Special attention will be devoted to study of the metabolites and
ecological roles of diverse natural chemical compounds found in such natural
settings. From an educational perspective, this three-year IRES should provide
exceptional access to a unique environmental setting for U.S. student
participants along with the opportunity to work side by side with renowned
European scientists as they gain valuable early career research experience. The
IRES project supports the participation of four U.S. students annually (two
undergraduate and two graduate) for the three-year duration. U.S. student
participants spend six weeks abroad in the area of the Bialowieza Forest working
together with their U.S. and Polish mentors and Polish students on
complementary, thematically-linked research projects. Pre-trip training includes
both technical and cultural preparation. Post-travel follow-up by the PI and
University of Mississippi staff continues with scientific mentoring and career
advise. For borader impact, new insights based on the study of the ecology,
biodiversity, and chemical diversity of Bialowieza Forest are expected to
contribute to refining future strategies for management and conservation of such
rare biological resources. Results will be disseminated through websites,
presentations, workshops, and scholarly publications. Overall, the cooperative
activities of this IRES project are expected to enhance STEM education at all
institutions involved, strengthen international partnering, and facilitate the
development of a new interdisciplinary research collaboration that bridges
biology and natural products chemistry.