* 1459184
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social and Spatio-Temporal Patterns of Arsenic Exposure and Effects
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Jane Menken, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,763.00

This research project examines the changing geographies of exposure to arsenic-
contaminated drinking water and the resulting human health effects of
respiratory disease and impaired lung function. Utilizing a political ecology of
disease framework and spatial statistical methods, the objective of the project
is to investigate the social, economic, political and environmental factors that
lead to and perpetuate exposure to arsenic and its resulting health effects. The
research findings are expected to advance knowledge within health and medical
geography by expanding understanding about how multiple factors intersect to
both create and mitigate risk of toxic exposures over space and time. This
advancement of knowledge will have important important implications for policy
evaluation and the planning of future mitigation strategies by highlighting
priority locations and groups at risk. Although this research focuses on
Bangladesh, its findings will be broadly applicable to many areas of the world
reporting arsenic poisoning from contaminated groundwater including Chile,
Taiwan, and parts of the United States. Arsenic occurs naturally in the
sediments of Bangladesh, though with high spatial variability due to changes in
local geology. At the same time, household and individual exposure to that
arsenic varies due to social, economic, and political factors that influence
both access to wells and the likelihood that a well taps a contaminated aquifer.
Therefore, understanding the relationship between arsenic exposure and human
health demands an understanding of human-environment interactions and how they
vary across spatial and temporal scales. Situated in this context, this research
is guided by three main questions: (1) How does arsenic exposure in rural
Bangladesh vary spatially, temporally, and with social/demographic factors? (2)
What factors influence a household's behavior to access an uncontaminated water
source? (3) What are the consequences of chronic arsenic exposure for lung
function and respiratory disease? The research will contribute a new
methodological approach to the study of arsenic and health that combines a
Bayesian cluster detection model with spatial regression techniques. Together
these techniques will highlight risk factors and areas of persistent arsenic
exposure and the role of arsenic exposure in lung disease. In addition to novel
results, the theoretical framing of this study will provide an example for
incorporating geographic theory on human-environment interactions and political
ecology into health studies, improving future research.