* 1459156
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Larval Orientation Behavior in Determining Population Connectivity
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Claire Paris, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 04/30/2018
* USD 382,159.00

Understanding how far young fish move away from their parents is a major goal of
marine ecology because this dispersal can make connections between distinct
populations and thus influence population size and dynamics. Understanding the
drivers of population dynamics is, in turn, essential for effective fisheries
management. Marine ecologists have used two different approaches to understand
how fish populations are connected: genetic methods that measure connectivity
and oceanographic models that predict connectivity. There is, however, a
mismatch between the predictions of oceanographic models and the observations of
genetic methods. It is thought that this mismatch is caused by the behavior of
the young, or larval, fish. The objective of this research is to study the
orientation capabilities of larval fish in the wild throughout development and
under a variety of environmental conditions to see if the gap between
observations and predictions of population connectivity can be resolved. The
project will have broader impacts in three key areas: integration of research
and teaching by training young scientists at multiple levels; broadening
participation of undergraduates from underrepresented groups; and wide
dissemination of results through development of a website with information and
resources in English and Spanish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of
the research is to investigate the role of larval orientation behavior
throughout ontogeny in determining population connectivity. This will be done
using the neon goby, Elacatinus lori, as a model system in Belize. The choice of
study system is motivated by the fact that direct genetic methods have already
been used to describe the complete dispersal kernel for this species, and these
observations indicate that dispersal is less extensive than predicted by a high-
resolution biophysical model; E. lori can be reared in the lab from hatching to
settlement providing a reliable source of larvae of all ages for proposed
experiments; and a new, proven behavioral observation platform, the Drifting In
Situ Chamber (DISC), allows measurements of larval orientation behavior in open
water. The project has three specific objectives: to understand ontogenetic
changes in larval orientation capabilities by correlating larval orientation
behavior with developmental sensory anatomy; to analyze variation in the
precision of larval orientation in different environmental contexts through
ontogeny; and to test alternative hypotheses for the goal of larval orientation
behavior, i.e., to determine where larvae are heading as they develop.