* 1459563
* Temperature-Dependent Ocean-Atmosphere Equilibration of Carbon Isotopes in Atlantic Thermocline and Surface Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Jean Lynch-Stieglitz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2019
* USD 330,179.00

The stable isotopes of carbon can provide clues about the processes by which
carbon moves through the earth system. Researchers at Georgia Institute of
Technology will use carbon isotope and nutrient reconstructions in the upper
ocean, in combination with existing atmospheric carbon isotope reconstructions
from ice cores, to better understand why and how atmospheric carbon dioxide rose
at the end of the last ice age. This work will help further the understanding of
the controls and feedbacks on atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. The
possibility of reconstructing past surface ocean temperatures from the air-sea
carbon isotope difference will also be explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will assess whether the upper ocean carbon isotope changes seen
over the deglaciation in the North Atlantic primarily reflect biological cycling
or air sea exchange processes. A detailed record of seawater cadmium (Cd,
related to the nutrient phosphate in today's ocean) from Cd/Ca measurements in
benthic foraminifera will be constructed. These measurements will help to
pinpoint what mechanism was responsible for the transition to a less efficient
biological carbon pump over the deglaciation. The investigators will also
reconstruct the carbon isotopic composition of well equilibrated, low nutrient
surface waters in the North Atlantic using carbon isotopic measurements on large
planktonic foraminifera. The carbon isotope ratio in these waters will reflect
the changes in the atmospheric ratio and the temperature of equilibration,
potentially providing information on past surface ocean temperature changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the societal relevance of better
understanding the relationship between carbon dioxide and climate, this grant
will support the training of several students from under-represented groups. The
data will be made available to the community and will be contributed to an
international effort to synthesize and interpret carbon isotope records over the
deglaciation.