* 1459226
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Migratory Shorebird Response to Habitat Availability Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Danica Schaffer-Smith, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 02/28/2017
* USD 15,996.00

An understanding of species-habitat relationship is fundamental for adopting a
balanced approach for managing and conserving natural resources. This doctoral
dissertation research project will investigate surface water resources and
habitat changes over the past two decades to understand habitat resource
availability for migratory shore birds. The project will assess broad and fine-
scale habitat availability and will analyze differences between habitat types
across wet and dry years. The research will contribute to a better understanding
of natural wetlands and agriculture lands as potential habitats and the
challenges of managing these water-rich resources under stressed conditions. It
will provide new information regarding how spatio-temporal dynamics influence
habitat quality and how public and private lands can be optimally managed to
serve socio-economic and environmental needs. The doctoral student will work
closely with several local organizations and nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) with the findings likely to guide policy makers in selecting and
protecting fragile environments. Because shorebirds are among the most migratory
species on a global level, the research will inform habitat management and
conservation managers on a broad scale. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in habitat availability preferred by
shorebirds are not well understood, particularly for inland wetlands and flood-
irrigated agricultural areas. Because large portions of the habitat exist on
agricultural lands, the synchronization of rice-field inundations with shorebird
migration plays an important role in providing habitat benefits to the birds.
This project will address two core questions: (1) What are the external drivers
impacting long-term shorebird habitat availability? (2) How do these changes in
habitat availability vary across spatial scales? The project will use multi-
temporal satellite imagery, survey data, and in situ information for the
Sacramento River Valley in California to quantify habitat availability in the
area. The analyses will provide an assessment of the response of migratory
shorebirds to changes in habitat availability, water depth and land use. As a
key component, the comparative differences across wet and dry years will help
improve monitoring and management of shorebirds and their wetland habitats.