* 1459911
* IRES: The University of Michigan and South African National Space Agency (SANSA) Space Weather International Research Experiences for Students Program
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Mark Moldwin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

The University of Michigan and South African National Space Agency (SANSA) Space
Weather International Research Experience for Students (IRES) program (UM-SANSA-
IRES or MSI for short) will support 18 students (six per year) spending the
northern hemisphere summer (8-weeks) at the SANSA Space Science Directorate
located in Hermanus, South Africa working on a variety of space weather science
and engineering projects. Space Weather is the field of space science that seeks
to understand the impact of solar disturbances on the Earth's space environment
especially with respect to technology. The goals of MSI include (1) engage
undergraduates in publishable research projects; (2) development of students'
scientific communication skills; (3) development of culturally competent and
societally aware scientists and engineers and (4) strengthening existing and
developing new UM and SANSA collaborations and
exchanges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will be paired with SANSA
scientists, engineers and post-docs to provide one-on-one research mentoring,
will participate in the annual "Space Weather Winter School" held by SANSA in
June and July and attend the South African Institute of Physics (SAIP)
Conference. Pre and post trip activities at the University of Michigan will
provide scientific, cultural and professional development programs to enhance
the impact of the international research experience. The students will also have
a UM scientific mentor to engage the students prior and after the IRES
experience, which will also foster scientific collaborations between UM and
SANSA scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Space weather is an
important area of research, especially because of the implications for
communications and other crucial technologies including satellite navigation and
communication systems, power grids, and ground-and-aircraft-based HF radio
communication. There are significant variations in space weather effects
depending on latitude, local time, and longitude, as well as northern and
southern hemispheric differences depending on season. The research focus of this
IRES program is to understand space weather effects at mid- and low-latitudes,
differences between the northern and summer hemisphere, and between the American
and African sectors. The program takes advantage of the impressive facilities
and expertise available at SANSA. SANSA Space Science is currently responsible
for monitoring the space environment over the Southern African region, Indian
and Atlantic oceans as well as the South Pole, and forms part of a global
network of similar organizations throughout the world. Instruments are deployed
throughout South Africa, Namibia, Antarctica, Marion Island and Gough Island.
SANSA is host to the only Space Weather Regional Warning Center in Africa and
therefore develops and operates space weather forecasting models for a broad
region. IRES MSI students will participate in SANSA research which includes
studies on the variation of the Earth's geomagnetic field and its application to
navigation, the propagation of waves in the various regions of the space
environment and their effects, diagnostic information on the propagation media,
ionospheric characterization, basic and applied space weather, space plasmas,
and radio wave propagation.