* 1459897
* Wage Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Rasmus Lentz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 279,121.00

This research project develops and analyzes a new model of how unemployment can
affect lifelong earnings. The project plans to test a new explanation for the
following widely observed facts. First, for most workers, wages grow over time,
whether that is measured as total time in the workforce or time in the current
job. Second, workers who have been unemployed at some point in their work
careers often find that their later earnings from employment lag behind the
earnings of other workers. The PI has developed an economic model where firms
vary in productivity and the on-the-job training provided to workers. Workers at
productive firms are more likely to avoid unemployment and also gain more
skills, which increases their future wages. The research team will test the
model using an innovative data set. The project advances science in
macroeconomics and labor economics. Because the research may lead to new
understanding about the long-run costs of unemployment to American workers, it
will contribute to better policies for promoting national prosperity.

The work explores the interaction between human capital accumulation and labor
market frictions as first order determinants of wage dynamics. While these are
frequently viewed as competing explanations of labor market outcomes, the core
idea here is that they work together and the two forces can combine to cause
persistence in the response of wages to shocks. Through the presence of firm
heterogeneity, frictions can impact the rate of human capital accumulation, with
different firms providing different levels of training. As such, frictions do
not only introduce dispersion in the return to current skills but are also
themselves determinants of dispersion in future skill outcomes. The estimation
methodology is based on simulation-based methods and will use micro panel data.