* 1459152
* Origin and Deformation of the Ontong Java Plateau
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Brian Savage, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2019
* USD 322,415.00

The Ontong Java Plateau (OJP) covers 2 million km2 of seafloor, made up of 100
million km3 lavas that erupted rapidly ~120 Ma. This event represented a major
heat and mass transfer from the Earth's deep interior to the surface. The cause
of this magmatic event and the associated deformation of the plate on which this
large load was emplaced are unclear. Recent work by these scientists has
identified seismic structure in the mantle beneath the OJP that can only be
explained by rock composition that would correspond to recycled oceanic crust.
If true, this would suggest that subducted oceanic plates do not complete
assimilate in the deep Earth. At least portions can survive the high
temperatures and pressures and be caught up in global mantle circulation.
Validating the presence of a mechanically strong mantle root beneath the OJP
with quantitative estimates of its physical and chemical characteristics is
expected to further understanding of the evolution of the oceanic lithosphere
and the formation and survival of continental cratonic
keels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of scientists from Japan, UK, and US are
deploying ocean-bottom seismometers, electromagnetometers, and land based
seismic stations on and around the Ontong Java between 2014-2016. This project
supports US scientists and students to participate in onshore seismic data
collection and analysis of the full amphibious dataset. All the seismic data for
the combined projects will be shared among all the team and analyzed in
collaboration. The US scientists will conduct advanced seismic analysis using
3-D full-wave tomography, and characterizations of anisotropy and attenuation.
The new results would achieve 1° resolution, much improved over the current ~5°
resolution that has led to contrasting interpretations of the distribution of
low velocity within the OJP root. Teaching modules will be created and made
available at Carleton College's On the Cutting Edge Geoscience site. Aspects of
the data, analysis techniquest, and interpretation will be incorporated in
undergraduate and graduate courses.