* 1459013
* Collaborative Research:  Women's Empowerment, Food Security and Farm Productivity
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Carmen Bain, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2018
* USD 75,333.00

This project investigates the implications of development initiatives that seek
to empower women and enhance gender equity in developing countries, using the
dairy sector in Uganda as a field site. In Uganda, as in many developing
countries, women dominate the agricultural labor force, yet gender-based
inequalities constrain their ability to enhance farm productivity and
profitability. A key development strategy to close the gender gap focuses on
empowering women within agricultural value chains, the wide-ranging set of
activities that connect farmers to markets. Yet little is known about the
effects of value chain development initiatives for empowering female farmers and
addressing gender-based inequalities. This research uses a value chain approach
and geospatial analysis to examine gender mainstreaming efforts in Uganda by
comparing dairy value chains with active gender and-development programs with
dairy value chains that do not have gender-specific programs. The results from
this study will provide a better understanding of how female farmer
participation in the marketplace facilitates women?s empowerment and improves
farm productivity and food security in developing countries.

The objectives of this research are to: 1) Identify and measure how gender
mainstreaming efforts affect women's participation in the value chain, gender
equity in the household, and gender equity in the community; 2) Analyze the
spatial and geographic consequences of women's empowerment at the individual,
household, and community levels; and 3) Evaluate how examining gender within a
spatial context assists in decision making for development programs. To
accomplish this, a mixed method research approach will be used including: 1)
surveys of female and male farmers engaged in the value chain; 2) in-depth
interviews with female and male farmers from households engaged in the value
chain, as well as key stakeholders throughout the value chain; 3) geospatial
analysis; and 4) a randomized experiment. By conducting a theory directed,
empirically grounded analysis of pro-poor value chain projects, this research
can inform and shape the decisions of donor organizations, development
practitioners, the private sector, and policy makers interested in targeting
vulnerable populations through market based initiatives, as well as academics
working in the areas of agriculture, gender, and development.