* 1459882
* IRES: Changing Landscapes, Biodiversity, and Ecosystem Function in an African Global Biodiversity Hotspot in Swaziland
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* James Austin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project will engage
U.S. undergraduate students in field-based ecology and conservation research in
the southern Africa country of Swaziland. The project will use mentoring,
teamwork and innovative research to train students to address some of the
planet's most pressing conservation issues. Students will work with American and
African scientists to study the integration of human livelihoods and needs for
agricultural production with the need to maintain the diverse and vigorous
ecosystems that allow human communities to thrive. Working internationally in
Swaziland, students will first gain an understanding of regional cultures,
natural history, ecological theory and research techniques. Students will then
spend their summer conducting independent research projects. Over the course of
the project student research projects will examine how recently converted
agricultural lands may alter wildlife communities and the health of entire
ecosystems. As global biodiversity continues to decline and agricultural
landscapes increase, this project will help us understand how to maintain
biodiversity, healthy ecosystems, and human livelihoods. Additionally, the
program will produce a new generation of scientists who will spread their newly
found knowledge to local and global audiences and be well prepared to face our
planet's growing conservation challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global
conservation efforts must embrace agricultural landscapes, because agriculture
has and will continue to play a dominant role in shaping land-use practices.
Nonetheless, there is only a limited understanding of how agricultural
landscapes alter biodiversity and ecosystems? ability to provide resources for
humans (ecosystem services). One major hypothesis for balancing agricultural
production with biodiversity and ecosystem functioning is the habitat
heterogeneity hypothesis. Swazi and American scientists will work with students
to understand the role of heterogeneity on faunal biodiversity and ecosystem
functioning. One cohort of students will relate variation in the distribution of
faunal communities to patterns in landscape heterogeneity. A second cohort of
students will test the mechanisms that drive faunal community changes in
agriculturally dominated landscapes. A final cohort of students will examine how
landscape heterogeneity and faunal communities influence ecosystem functions.