* 1459180
* Collaborative Research: Inferring Marine Particle Properties from Polarized Volume Scattering Functions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ping Yang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2018
* USD 197,140.00

Understanding biogeochemical cycles and their interaction with the climate
system requires quantifying the various forms of materials in the global ocean.
In particular, the chemical composition and size distribution of living and non-
living particles in the ocean have an enormous impact on marine ecosystems,
including the dynamics of marine food chains, the vertical transmission of solar
energy, and the transport of organic matter and trace elements. These particle
characteristics not only affect but reflect changes in many biogeochemical
processes in the ocean. In this project, a team of scientists will launch a set
of technical and numerical modeling innovations that will allow them to
determine key biogeochemical quantities from optical observations of the angular
distribution of scattered light. The project will involve an interdisciplinary
team of experts, who will theoretically model the optics of marine particles,
develop an innovative advanced mathematical modeling scheme, and then
laboratory- and field-test and validate the approach for observing marine
particle properties.

When perfected, the technique should see a broader application, as it will be
designed to be amenable to operation on ship-borne and autonomous platforms with
the potential to provide estimates of the particle size distribution and
composition at high temporal and spatial resolutions. It should thus benefit
different fields requiring detailed knowledge of aquatic particles
(biogeochemistry, biology, optics). The project will also provide for the
training and support of graduate and undergraduate students as well as public
educational outreach, including a special effort to reach Native Americans in
North Dakota.

The goal of this project is to derive water-column quantitative particle size
and composition information from in situ unobtrusive volume scattering function
(VSF) measurements to characterize marine biogeochemical particulate stocks. The
angular patterns of the scattered intensity and polarization state of the
scattered light by particles can be described in terms of a 4x4 Mueller matrix
(S) that is intrinsically determined by the sizes, shapes, composition, and
structures of the particles. The particle properties can be, therefore,
potentially inferred from measurements of S. Unfortunately, the complete Mueller
matrix of oceanic waters has been seldom measured. Even the most commonly
measured component, the volume scattering function (element S11) representing
the angular distribution of unpolarized light, was scarcely measured until
recently, followed by development of an inversion technique to derive size
distributions and composition of particles from the VSF. Recently, a commercial
product, LISST-VSF, became available for measuring the Mueller matrix components
S11 (VSF), S12 (linear polarization), and S22 (cross-polarization), potentially
providing an avenue to obtain a much more detailed characterization of
particles. This project will incorporate the additional information provided by
S12 and S22 using recent advances in scattering modeling to further constrain
the inversion with the following: (i) better knowledge in particle shapes using
S22 (spherical vs. non-spherical); (ii) reduced uncertainty using both S11 and
S12; and (iii) further improved capability to characterize particles in the size
range of 0.02 to 200 um. The study should greatly enhance our ability to
quantify size distributions and refractive indices (closely linked to particle
densities) for particle groups such as phytoplankton cells, detrital particles,
organic particles, mineral particles, bubbles, and emulsified oil (if present).