* 1459209
* Doctoral Dissertation:  A Changing Geoengineering Policy Landscape in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Richard Peet, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 10/31/2016
* USD 8,627.00

Research on geoengineering has thus far focused on ethical frameworks, potential
international governance mechanisms and public perception but has neglected both
a deeper theoretical analysis regarding why geoengineering is emerging as a
legitimate policy option, and the development of geoengineering policy in
particular national contexts. The understanding that human activity plays a
crucial role in earth system processes has prompted important theoretical
debates in geopolitics which is increasingly being understood as "earth
politics" as planetary processes become central to these discussions. This
doctoral dissertation project will generate new knowledge in our understanding
of geoengineering policy development and contribute to the literature in
political geography on the role of experts in shaping geopolitics. The student
will work collaboratively with RAND Corporation, academic institutions,
consortia, and non-governmental organizations to discuss geoengineering research
and policy. Providing a clearer understanding about geoengineering will help
decision-makers, government agencies and non-governmental organizations to
better understand its intricate and important policy landscapes. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

The majority of literature about geoengineering falls into four categories:
scientific and technical questions; ethical concerns; discussion of
international law, norms and governance; and public perception. In this project
the investigators will address three core questions: (1) Why has geoengineering
recently emerged as an increasingly legitimate policy option in a number of
industrialized nation states? (2) What is the composition of the contemporary
geoengineering policy landscape in the United States? (3) How are geoengineering
policy discussions developing at think tanks and academic institutions? The
student will adopt a three-pronged approach that will include a macro-scale,
theoretical exploration of the recent rise of geoengineering, a meso-scale
discursive analysis that maps the geoengineering policy landscape in the US, and
a grounding of these theoretical and discursive analyses at a finer scale
through institutional ethnography and in-depth, semi-structured interviews with
experts. Because this is an empirically rooted project that examines
geoengineering policy development within a nation-state it will serve as a model
for researchers in other national contexts thus broadening understandings of
geoengineering policy around the world.