* 1459255
* A new tool for ocean carbon cycle and ocean acidification studies
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Michael DeGrandpre, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 05/31/2019
* USD 493,772.00

The ocean inorganic carbon system is of great interest to marine scientists, and
indeed all people, because it contains important information about ocean
productivity, the sources and sinks of anthropogenic carbon dioxide, and ocean
acidification. Total alkalinity is one of the critical inorganic carbon
parameters and has been widely measured through ship and laboratory-based
methodologies. At this time, there are no commercially-available in situ sensors
for total alkalinity. In this project, researchers at the University of Montana
will further develop and test a new autonomous system, known as the SAMI-alk,
for measuring total alkalinity. This new system will expand understanding of
total alkalinity and the inorganic carbon cycle by making near continuous
measurements in locations not frequented by ships. The development of this
instrument will have important broader implications for the oceanographic
community and ocean acidification research by providing a novel instrument for
ocean research. This project will also provide training opportunities to
graduate and undergraduate students, and will continue to support public
outreach on ocean acidification through a university-affiliated
museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies focused on the marine carbon cycle and
ocean acidification pose a number of measurement challenges. While pH is the
ocean acidification "smoking gun" and partial pressure of CO2 is critical for
gas exchange calculations, the full inorganic carbon system must be quantified
for most inorganic carbon studies. Using autonomous sensors to accurately and
precisely quantify all of the inorganic carbon species has been a long-standing
objective for marine biogeochemists, but full characterization of the inorganic
carbon system has, until recently, been limited to ship and laboratory-based
measurements. Total alkalinity is one such parameter as its research has been
limited by the lack of instrument capable of making in situ measurements. This
research will address this problem and advance inorganic carbon studies through
the further development of an autonomous, in situ system to measure seawater
total alkalinity, known as the submersible autonomous moored instrument for
total alkalinity (SAMI-alk). Preliminary testing of the instrument showed great
promise, and through this project, researchers will conduct lab experiments to
improve its performance. Two new prototype instruments will be tested in
laboratory and field evaluations.