* 1459717
* Collaborative Research: An Experimental Investigation of Reactive Melt Channelization in Partially Molten Rocks
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Matej Pec, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2019
* USD 329,467.00

Melting occurs beneath the plate tectonic boundary zones as well as volcanic
hotspots, such as Hawaii and Iceland. The physical and chemical interactions
between the migrating melt and the surrounding rock determine how planets evolve
over time. However, the means by which melt formed deep in the Earth migrates
upward to the surface to either erupt or cool slowly in a crustal magma chamber
are not well understood. Geologists want to know how bulk planetary composition
evolves to produce crustal rocks that have fundamentally different mineralogy
than the underlying mantle rock. Such information underpins knowledge about the
extent of chemical exchange between the Earth's interior and surface. This study
will feature an early career scientist working with established experts to
implement new laboratory techniques that, for the first, should produce results
that can be related to the inaccessible natural system. As the experimental
procedures are honed, new undergraduate lab exercises will be developed. They
will employ glass beads and salt and introduce students to techniques that make
is possible to investigate complex processes where there are feedbacks between
the physics and chemistry of the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Melt extraction
affects much of the chemical exchange between mantle, crust and the atmosphere.
Geochemical, geophysical and geological evidence suggests that, at some stage of
melt extraction, melt must segregate into high permeability channels. These
channels must be isolated enough to preserve chemical disequilibrium and
permeable enough to allow fast melt extraction in order to preserve radiogenic
disequilibrium. In nature, melt segregation is inferred to occur due to an
interplay between reaction and deformation. Experimental investigations provide
key insights into the processes occurring during melt migration and motivate
further theoretical developments. A recently developed experimental methodology
has reproduced the reaction infiltration instability. Since the gradient in pore
pressure can be controlled in these experiments, it is possible to independently
control melt velocity and melt-solid reactivity. Thus, the evolution of
permeability with time can be explored as the reaction modifies the rock
microstructure, the increase in melt flux due to channelization can be
quantified, and melt migration regimes can be documented as a function of
physical and chemical driving forces. A first set of experiments will be
conducted on dual composition samples of olivine with clinopyroxene, and with
orthopyroxene at high temperature and pressure. A second set will combine
olivine with both pyroxenes in a single sample. This study will also develop new
methods for analyzing the resulting microstructures and test/refine parameters
that allow for scaling of laboratory data to natural environments.