* 1459262
* Collaborative Research: Family Structure and Inequality in Contemporary America
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Christina Gibson-Davis, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,250.00

In the last three decades, economic inequality among families in the United
States has increased. One of the likely drivers of rising inequality is the
changing familial landscape, especially the steep decline in the percentage of
children living in married-parent families. Notably, other factors related to
the structural and economic context of modern American life were also changing
and may have also contributed to economic inequality among families. This
project analyzes economic inequality among families with children in the
contemporary United States. This project will be the first to simultaneously
investigate several features of the contemporary American landscape. The goal is
to understand 1) how family income and wealth vary by key characteristics of
families, such as whether families include one or two parents and, if two
parents, whether the parents are married, and 2) how these associations between
family characteristics and family economic resources have changed over the time
period of 1980-2013. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data, for the years 1980-2013,
come from the Current Population Survey and the Survey of Income and Program
Participation. Families with at least one resident child under the age of 18
will be classified into one of seven family types. The study
will&lt;br/&gt;decompose changes in family economic resources into between- and
within-family type components and estimate income volatility, within family
type, using both the standard deviation and permanent and transitory variances
of family income. The PIs consider both static measures of, and over-time
changes in family structure. This project examines factors that may affect
family economic resources that have not been fully explored in previous
research, including year-to-year changes in parental wages and earned income,
changes in resources that families receive from government programs and tax
credits such as the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), and stability in the number
of adults living in the family household. Additionally, we will examine
differences across families in wealth and debts, in addition to differences in
income. Our results will help social scientists understand how changes in
American families are related to growing income and wealth inequality, and
whether changes in government programs and taxes are widening economic
inequalities among children.