* 1459116
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Forest Fragment Size, Shape, and Structure on Rainfall Redistribution and Solute Flux in Urban Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Delphis Levia, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,513.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the ways in which
the shape and structural characteristics of urban forest fragments affect the
cycling of water and solutes in wooded ecosystems of metropolitan areas. The
doctoral student will seek to disentangle the complex relationship between
forest fragmentation and the ecosystem services they can provide by establishing
a clearer understanding of the differences in water and solute flux among forest
fragments with varying canopy structure and location along an urban-to-rural
land-use gradient. This project will enhance basic knowledge of the forms into
which precipitation is partitioned when it falls in forest fragments, such as
water that is intercepted in forest canopies, water that falls to the ground
from leaves (throughfall), and water that flows down the trunks and stems of
plants (stemflow). Project findings should help assess the chemistry of
throughfall and stemflow in relation to fragment size and shape, location, and
structural characteristics. Through these and other measurements, this project
will help develop a more accurate quantification of ecosystem services provided
by urban forest fragments, particularly the reduction of stormwater runoff and
the modification of solute transport to ground- and surface-water pools. In
addition to enhancing basic understanding, the project will provide new insights
into methods to manage forest fragments for the conservation of green/forested
space in urbanizing areas. Data from this work will be made readily available to
the public via the Delaware Environmental Monitoring and Analysis Center web
portal for those interested in improving the management of urban green spaces.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching question of this research
is: How does the hydrological function of urban forest fragments (namely the
partitioning of precipitation into throughfall and stemflow, and the leaching
and cycling of solutes) vary among forest fragments within the city and along an
urban-rural gradient? This student will investigate interception losses in five
forest fragments in Wilmington, Delaware, and along an urban-to-rural gradient
in that metropolitan area in order to understand its effect on water inputs and
the chemical signature of throughfall and stemflow. She will employ field
methods in forest hydrology and hydrochemical laboratory analyses to quantify
both precipitation partitioning and solute chemistry of throughfall and
stemflow. Additional analyses will elucidate the dynamic nature of precipitation
partitioning over space and through time in relation to land use.