* 1459366
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Indigenous Rights, Cultural Politics, and the Gaps Between International and Domestic Law
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Joseph Bryan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2016
* USD 14,125.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will focus on reasons for and
impacts of delays in the implementation of recommendations from an international
court of human rights to expropriate land to honor land claims of indigenous
communities as restitution for human rights violations. The doctoral student
will conduct case studies of three different court rulings to answer three
general sets of questions: (1) What factors have led to the implementation
delays, and why do they continue in all three cases? (2) How do claimant
community members perceive the experience of fighting for territory from the
state and its effect on their cultural identity and political power? (3) How do
the indigenous communities, private landowners, and state agencies involved in
the claims process articulate and perform territory as a concept and in
practice? The project findings will contribute to theoretical debates in the
fields of political economy, legal geography, and cultural geography regarding
the performance of law and territory, multiculturalism, and indigenous rights.
The project will add new insights to lines of inquiry in which territory is not
viewed as synonymous with a specific political jurisdiction but instead is
viewed as a form of spatial organization made from political, economic, legal,
and cultural activities where resource control is at stake, power relations are
dynamic, and new cultural identities and political subjectivities are created.
The project will enhance international collaborative relationships and will
build capacity by providing training in community-based mapping methods for
members of indigenous communities. The project's findings will be shared with
representatives of the international court and with communities engaged in the
disputes. Although focusing on a specific set of case studies, the insights and
information obtained in this study of legal processes and their impact on the
territoriality of people will have relevance to a broad range of other locales
where restitution of land is an approach aimed to try to redress wrongs that
have been committed in the past. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
doctoral student will conduct this research by focusing on three specific
rulings issued by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights to expropriate land
as restitution for human rights violations against indigenous peoples in
Paraguay. The student will employ a mixed-methods qualitative approach that
includes semi-structured interviews, participant observation, archival research,
and community-based mapping. Among those involved in the project are leaders and
other members of the indigenous communities that have made and won their claims,
representatives from government institutions, lawyers, representatives from
nongovernmental organizations and academics involved in the process, and the
owners of the lands to be expropriated.