* 1459247
* SHINE:  Observational Constraints on Wave Heating of the Corona
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Michael Hahn, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 04/30/2018
* USD 357,000.00

This 3-year SHINE project aims to investigate the wave-induced heating of the
solar corona by extending the research analysis to include quiet Sun regions and
coronal hole plumes. Currently, there is a dearth of observational results to
resolve the debate over whether waves can heat the entire solar corona, or other
heating mechanisms need to be invoked. The project team will use spectroscopic
line-profile measurements to infer the wave energy within various structures and
determine if it is sufficient for heating of the solar corona. The project will
enable several educational broader impacts. The project team will take part in
the Columbia University Summer Research Program, in which middle and high school
science teachers participate in scientific research. This program has a
substantial positive impact on the teachers and their students. After teachers
participate in the program, data show a 10.1% increase in the pass rate of their
students on the New York State Regents science exam. Given the diverse
population of New York City, this program has a high impact on the education of
underrepresented groups. Most of the analysis during the project will be
conducted by a postdoctoral research scientist who will develop experience in
diverse areas of solar physics and related techniques. Undergraduate research
participation is also expected, for which the students will receive course
credit through the Columbia Astronomy Department. The research and EPO agenda of
this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery,
learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.

This SHINE project aims to infer the wave amplitudes in the solar corona and
determine how the damping rate varies with plasma properties, inhomogeneity, and
magnetic geometry, thereby constraining the damping mechanism for the waves.
Some of the dissipated wave energy appears to heat the minor ions in the solar
corona. Numerous numerical models have been developed to describe processes that
could transfer energy to the ions via turbulence or wave-particle interactions.
The predicted ion heating rate depends on both the specific energy transfer
mechanism as well as the frequency distribution of wave power. Thus, the ion
temperature data constrain theories of the ion heating and also provide insight
into the wave spectrum. The project team will measure the ion temperatures in
the quiet Sun corona and in plumes, building on the novel techniques developed
during previous NSF-funded projects. The results of this project are expected to
provide critical tests of the existing ion-heating theories. Accurate ion
temperatures are also needed for the analysis of wave amplitudes. By determining
the temperature and wave amplitudes self-consistently, the project team will
obtain accurate measurements of both quantities. These are crucial for proving,
or disproving, the existing wave-heating mechanisms of the solar corona.