* 1459140
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Socio-Spatial Factors Influencing Prenatal Care Availability, Access, and Use
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Gary Shannon, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2017
* USD 10,567.00

This project explores issues related to immigrant health care through an
investigation of the changing socio-spatial relationships (e.g. political,
economic, socio-cultural, and geographic) that shape immigrant women's health
during pregnancy. Using the case of Haitian migrant farm workers in Immokalee,
FL, this research investigates the availability, provision, utilization, and
accessibility of prenatal care to immigrant women in order to understand not
only the specific issues that these women face in trying to maintain their
health during pregnancy, but also the broader political, economic, and social
processes that contribute to immigrant women's health disparities across the
United States. The research is expected to fill scholarly and clinical gaps in
understanding the socio-spatial factors influencing immigrant health, the
politics of immigrant health care, rural and minority health disparities, and
the emerging impacts of the Affordable Care Act on the health care system more
broadly. It also explores the methodological possibilities offered by
qualitative GIS to health researchers and planners by producing dynamic maps
that show the complex relationship between gender, politics, economics, and
health care.

Using a critical medical geography framework, the researchers draw from
interdisciplinary literatures on healthcare, intersectionality, immigration, and
critical GIS. The project has four interrelated aims: First, using archival
research and mapping, it explores how the changing politics of immigrant health
(and the notion of "deservingness") affect the health care landscape in the
United States. Second, it uses interview data from health care providers to
explain how the changing politics of immigrant health care affects the provision
of care for immigrant women. Third, using feminist qualitative GIS and multi-
session in-depth interviewing, the project investigates immigrant women's
experiences of the health care system, as well as how these experiences
influence where and how they utilize health care services. Finally, it
identifies the socio-spatial barriers that immigrant women face in accessing
care in an effort to improve health care accessibility in the community.