* 1459406
* Collaborative Research: Planktonic Sources of Chromophoric Dissolved Organic Matter in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Astrid Schnetzer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2019
* USD 574,652.00

Chromophoric dissolved organic matter (CDOM) is a small but important fraction
of the marine carbon pool that interacts with solar radiation and thus affects
many photochemical and biological processes in the ocean. Despite its
importance, the chemical basis for the formation of oceanic CDOM remains
unclear. CDOM may be formed from two possible sources: 1) heterotrophic
bacterial transformations of primary productivity (plankton-derived), or 2)
terrestrially-derived. This project will examine the role of phytoplankton as a
source of CDOM in the ocean by utilizing a powerful, new technique to measure
particulate organic matter absorbance and fluorescence, discrete chemical
measurements of probable precursors to planktonic CDOM, and enzymatic assays.
Results of this research will provide new insights into the origin and
production of planktonic CDOM and its transformation by heterotrophic bacteria.
This research on CDOM will be shared broadly through a module at a North
Carolina Aquarium, and streaming live feeds of shipboard activities to
elementary school classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terrestrial and oceanic
dissolved organic matter (DOM) differ in their chemical composition. Laboratory
and open-ocean observations suggest that bacterial transformation of
phytoplankton DOM produces humic-like CDOM signals that are visually similar to
those in terrestrial CDOM. However, prior studies of oceanic CDOM using
absorbance and fluorescence fit an electronic interaction (EI) model of
intramolecular charge transfer (CT) reactions between donor and acceptor
molecules common to partially-oxidized terrestrial molecules found in humic
substances. This project will test the hypothesis that phytoplankton and
bacteria provide a source of donors and acceptors that are microbially-
transformed and linked, enabling CT contacts between them and creating oceanic
CDOM. To address this, researchers will systematically study phytoplankton
growth, including marine snow formation. A new technique for measuring base-
extracted POM (BEPOM) absorbance and fluorescence will be used to incorporate
planktonic CDOM results into the EI model, and supplemented with measurements of
its probable chemical precursors. Determining the time course and extent of
phytoplankton POM and DOM transformation by heterotrophic bacteria during the
same phytoplankton growth experiments will provide an in-depth understanding as
to how bacterial transformation of marine snow-associated planktonic organic
matter drives CDOM production throughout the ocean.