* 1459513
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Arctic Section: Nd isotopes and REEs in the Arctic
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Brian Haley, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2019
* USD 245,936.00

In this project, investigators participating in the 2015 U.S. GEOTRACES Arctic
expedition will measure neodymium isotopes and rare earth elements in seawater,
sediment, and particulates collected from the western Arctic Ocean. In common
with other national initiatives in the International GEOTRACES Program, the
goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to identify processes and quantify
fluxes that control the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the
ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of these distributions to changing
environmental conditions. Some trace elements are essential to life, others are
known biological toxins, and still others are important because they can be used
as tracers of a variety of physical, chemical, and biological processes in the
sea. Neodymium and rare earth elements are oceanographic tracers, and data from
this research will provide benchmarks for other trace element and isotope
studies to better understand their cycles and how future environmental changes
will impact this important ocean basin. The project will support the training of
undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral researchers, and results will be
disseminated via public outreach activities.

Neodymium (Nd) isotopes are tracers of water mass sources, transport and mixing,
and rare earth elements (REEs) show systematic fractionations during
environmental processes. Together they provide a powerful tool for analyzing
provenances and processes in the oceans that reflect the changing environmental
controls on the distribution of trace elements and their isotopes (TEIs).
Inherent logistical difficulties make the Arctic Ocean especially scarce in TEI
data (including Nd isotopes and REE concentrations), which hinders understanding
and application of these tracers. In this study, researchers will examine Nd and
REE concentrations in seawater, sediment, and particulate samples collected in
the western Arctic Ocean, with the aim of (1) assessing Arctic circulation and
water mass mixing in light of Nd isotopes and REEs; (2) attempting to quantify
particle-dissolved exchanges of TEIs and; (3) using Nd isotopes and REEs to
characterize the sources, sinks and exchanges of TEIs. It is expected that
through improved understanding of the Nd isotope and REEs tracers, scientists
will be able to relate these findings to other TEIs and to the broader
understanding of Arctic oceanographic change in the past, present, and future.