* 1459432
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: "U.S. Veterans:" Two Fronts of Veteran Care among the Oglala, Lakota
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Ann Stoler, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2015
* USD 19,997.00

Historically, American Indians have had the highest per capita rate of military
enlistment of any ethnic group in the United States. Pine Ridge Reservation,
South Dakota, is home to thousands of Oglala Lakota veterans and many Oglala
view military participation to be a central component of Lakota society. Yet
nowhere is veteran care more at risk than within Native communities. In addition
to persistent conflicts over Indigenous self-determination and cultural
recognition, Oglala veterans often face hardships associated with poverty,
illness, substance abuse, and geographic isolation. This project seeks to
understand how the highly regulated domain of state authority represented by the
United States Department of Veterans Services (the VA) interfaces with the
cultural practices and practical realities of Indigenous communities. By
comparing veterans of different periods -- World War II, Korea, Vietnam, Iraq,
and Afghanistan -- the research also provides a lens through which to examine
the complex and ever-changing relationship between federal governance and
Indigenous life. This research will contribute to a science of the complex modes
of interface that connect different levels of governance with local life
wherever it is lived. Data will be gathered in southwest South Dakota, on the
Pine Ridge Indian Reservation and in nearby border towns. For over a century,
Pine Ridge veterans have been served by the VA hospital in a border town to the
west. A proposal has been made to consolidate this hospital with a more distant
facility. The hearings, documents, and conversations around this proposal
provide the researcher a venue in which to document and analyze the multi-
faceted practices that Oglala veterans have developed for seeking effective
governance, appropriate management of care, and self-determination. The
researcher will employ a mixed methods approach, including life histories, semi-
structured interviews, surveys, and archival research. Computer-enabled
qualitative text analysis software will be used to produce a rich understanding
of veteran life in a historically important tribe. This will supplement the
statistics of poverty, illness, and violence that so often accompany
descriptions of life on Pine Ridge. The research will also provide information
for communities and policy makers committed to improving the fit between
administrative expectations and a particularly vulnerable but poorly known
population.