* 1459474
* Diagnosing Overturning and Water Mass Transformation in the Labrador Sea From Argo Floats
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Fiammetta Straneo, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 161,230.00

The sinking of cold, saline water at high latitudes in the Atlantic Ocean and
its spread along the sea floor, which is balanced by the return flow of warmer
waters at the surface, is known as the Atlantic meridional overturning
circulation (AMOC). It plays an important role in maintaining Earth?s climate as
well as key ocean properties. Labrador Sea overturning is a key component of
AMOC, but its magnitude and variability has been difficult to measure
accurately. This study will explore whether float observations can be used as a
cost-effective way to answer such questions. The project has the potential to
enhance and quantify our understanding of the connection between dense water
formation and overturning circulation in the Labrador Sea and lead to an
improved strategy for continued AMOC sampling. Information from the study will
improve understanding of the spatial and temporal variability of Labrador Sea
overturning and export on interannual and decadal timescales. A quality-
controlled data set will be available online and incorporated into undergraduate
and graduate classes. The project will also support a post doc and facilitate
his transition to a more permanent position.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Labrador
Sea's contribution to the AMOC is relatively unknown and the potential change
between the 1900s and 2000s is still uncertain. The primary objective of the
project is to quantify the Labrador Sea?s contribution to the AMOC using
profiling floats. The mean overturning calculated in a preliminary analysis is
in line with previous estimates, suggesting that floats are a viable dataset for
examining these aspects of the Labrador Sea. The project will be part of a large
ongoing effort to understand AMOC over the next few years and complement OSNAP
moored data. Argo and PALACE floats in the Labrador Sea and boundary current
have collected data for the past two decades. The Argo floats offer seasonal and
spatial data coverage at the basin-wide scale. PALACE floats data from the 1990s
allows the opportunity to compare Labrador Sea overturning from two different
periods; one of enhanced deep convection in the 1990s, and weaker convection in
the 2000s.