* 1459574
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Modernity, Materiality, and the Moral Economy
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Susan Mckinnon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2016
* USD 15,114.00

The United States is deeply involved in projects around the world that promote
Western ideals of responsible modernity. Some of these initiatives aim to
strengthen the financial circumstances of people in developing economies.
Frequently, however, the indigenous moral economies are overlooked. Without
accounting for how people already understand responsible economic decision-
making, efforts to educate people about personal finance and small business
ventures, for example, will be unsuccessful. This research will examine how
family organization impacts economic management and how Western norms of kinship
and ideals of personal economic responsibility interact with indigenous views.
The results of this study will improve understanding of how people respond to
globalizing modernity and can help Americans design more effective development
programs at home and abroad.

The research will be conducted by University of Virginia doctoral student
Carolyn Howarter, under the supervision of Dr. Susan Mckinnon. Howarter has
chosen the Kingdom of Tonga as an appropriate field site in which to pursue
these questions because the small scale of the interactions make them more
visible and amenable to social science research. In Tonga, the local structure
of family (broad networks of extended kin) and appropriate allocation of one's
resources (immense acts of giving and sharing) contrast starkly with externally
introduced norms that favor nuclear family organization and household thrift.
Usefully, for research purposes, Tongan mores are currently being challenged by
three different Western religious organizations, each of which has a different
emphasis. This allows for a natural experiment to explore the relationship
between global and local values. Methodists, Catholics, and Mormon are all
active in Tonga but they vary significantly in how they promote values to church
members, despite using Tongan cultural symbols to do so. The researcher will
focus particularly on the symbolic use of dress to promote or express adherence
to traditional Tongan ideals, a rejection of those ideas, or the creative
combinations of the two. The researcher will collect data through observation at
church and family events, extensive and repeated interviews with informants, and
participant observation. She will assess patterns across the three religious
communities to determine how informants recognize and maintain kin
relationships, how financial, food, and textile resources are managed, and the
emergent patterns of dress as a key symbol of identity. Results of this research
will elucidate ties between kinship and economic systems, the complex ways in
which value systems shift, and how they are visually and physically represented
through clothing and bodily adornment.