* 1459185
* Collaborative Research: Availability of Employment Opportunities and Recidivism Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Robert Apel, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,058.00

The U.S. prison population continues to grow and devising policies to reduce
recidivism and criminal justice expenditures is now a major bi-partisan
priority. Policy makers are focusing on improving employment outcomes for former
prisoners as a way of reducing recidivism and generating tax revenue. We propose
a detailed study of the relationship between employment timing and recidivism.
We focus on whether employment that occurs rapidly after release (within the
first three months) is more effective in reducing the likelihood of recidivism
than remaining unemployed or taking a longer period of time to find a job. Our
project also examines the characteristics of the broader economy such as the
local unemployment rate and the kinds of job openings available in the local
labor market, characteristics often associated with rapid and successful job
search. The analysis will employ appropriate statistical techniques and is based
on recidivism data collected from the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction (ODRC) and employment data from the Ohio Department of Job and Family
Services (ODJFS).

To address our research question, we gather and construct a unique set of data
and perform an analysis of recidivism outcomes. Our data task involves gathering
administrative records including Unemployment Insurance (UI), Employer
Enterprise (EE) and Adult Workforce Education (AWE) data created by the Ohio
Department of Job and Family Services (ODJFS), and matching them with the
records of four representative samples of Ohio state prisoners (previously
gathered, geocoded, and merged with census tract/block group data) from the Ohio
Department of Rehabilitation and Correction (ODRC). Additional records
pertaining to mental health status, verbal ability, and work assignment in
prison available from ODRC will be gathered and merged to supplement pre-
existing collections. Our analysis task involves analyzing recidivism outcomes
(parole violations, arrest, parole revocation, and re-incarceration for new
crime) with careful scrutiny of the independent and joint influences of (a) the
timing and quality of employment experiences and (b) local employment
opportunity (unemployment, presence of low skill employment opportunity) and (c)
concentrated disadvantage in the neighborhood (block group, tract, county). The
overall goal is to assess the unique contribution that timing of employment
plays in reducing prison recidivism, contributing to the reintegration of ex-
offenders into the wider society.