* 1459389
* Quantifying exchange between the surfzone and a stratified inner-shelf with dye tracer experiments
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Falk Feddersen, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2021
* USD 996,802.00

The surfzone and inner-shelf are by far the most economically and ecologically
important ocean regions, vital for recreation, food, and ecosystem services.
Despite the importance of clean coastal waters to our economy and well-being,
declining water quality threatens coastal ecosystem and human health worldwide.
Healthy coasts are a significant priority to federal agencies, local government,
and non-governmental organizations. This study will use dye release experiments
to quantify the exchange between the inner-shelf and the surfzone, improving
scientific understanding and thus allowing for accurate prediction of tracer
(e.g., larvae, nutrients, pathogens) exchange from the surfzone through the
inner-shelf in the San Diego South Bay. This region is a representative surfzone
and inner-shelf system, allowing project results to be applied generally. This
region also is home to economically valuable beaches, State Parks, a Marine
Protected Area, and a National Estuarine Research Reserve, among other assets.
Yet, it is often impacted by poor water quality. This study will provide local
managers and citizens insight into regional tracer exchange. The investigators
will train a PhD student and engage undergraduates through the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography Research Experience for Undergraduates program.
Additionally, they will host three SurfScience Teen Conferences for high-school
students, develop collaborations with students at the underserved Kearny High
School (San Diego, California), and participate in the annual Avanzamos
conference which introduces young Latinas to ocean
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this study the analysis of observations and
model results will improve the understanding of the physical processes governing
tracer exchange between the surfzone and the stratified inner-shelf. By closing
a tracer mass budget, dye fate can be accurately determined. Estimates of
observed and modeled inner-shelf dye diffusivity will be used to test the extent
to which the inner-shelf is a "material barrier". Inner-shelf lateral
diffusivities (hypothesized to be smaller than the surfzone) may be comparable
to or greater than surfzone diffusivities, as larger inner-shelf eddy length-
scales may compensate for weaker eddy velocities. The source of stratified
inner-shelf coherent structures with large length-scales (relative to surfzone
generated rip currents) will be investigated. Shoreline dye observations far
downstream and inner-shelf cross-shore dye flux measurements will determine the
extent to which surfzone dilution mechanisms are or are not Fickian. The
observations and model results will be used to determine how inner-shelf upper
water column stratification is set by surfzone ejection of warm water. Lastly,
the vertical mixing of tracer on the stratified inner-shelf will be diagnosed.
Additional hypotheses driven modeling studies will be performed with varying
stratification, wind, and rip current conditions