* 1459227
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Influence of Statistical Forecasting and Sustainability in Urban Transportation Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Keith Murphy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2016
* USD 17,010.00

Civil engineers and planners are frequently challenged by a range of social,
cultural, and environmental issues in developing efficient urban transportation
systems. And gathering reliable aggregates of statistical data is particularly
challenged under circumstances of rapid urbanization. This project, which trains
a graduate student in conducting rigorous, empirically-grounded scientific
fieldwork, asks how planners balance the needs for environmental and social
sustainability in transportation networks with the demands of a growing urban
population. The results will be useful to urban planners tasked with the
responsibility of organizing and overseeing transportation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cheryl Deutsch, under the supervision of Dr. Keith
Murphy of the University of California, Irvine, will explore the ways in which
statistical forecasts influence planning for new public transit systems. She
proposes to do this by studying on-going planning for a Bus Rapid Transit
network in Delhi, India, which preliminary research suggests is an ideal site,
as increasing urbanization and motorization (dependence on private cars) in
Indian cities are representative of challenges faced by planners in developing
countries around the world. Transportation planning depends on demographic and
economic data to forecast future travel, assess multiple design and fare pricing
scenarios, and build infrastructure accordingly. These forecasts are complicated
in Indian cities by the rapid pace of urbanization and the challenges of
collecting reliable data. Urban infrastructure also raises concerns of social
and economic equity, as well as rights to the city. In this study, the
researcher will use her dual training as an anthropologist and transportation
planner to help practicing transportation planners better understand the
cultural assumptions built into their statistical models and decision-making
processes. Data collection strategies include the use of conventional
ethnographic methods such as participant observation within city planning
departments and among those managing urban transportation infrastructures, as
well as interviews with transportation planners and policymakers, and stratified
range of other urban stakeholders in these transportation networks.