* 1459584
* Development and Intercomparison of Methodologies to Measure Dissolved Ferrous Iron in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,12/31/2017
* James Moffett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2017
* USD 290,823.00

The trace metal iron is a key micronutrient throughout the oceans that plays an
important role in regulating primary production. Iron (chemical symbol Fe) can
exist in different ionization states in the environment, primarily as the
reduced form Fe(II) and the oxidized form Fe(III), which impacts its chemical
behavior within the water column, and ultimately the ability of researchers to
accurately measure its abundance. There is an urgent need in the chemical
oceanography community for accurate measurements of Fe(II) in the water column,
as currently used methods may overestimate concentrations in water samples
collected from certain depths. In this study, researchers from the University of
Southern California will significantly redevelop an underutilized methodology to
measure Fe(II), and carry out an evaluation and inter-comparison between the two
methodologies. This work will enable the refinement of estimates of Fe(II)
concentration, present a robust methodology for future use, and clarify
conditions where the current methodology can be used effectively. This project
will involve strong undergraduate research opportunities, and the research will
be conducted in collaboration with an international researcher from
India.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fe(II) is thermodynamically unstable in seawater in
the presence of oxygen or nitrate, yet its presence has been reported both in
surface waters and in oxygen minimum zones. A rigorous assessment of Fe(II)
measurements is important because its chemistry and bioavailability are so
different than Fe(III). Fe(II) forms weak complexes, is weakly hydrolyzed and
highly soluble in seawater. Fe(III) forms strong complexes, is sparingly soluble
and strongly hydrolyzed. The presence of even a modest fraction of Fe as Fe(II)
under Fe-limited conditions could increase bioavailability by orders of
magnitude. The most widely used methodology to determine Fe(II) at nanomolar to
sub-nanomolar levels involves the Fe(II) catalyzed oxidation of luminol, a
chemiluminescent (CL) reaction. There are potential artifacts with this
methodology, especially in the euphotic zone, where other reduced species might
interfere. Researchers will develop a new, modified version of a published
alternative method to CL involving the preconcentration of Fe(II) complexed by a
synthetic chelator. While this alternative method is prone to artifacts and
contamination that has limited its value in the open ocean, new approaches
create a plausible path to an accurate and sensitive protocol that is
independent of the luminol method. Following the new method development, this
project will implement inter-comparisons with the CL approach, which will be
conducted in the laboratory, in an anoxic mesocosm system, at a coastal time-
series station off the California coast, and in the Eastern Tropical North
Pacific.