* 1459459
* The Political Control of Agencies and Bureaucratic Political Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jowei Chen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 165,008.00

Given the growing importance of Federal administrative agencies in the United
States government, it has becoming increasingly interesting and important to
study the political activity and management of non-elected Federal employees.
Elected politicians are delegating increasing levels of policy-making authority
to non-elected Federal employees. This increased level of delegation provides
opportunities for the Federal employees to manipulate policy to serve personal
agendas, which in turn poses a challenge for the elected politicians. This
project will measure the political activities of non-elected public employees
and use these measurements to develop and test three new theories concerning the
legislative control of federal agencies, the job performance of appointed and
non-appointed federal employees, and the stability of workforces within
different federal agencies. First, regarding legislative control of agencies,
this project will examine how Congress perceives the political dispositions of
different federal agencies and how these perceptions influence Congress'
willingness to delegate and entrust significant regulatory authority to certain
agencies more than others. Second, regarding the job performance of federal
employees, this project examines whether more politically diverse agencies
perform better than agencies with a politically homogenous workforce and
leadership. Finally, regarding workforce stability, this project will examine
which types of agencies are prone to being more politically stable across
presidential administrations. Together, these studies will help us understand
how the political ideas and ideals of the individual federal employees are
different from the agencies they work within. We will examine how these
differences may or may not impact political control and the functioning of
bureaucracy. The work will also seek to provide insight into how elected
politicians decide to delegate work or not, how differences in political ideas
and ideals of non-elected Federal employees impacts policy, and insight into
some of the reasons for serving as Federal employees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops new substantive theories concerning the political activity of
federal agency employees and legislative control of these agencies. The project
also produces the necessary data products, statistical tools, and methods to
empirically evaluate these new theories. Existing research on bureaucracies has
suffered from difficulties in measuring and understanding the political ideas
and ideals of individual non-elected employees within Federal agencies. While
recent studies have made significant progress in estimating these political
ideas and ideals of these individual employees, the studies have not considered
the variation in political ideas and ideals among the non-elected employees at
all of the various levels within federal agencies. This project will help
scholars to better study bureaucratic political ideas and ideals not only at the
Federal level but in other contexts, such as at the state level, in an accurate
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce public datasets that scholars
can use to study not only these issues, but also other topics related to public
bureaucracies. Furthermore, the study will produce educational materials that
help teachers incorporate the data into class lesson plans related to public
bureaucracy and campaign finance. The undergraduate and graduate students that
work on the project will gain valuable skills in data organization, analysis,
and the research process, and in-depth knowledge about how to study the public
bureaucracy scientifically. Finally, the study will provide information that
policy makes can use to think about the structure and design of Federal agencies
and personnel practices, with potential benefits being improving access to
government services, and improving access to government services by underserved
populations including minorities