* 1459096
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms supporting persistence of a key plankton species during climate change on the Northwest Atlantic continental shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Chang-Sheng Chen, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2019
* USD 208,650.00

In the Gulf of Maine region, rapid warming of the ocean surface in recent years
has raised concern in the research and resource management communities, fishing
industry and the general public about effects on the coastal marine ecosystem.
This interdisciplinary, collaborative project will improve understanding of the
physical and biological processes controlling the abundance of a planktonic
animal that is particularly important in the food web of the northeast coastal
ocean. About the size of a grain of rice, the marine copepod Calanus
finmarchicus is the primary prey for herring and other forage fish, as well as
for the endangered northern right whale. This study will examine whether
transport of C. finmarchicus into the Gulf of Maine from cold Canadian waters,
in combination with growth and reproduction in the relatively cold Maine Coastal
Current, is sufficient to supply the region with the numbers needed to attract
and nourish the fish, seabirds and mammals that rely on its energy rich life
stages, despite recent ocean warming. The research team will develop a computer
model that links extensive understanding of the species' life history with ocean
currents and temperature. Results from the model will be tested against field
collections at two locations. This study will also contribute to the new
Integrated Sentinel Monitoring Network, a joint effort planned by federal and
state agencies with academic research participation to monitor future ecosystem
change on the northeastern coastal shelf. It will train a graduate student and
postdoctoral scientist in interdisciplinary research and also provide support
for an early-career investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will take a
process modeling approach that takes into account regional and mesoscale
interaction between life history and bathymetry and circulation to improve
understanding of planktonic species distribution shifts. It will combine two
decades of research on Calanus finmarchicus life history, including diapause,
with a high resolution regional circulation model into an innovative application
of a three dimensional, physical-biological model. The modeling approach
represents an advancement of climate forecasts of species ranges by coupling a
Lagrangian perspective with local processes to better resolve complex range
boundaries. It will use Lagrangian parameters such as finite-scale or finite-
time Lyapunov exponents, translating particle trajectories into scalar fields
that represent the structure of the advective regime. The model will be informed
by and tested with measurements of vital rates and demographic data collected on
a research vessel at two time series stations. It will be used in backward-in-
time and forward-in-time modes to test hypotheses about sources and destinations
of C. finmarchicus in the Gulf of Maine, effects of match/mismatch in
phenologies, and exploration effects of climate forced scenarios on advective
pathways.