* 1459021
* The Relation between Decision Making and Valence Asymmetries: A Comparison of Older and Younger Adults
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Natalie Shook, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 05/31/2018
* USD 458,547.00

Across the life span, people face significant financial, social, and health-
related decisions that entail weighing the pros and cons associated with each
decision choice. However, little is known about decision making in people 64
years and older, even though aging Baby Boomers are a growing segment of the US
population. Recent research indicates that decision making differs by age, but
the reasons why are not well understood. To better understand age differences in
decision making, this proposal takes a new approach by focusing on how people
think about positive and negative information. Specifically, older adults may
focus more on positive information than negative information, whereas younger
adults may focus more on negative information than positive information. When
decisions have both pros and cons, differences between people in how they weigh
positive and negative information could determine, at least in part, the
decisions they make and explain age-related differences in risky decision-
making. By understanding if older and younger people weigh negative and positive
information differently and establishing that these differential sensitivities
affect decision making, more effective ways of communicating positive and
negative information can be developed to encourage good decision making across
the life span. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the proposed research
are to investigate differences in how older and younger people think about
positive versus negative information, and then link these differences to risky
decisions. Across two studies, older and younger adults will complete a computer
task that assesses basic ways of thinking about positive versus negative
information. Participants will also answer questions and complete tasks that
measure their decision making. Older and younger adults will be compared to
determine if they differ in learning or weighting of positive versus negative
information, and the extent to which these differences explain age-related
differences in decision making will be tested. The results will show how age-
related differences in decisions that involve pros and cons may be due to basic
differences in how older and younger people view positive and negative
information. Understanding this will provide information that can be used to
help people of all ages make good decisions.