* 1459368
* A high-resolution controlled-source seismic experiment to elucidate geologic controls on megathrust slip:  the 2014 Pisagua, Chile earthquake sequence as a natural laboratory
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Anne Tr√©hu, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 01/31/2020
* USD 512,886.00

Subduction zones, where one tectonic plate plunges beneath another, are the
birthplace of many of Earth's more destructive earthquakes and volcanoes.
Numerous studies reveal patchiness in the distribution of slip during these
earthquakes; patches with the greatest slip can occur in pattern that is the
opposite of where patches characterized by aseismic deformation occur along the
fault. On April 1, 2014, a magnitude 8.2 earthquake occurred offshore Chile near
the town of Pisagua. This region was identified in 1991 as one of two major
seismic gaps in Chile. In anticipation of a future great quake, the
international Integrated Plate Boundary Observatory Chile project started
installing onshore seismic and geodetic instrumentation in the Pisagua/Iquique
gap in 2007. Because the slip history of the fault prior to, during, and after
the earthquake was well recorded, the rupture pattern can be compared with
crustal structure. The largest foreshock preceding the earthquake and the patch
of greatest slip during the mainshock are associated with a local increase in
subsurface density. The boundary of the Pisagua aftershock activity coincided
with the southern boundary of the broader, regional density low. The portion of
the seismic 'gap' that did not slip during the Pisagua quake is marked by a
distinct density high, indicating an abrupt change in crustal structure. The
objective this project is to collect marine geophysical data to elucidate the
geologic significance of this correlation between a crustal structure and
earthquake slip. This project also has an important educational component.
Students from the US, Chile, Germany will participate in an shipboard course in
seismic reflection data processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in geodetic
techniques and an increase in the number of high-resolution seismic networks
have brought remarkable advances in documenting the distribution of slip on
subduction zone plate boundary faults prior to, during, and after great
earthquakes. The main Pisagua shock was preceded by two distinct foreshock
sequences that occurred in the month prior to the main shock, and it was
followed by many aftershocks, the largest of which had Mw 7.8. The sequence only
ruptured the northern half of the gap, leaving significant unreleased strain
accumulation according to plate tectonic and geodetic locking models. This study
will acquire and analyze marine seismic data to characterize the Pisagua
earthquake source region. A large-volume tuned airgun array and multichannel
streamer (MCS) and 90 short-period ocean bottom seismometers (OBS) operated by
the US Ocean Bottom Seismometer Instrumentation Pool and the German marine
research institute GEOMAR. A 3D tomographic P-wave velocity model and a grid of
2D deep-crustal seismic reflection profiles will be obtained. The velocity model
and positions of reflective boundaries will be integrated with high-resolution
bathymetric data to generate a geologic model of the crust that can be compared
to the seismologically and geodetically-determined slip history prior to, during
and after the earthquake. The program will be accomplished in two phases. During
phase 1, imaging will target the region that slipped during the 2014 earthquake
and acquire reconnaissance data from the remaining gap to optimize the field
program for phase 2. Earthquakes recorded by this and other OBS and onshore
arrays will be incorporated into the data set for 3D tomography to increase the
depth extent of imaging and improve determination of S-wave velocities and
Poisson's ratio. Partners in this project include Oregon State University,
GEOMAR, and the Universidad de Chile.