* 1459691
* Exploring the absolute pressure gauge data from the Cascadia Initiative OBS deployment for transient changes in seafloor elevation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Spahr Webb, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2017
* USD 96,649.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will study the use of pressure
gauges for geodetic observations to monitor vertical deformation in the offshore
regions of the Cascadia subduction zone. The work could contribute to our
understanding of slow-slip seismic events and their potential for the generation
of large tsunamis. The project will use the Cascadia Initiative?s absolute
pressure gauges (APG) data set to develop methods for removing oceanographic
noise from the observations to determine what types and time scales can be
detected using pressure gauges. Additionally, the project will search for
possible vertical deformation that may have occurred during the Cascadia
Initiative deployment. The APG records have the potential to detect slow slip
events in the accretionary prism, which could change or enhance the
understanding of the displacement behavior of these faults and of deformation in
the overlying accretionary prism. The results could be applicable to the future
data acquired in Cascadia region and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are provided to study the large Cascadia Initiative
(CI) absolute pressure gauge (APG) data set that will allow the use of pressure
gauges for geodetic observations to monitor deformation in the offshore regions
of the Cascadia subduction zone. The utility of APG data for geodetic
observations is limited by high noise levels from oceanographic signals and by
the inherent drift in the sensors. The proposed research will use this large
data set first to develop methods of removing oceanographic noise from these
observations so as to determine what types and time scales of vertical
deformation can be detected using pressure gauges. The second component of the
research will be to search for possible vertical deformation that may have
occurred during the CI deployment. The discovery of seismic slow slip events or
similar events beneath the seafloor will likely change or enhance our
understanding of the displacement behavior of these faults and of deformation in
the overlying accretionary prism. This results will be applicable not only to
the data acquired in Cascadia, but also to observations from future ocean bottom
seismometer deployments with that are equipped with APGs, which also includes a
GeoPRISMS focus site, the Hikurangi (New Zealand) subduction margin.