* 1459838
* International Undergraduate Research Experience: The Development and Application of Novel Micro- and Nano-Sized Sensing Arrays Capable of Detecting Small Molecules
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Andrea Holmes, DOANE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2019
* USD 248,419.00

Part 1: Doane College, a small liberal arts college in Crete, Nebraska, will
send at least nine undergraduate science students and three postdoctoral fellows
to Germany to conduct nanotechnology research at the Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology (KIT). Three students and a postdoctoral fellow will go each summer
for the duration of three consecutive years. The work involves the development
of a versatile nano-scaled detection tool that could provide a high societal
impact. In Germany, Doane students will work in the labs of Dr. Michael Hirtz
and Dr. Pavel Levkin, both well-known internationally for their expertise on
nano-scale phenomena. The undergraduate students will receive extensive research
training, as well as culture and language preparation at Doane College before
their departure to Germany. While in Germany, the research team will be given an
in-depth orientation to the country and the research setting at KIT from the
project?s Principle Investigator and the international collaborators. Through
the PI, the student team will also be linked with investigators at the Center
for Nanohybrid Functional Materials at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln,
Nebraska. The students, who are relatively isolated in the US heartland, greatly
benefit from the exposure to a culture abroad, providing a new experience for
them. The project provides increased student, post-doc fellow, and faculty
understanding of the collaborative research process, as well as potentially
motivating undergraduates to continue their studies and/or careers in science,
technology, engineering and math.

Part 2: The research collaboration with the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
(KIT) in Germany will advance a technology called DETECHIP (short for detection
chip). This is a proven sensor technology based on differential responses of
colorimetric and fluorometric sensing elements upon exposure to small molecules
of interest, such as drugs of abuse, explosives, and pesticides.

DETECHIP is evolving from a macroscale, liquid-phase-testing array utilizing a
96-well plate to a micro-scale, solid-phase array through the use of
piezoelectric and inkjet printing. Seeking to further miniaturize and optimize
DETECHIP, this work will incorporate Dip-Pen Nanolithography (DPN) that is
available at KIT for micro-to-nanoscale array fabrication on novel polymeric
surfaces. In collaboration with the KIT collaborators, the Doane investigators
will incorporate the chemical sensors onto amphiphilic nanoporous (HEMA)
polymeric surfaces that are produced at KIT.

The goal is the uniform fabrication and analysis of arrays for the detection of
small molecules. Expected deliverables include: 1) a small micro-to-nanometer-
scaled, polymer-supported DETECHIP array; 2) methodology for bench-top or
portable analysis with the best imaging and/or read-out technology to be
determined during this project period; and 3) reports documenting the efficacy,
ease of use, and cost effectiveness of the resulting DETECHIP technology.

This international collaboration sets the stage for US post-docs and
undergraduates to apply for German Humboldt, Fulbright, and DAAD-RISE
fellowships, while German KIT students can participate in academic exchange
programs with Doane College.