* 1459252
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The role of iron-oxidizing bacteria in the sedimentary iron cycle: ecological, physiological and biogeochemical implications.
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Peter Girguis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2019
* USD 396,186.00

Iron is one of the most abundant elements on Earth and is an essential element
for life. Despite its abundance, iron is not always biologically available. For
example, in the water column of the ocean, iron is easily oxidized and
precipitates or sinks to the sediments. This can result in there being such a
deficit of iron in the open ocean that it is often the primary limiting nutrient
for the growth of phytoplankton that form the base of the marine food web.
Marine sediments can be a major source of iron to the ocean, when it is made
biologically available. Interestingly, one group of bacteria, the iron-oxidizing
bacteria (FeOB), can use iron directly as an energy source to fuel their growth,
and may govern the availability of iron to other parts of the ocean. While this
group can be abundant at hydrothermal vents, little is known about their
abundance or activity in marine sediments. Are these bacteria playing an
important role in controlling the flux of iron from the sediments to the water
column? To answer this, sediments on the east and west coasts of the United
States will be analyzed to characterize and quantitate the diversity and
abundance of FeOB. In addition, a series of laboratory experiments will be aimed
at understanding the specific role they play in controlling iron flux from the
sediments to the ocean, as well as the technically challenging question of
determining the lower limit of oxygen at which they can grow. This work has
relevance to our understanding of how biological control of a seemingly minor
constituent in seawater, iron, could have implications for productivity of the
entire ocean. Notably, a predicted impact of climate change on marine
environments is to decrease oxygen levels in the ocean. This could have a
profound influence on the sedimentary iron cycle, and possibly lead to greater
inputs of iron, which could in turn alleviate iron-limitation in some regions of
the ocean, thereby enhancing the rate of CO2-fixation and draw down of CO2 from
the atmosphere. This project will provide training for a postdoctoral scientist,
graduate students and undergraduates. Public outreach will include a student
initiated exhibit, entitled "Iron and the evolution of life on Earth" at the
Harvard Museum of Natural History providing a unique opportunity for
undergraduate training and outreach. The central hypothesis of this proposal is
that FeOB are more common in marine sedimentary environments than previously
recognized, and play a substantive role in governing the iron flux from the
sediments into the water column by constraining the release of dissolved iron
(dFe) from sediments. A survey of near shore regions in the Gulf of Maine, and a
transect along the Monterey Canyon off the coast of California will obtain cores
of sedimentary muds and look at the vertical distribution of FeOB and putative
Fe-reducing bacteria using sensitive techniques to detect their presence and
relative abundance. Sediments will be used in a novel reactor system that will
allow for precise control of O2 levels and iron concentration to measure the
dynamics of the iron cycle under different oxygen regimens. Pure cultures of
FeOB with different O2 affinities will be tested in a bioreactor coupled to a
highly sensitive mass spectrometer to determine the lower limits of O2
utilization for different FeOB growing on iron, thus providing mechanistic
insight into their activity and distribution in low oxygen environments.