* 1459708
* Interactions of Estuarine Physics, Sediment, and Organic Matter in Determining Suspended Particle Properties, Their Spatial and Temporal Distribution, and Resulting Water Clarity
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Carl Friedrichs, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 691,150.00

Water clarity in coastal and estuarine systems impacts ecosystem dynamics,
influences essential habitat for key life stages of many species, and is also
valuable for aesthetics and recreation. In Chesapeake Bay, water clarity has
seemed particularly unresponsive to management practices, and has continued to
decline over recent decades. Paradoxically, clarity has decreased more in areas
with relatively low concentrations of inorganic sediment than in locations where
riverine sediment loads have increased. Here it is proposed that the apparent
disconnect between water clarity and input of sediment in the Chesapeake Bay and
many other estuaries is related to the interaction of common estuarine flow
patterns with the presence of excess organic matter. Through improved
observation, modeling, and analysis of the interaction of estuarine physics with
suspended organic matter and inorganic sediment, this study aims to transform
understanding of the controls on water clarity in estuaries. States in the
Chesapeake Bay watershed will invest billions of dollars over the next decade to
further reduce runoff of nutrients and sediment. In the future, analogous
investments may be required for estuarine watersheds nationwide. By evaluating
how estuarine physics, organics, and sediment interact to influence water
clarity, this study will provide valuable guidance on effectively investing
these funds. This project will fund two PhD students on societally-relevant
dissertation projects and provide engaging projects for undergraduate
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many coastal settings, the interactions
that determine water clarity are sensitive to particle concentration, size,
density, composition, organic content, and settling velocity, yet few studies
have explicitly considered how these connect to generalized estuarine turbulence
and circulation patterns. The main objective of the study is to better
understand the interaction of small and large scale estuarine physics with
mixtures of inorganic sediment and organic matter typical of partially-mixed
systems. Novel field observations and numerical models will be developed to test
these ideas and focus on the York River estuary, a logistically attractive,
broadly representative, partially-mixed branch of the Chesapeake Bay. Field
observations will characterize physical oceanography (circulation,
stratification, and turbulence), as well as particle populations (including size
distribution, concentration, density, settling velocity and organic
constituents). Open-source, community-supported numerical models will be
implemented to further investigate feedbacks between estuarine hydrodynamics,
organic content, and sediment dynamics, incorporating multiple particle sizes
and densities, and new formulations for composition-dependent flocculation, as
well as state-of-the-art formulations for cohesive bed behavior. This work will
test the following novel hypotheses: (H1): Addition of organic material further
enhances the horizontal and vertical particle sorting that characteristic to the
physics of partially-mixed estuaries. (H2): Organic matter added to low
concentrations of inorganic solids results in relatively small, low density
flocs having slow settling velocities (Type 1 flocs). Conversely, adding organic
matter to high concentrations of inorganic flocs favors larger, higher density
flocs, with increased settling velocity (Type 2 flocs). (H3): Organic rich flocs
(Type 1) are especially effective at attenuating sunlight because they are
suspended high in the water column and have a large cross-sectional area per
unit mass. The end result of interactions with estuarine physics is that the
addition of organic matter to the estuary degrades water clarity in the lower
estuary and improves water clarity in the upper estuary, closer to the estuarine
turbidity maximum.