* 1459713
* Dynamic Weighting of Panel Data
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Betsy Sinclair, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 05/31/2016
* USD 87,524.00

General

Although it is not always the case, surveys are generally used to make
inferences about a larger population using a relatively small sample. In order
to do that, each respondent in a survey is given a weight to describe the
relationship between the proportion of individuals like them in the survey
relative to those in the population. The construction of these weights is
critically important as they ensure the survey sample can accurately reflect the
population. This project develops a tool for users to estimate weights for
several of the most commonly used panel surveys in political science. By
enabling researchers to estimate weights that are appropriate for their
individual research questions, we increase the reliability of studies that use
these panel surveys. Technical

Because of the issues that panel weighting involves, we develop an R package
that delivers a single weight variable based on the sub-samples obtained after
attrition and item non-response. The motivation behind the creation of such a
statistical package is the need for a tool that can deliver a set of weights
suitable for the analyses desired by researchers dependent on the outcome
variables, covariates and waves specified. Moreover, we develop program to run a
diagnosis of the socio-demographic characteristics of the remaining sample after
accounting for attrition and item non-response in order to flag potential
complications such as over-weight of respondents that belong to groups with high
levels of attrition. Finally, we generate an accessible and user-friendly
program that facilitates the analysis of panel survey data. Countless scholars
rely upon nationally-representative and publicly-available panel surveys as a
data resource to draw inferences about national opinion. This project improves
those inferences by providing researchers with the tools they need to weight
their data appropriately.