* 1459519
* REU Site: A forest full of Big Data: the Harvard Forest Summer Research Program in Ecology 2015-2019
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2022
* Aaron Ellison, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2022
* USD 776,713.00

This REU Site award to Harvard University's Harvard Forest is supported by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences (BIO) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS). The REU program,
located in Petersham, MA, will support the training of 12 students for 11 weeks
during the summers of 2015- 2019. Research will focus on collecting,
visualizing, analyzing, and communicating ecological "Big Data". Students will
be mentored by researchers who are conducting innovative forest ecology
research. The program aims to meet five overarching objectives: 1) Enhancing the
ability of students to undertake high-quality interdisciplinary research; 2)
Building teams of researchers in which students bring different strengths to the
table, collaborate on cutting-edge projects, and find their own intellectual
"voice"; 3) Encouraging students to link fundamental and applied issues in
science; 4) Communicating research findings to a wide range of audiences; and 5)
Cultivating the next generation of ecological scientists and educators that
reflects the diversity of backgrounds and experiences of students in the United
States. The Harvard Forest REU program actively recruits students from a broad
spectrum of cultural, economic, educational, and ethnic diversity. The Harvard
Forest's commitment to diversity was recognized with the 2014 Human Diversity
Award from the Organization for Biological Field Stations. Over the next five
years, the program is committed to enhancing diversity and cultivating the next
generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total
of 60 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will
be trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and
many will present their results at scientific conferences. Students
participating in collaborative groups are fully involved in the development and
execution of projects on the cutting edge of ecological research. Students are
also encouraged to develop independent projects that reflect their own interests
and observations. Students participate in workshops on ethics, scientific
writing, and presenting and analyzing data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
maintain contact with Harvard Forest so that the impact of the Summer Research
Program on their career progress can be assessed. Demographic data about
students are collected through responses to emails sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information is available by visiting
http://harvardforest.fas.harvard.edu/other-tags/reu, or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Aaron Ellison at aellison@fas.harvard.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Andrew
Richardson at arichardson@oeb.harvard.edu).