* 1459506
* Collaborative Research:  Multiscale modeling of internal tides at topographic generation sites: turbulence and wave energetics:
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Alberto Scotti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 318,228.00

Turbulent processes associated with internal waves occurring at or near the
generation sites of internal tides are key ingredients in maintaining and
regulating the global ocean circulation which is a crucial component of the
climate system affecting simultaneously the uptake of carbon dioxide into the
ocean and the meridional transport of heat. Accurate computation of the
magnitude and spatial distribution of turbulent dissipation is necessary for the
development of physically based parameterizations of conversion and dissipation
rates in the near-field. Qualitative changes in turbulence occur when geometry,
barotropic forcing and environmental parameters change. The spatial and temporal
scales of the physical processes that drive the turbulent energy dissipation
during the generation of internal waves span several orders of magnitude. To
address these knowledge gaps, a multi-scale approach is necessary to span the
disparity between scales: from the scale of the outgoing low-mode internal tide
(vertical scale is of order one kilometer, horizontal scale is of order tens of
kilometers, time is of order hours) through the nonlinear formation of higher
wave number modes to, finally, the turbulence events (spatial scale of meters
and time scale of minutes). The integration of models across disparate scales is
not only relevant to ocean sciences but also of great interest in many areas of
science and engineering, e.g., the representation of turbulent boundary layer
processes in medium- and long-term weather forecasting. The broader community
interested in developing or applying parameterizations will have access to the
simulation data and the numerical model code. Two graduate students will be
trained and gain valuable experience in applying cutting edge numerical tools to
a complex ocean problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A numerical investigation of the
generation process of internal waves by barotropic tidal flow over an isolated
topographic feature scales with the relevant non-dimensional parameters will be
conducted. The driving hypothesis is that only the inclusion of turbulence in a
realistic way can provide a correct description of the dissipation rates during
generation and near-field propagation of internal waves at these sites. The
scale-separation will be handled through a novel hierarchical approach that
combines Large Eddy Simulation (LES) at small scales with the Stratified Ocean
Model with Adaptive Refinement (SOMAR) for the large scales. The LES model,
equipped with a sophisticated subgrid-scale model, is capable of providing a
faithful description of turbulence, without the need of tunable parameters. The
non-hydrostatic SOMAR is specifically optimized to deal with the anisotropy of
the internal wave problem. The goal is to implement a two-way nested SOMAR-LES
model so that the LES is driven with realistic forcing, and SOMAR receives
realistic turbulent feedbacks. We will do so for a model triangular ridge at
oceanic scales over a wide range of key non-dimensional parameters: overall
Excursion number, obstacle criticality, inner Excursion number and length of
critical slope. The simulations will be analyzed to ascertain (i) the dependence
of internal wave energetics on the non-dimensional parameters, and (ii) a better
understanding of stabilities, turbulence and associated dissipation rates in the
near-field.