* 1459384
* Collaborative Research: The impacts of mating system variation on ecological performance and evolutionary diversification in a clade of marine snails
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Stephanie Kamel, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2021
* USD 368,247.00

At present, virtually nothing is known about how mating systems vary within and
among individuals, populations, and species of marine organisms. Indeed,
characterizing mating system variation in the sea, and its effects on
fundamental ecological and evolutionary patterns and processes, now represents a
challenge perhaps equal in importance to the study of population connectivity
that has occupied many marine ecologists for the last three decades. Snails in
the genus Nucella are important intertidal predators and provide an exceptional
model system for exploring how mating systems control critical ecological and
evolutionary processes and patterns. By integrating insights from population and
behavioral ecology, and life-history theory, combined with genetic,
experimental, and phylogenetic approaches, this project will generate novel
insights into the impacts of mating system variation on the ecological and
evolutionary dynamics of marine systems. This project will significantly advance
our understanding of how mating system variation in marine systems influences
individuals, populations, and species, with important implications for better
predicting how processes such as climate change, habitat fragmentation, and
harvesting will influence population dynamics, speciation, and ecosystem
function. Through partnerships with established programs, including (1) a UC
Davis-Howard University program that supports research internships at UC Davis
for Howard undergraduates every year; (2) new programs at Bodega Marine Lab
(CAMEOS and ISOpods) to develop self-contained marine science modules in the
classroom; (3) training of K-12 educators through the Sacramento Area Science
Project; (4) a newly funded NSF grant at UC Davis to produce a new, statewide
?Modeling scientific practice in high school biology? curriculum; (5) military
veteran placements through the UNCW Office of Transitional programs; and (6) the
UNCW eTEAL (Experiencing Transformative Education through Applied Learning)
program, emphasizing undergraduate research in molecular ecology, this project
will train numerous under-represented students, scientists, and teachers in
modern ecology, genetics, and phylogenetics. In addition, the project interfaces
with multiple educational programs through partnerships with the Exploratorium,
NOAA?s expansion of west coast marine sanctuaries and outreach programs, and
science communications programs at UC Davis and UNCW. NSF funding over the last
4 years has supported 5 Ph.D. students (4 women), 3 postdocs (1 woman, 1
Hispanic), and 9 undergraduates (5 women, 2
minority).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Worldwide, anthropogenic and natural processes
are rapidly modifying patterns of environmental variation that affect the traits
of individuals, populations, species, and communities, and that ultimately
threaten both biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. These threats are often
viewed in the context of (a) reductions in population size or density; (b)
changes in demographic and genetic connectivity; and (c) Allee effects, where
reduced local densities limit mating success. Though less-well studied ?
especially in marine systems ? environmental perturbations can also rapidly
alter the mating systems of populations. Numerous studies show that intra- and
inter-specific variation in mating systems has major impacts on a broad spectrum
of ecological and evolutionary processes (e.g., dispersal, population dynamics,
life-history diversity, and speciation), that can profoundly influence the
sustainability of marine ecosystems. The investigators? previous NSF-funded work
established, for the first time in any marine organism, that the mating system
strongly influences both offspring size variation and reproductive
compatibilities in the predatory marine snail Nucella ostrina. This work raised
several major questions regarding the ecology of marine organisms. Through field
experiments, mating trials, genetic analyses, and phylogenetically explicit
comparisons, the present project will comprehensively examine the fundamental
roles that mating systems play in (1) generating ecologically relevant trait
variation; (2) driving reproductive isolation; and (3) shaping macro-ecological
patterns of life-history variation. This research will broaden our understanding
of the critical role that mating systems play in the ecology and diversification
of marine organisms, and provide the foundation for understanding how changes in
population demographics and mating systems can influence both short term
population dynamics and longer term responses to environmental change.