* 1459686
* Asymptotic Properties for Models of Strategic Network Formation
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Konrad Menzel, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 246,254.00

Network models can be used to describe the structure and the effects of various
systems of contracts, transactions, and other formal or informal relationships
between economic agents. In these contexts, the consequences of economic
policies often depend crucially on the structure of a social or economic
network, as well as the forces and incentives shaping that structure. This
project develops a tractable empirical model of network formation that has
credible micro-foundations. Given the broad range of applications for network
models, the techniques and insights envisioned in the proposed project may also
be useful for researchers in other social sciences, education, public health and
related fields. We consider static models of network formation, where links are
undirected and a link can be severed unilaterally by either agent. We formulate
a random utility model to describe agents' preferences over potential links, and
assume pairwise stability as a solution concept. The main objective of the
proposed research is to derive the asymptotic distribution of pairwise stable
links, assuming that the number of agents in the network grows large. Our formal
results will then be used for identification, estimation, and welfare analysis,
where we plan to develop specific applications in the context of the proposed
activity. In addition to providing a tractable empirical model that can be used
to uncover the incentives behind link formation decisions, the limiting
approximation can serve as a building block for modeling and estimation of peer
effects and other forms of strategic interaction on networks with endogenous
link formation.