* 1459208
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS - The Predictive Power of Beliefs:  Testing a Norm-Based Utility Function
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Gretchen Chapman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 01/31/2017
* USD 22,816.00

The purpose of the present work is to test an operationalization of norms
proposed by Dr. Cristina Bicchieri, which embeds this concept into the rational
actor model from decision theory. In a series of two studies, the researchers
will test whether two often-cited effects in the social dilemma literature (the
influence of social cues and group membership) can be accounted for by their
impact on participants' beliefs about the existing social norm, as defined by
Dr. Bicchieri and measured using procedures she developed. In a third study, the
researchers will test the ability of Dr. Bicchieri's norm-based utility function
to predict cooperation behavior across social dilemma tasks. If successful, this
would support the usefulness of embedding norms into the rational choice model
(as behavioral economists have been doing with other "social preferences").
Lastly, a fourth study will test Dr. Bicchieri's claim that the norms that solve
coordination problems (where self and social interests dovetail) are sustained
via a different mechanism than those that solve social dilemmas (where self and
social interests diverge). In particular, we will observe whether third-party
reward, punishment, and compensation behavior differs as a function of the type
of norm necessary to reach the socially optimal outcome. Evidence in line with
our predictions would support Dr. Bicchieri?s dichotomy of norms into two types
and present another method for detecting the existence of norms other than
belief elicitation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The norms of an environment influence
people's expectations about what is commonly done and what is commonly approved
or disapproved. These expectations can subsequently influence a person's actions
as norm-abiding behavior is informally rewarded and violations are punished
(starting with gossip, ostracism, and then exclusion). From a policy
perspective, efforts aimed at improving the welfare of society by introducing
formal rules will benefit from an examination of the current informal rules
governing a group's actions. To the extent that the existing informal rules
legitimize the formal ones, the cost of enforcing the new formal rules will be
lower and vice versa. However, the concept of norms remains imprecise, and real-
world applications remain infeasible, without an operational definition and a
model of their impact on behavior.