* 1459847
* White Flight, Discrimination, and the Origins of Urban Segregation in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Randall Walsh, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2019
* USD 431,689.00

Residential segregation by race is one of the most visible and persistent
characteristics of American cities. This project improves our knowledge of the
emergence of segregation in the United States with a series of data and
methodological advances. Whereas previous work on the causes of segregation
relied largely on descriptive analyses and coarse tabulations of urban
populations, this project constructs the first fine-grained, spatial demographic
dataset with neighborhood comparability over time for the early twentieth
century. &lt;br/&gt;The emergence of segregation in the United States merits
more thorough empirical investigation because of its implications for
understanding racial disparities in the United States as well as attempts to
achieve integration and equality. Policymakers have primarily focused on
dismantling discriminatory informal institutions to reduce segregation, most
notably with the Fair Housing Act of 1968, which outlawed discrimination by
sellers and landlords based on race. Yet segregation remains a significant issue
nearly a half century later. The proposed analysis illuminates this problem by
revisiting the scholarly consensus that discriminatory informal institutions
were the driving force behind the rise of segregation in American
cities.&lt;br/&gt;Because research on segregation crosses disciplinary
boundaries, the data and methods developed over the course of this project will
attract broad interest across the social sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project digitizes and synthesizes a significant set of related historical
geographic data sources, including maps of comprehensive zoning ordinances, land
use, HOLC/FHA security zones, streetcar grids, and the location of restrictive
covenants. With this advance in data quality, the PIs address previously
unanswerable questions about what led to the emergence of segregation in
American cities. In particular, they isolate and systematically investigate the
role of uncoordinated market choices, informal institutions, and government
policies on the emergence of racial residential segregation.&lt;br/&gt;The
findings will shed light on how segregation arose in American cities, providing
context for policymaking related to integration and the elimination of racial
disparities. More generally, the capacity of scholars to rigorously investigate
the early development of American cities has been hampered by the near total
lack of systematic fine-scale spatial data covering urban areas in the early
twentieth century. This project remedies this gap in the nation's statistical
infrastructure by compiling census data for small geographic areas and creating
consistent neighborhoods over time.