* 1459677
* A new mechanism for Mode water formation at a thermohaline ocean front
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Leif Thomas, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 390,494.00

In every ocean basin, on the equatorward side of major ocean fronts, layers of
weakly stratified waters with nearly homogeneous properties are found. These so-
called "mode waters" play an important role in the coupled ocean-atmosphere
system by sequestering and releasing heat and carbon dioxide on interannual
timescales and by affecting the large-scale circulation through shaping the
potential vorticity field. Current climate models have difficulties accurately
forming mode waters with the correct temperature and salinity properties, which
is a concern given their influence on interannual ocean and climate variability.
The mechanisms explaining their formation are not well understood but appear to
be shaped by the dynamics of the ocean fronts that mark their poleward extent. A
new mode water formation mechanism that has a clear connection to fronts and
involves cabbeling, submesoscale lateral mixing, and frontogenesis will be
explored. Cabbeling refers to the process by which two water masses of equal
density but different temperature and salinity are mixed to create a new, denser
water mass, as a result of nonlinearities in the equation of state for seawater.
The theory that forms the basis of this project suggests that the properties of
mode waters are influenced by cabbeling at fronts. The dynamics necessarily
involves submesoscale processes, which have received much attention in recent
years, but in the framework of a linear equation of state. The coupling between
submesoscale motions and cabbeling through changes in density has the potential
for new, rich physics that will be explored in this project. The expected
findings should help inform strategies to improve the simulation of mode waters
in ocean circulation and climate models and should be important for quantifying
the flux of nutrients at the fronts that mark gyre boundaries. The project
includes mentoring and support of a promising postdoctoral researcher. A high
school science teacher will be given training on laboratory demonstrations that
illustrate the physics of the ocean, atmosphere, and climate that can be
incorporated in their courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A simple two-dimension
model for the water mass transformation due to cabbeling at a thermohaline front
forced by frontogenetic strain and equilibrated by lateral mixing correctly
predicts the isopycnal layers where mode waters are observed to reside and
suggests that the mechanism could be responsible for persistent, hence
significant, mode water formation. This project will test and extend the simple
model using a more complete theory and two sets of numerical simulations
designed to study the process on scales spanning the width of a basin to the
width of a front. The theory will consider partially compensated fronts and use
the semi-geostrophic equations to capture the feedback of secondary circulations
on frontogenesis and quantify its effect on cabbeling. The objectives of the
basin-scale simulations are to test the theoretical prediction for mode water
formation in a three-dimensional, double-gyre circulation and to explore the
role of lateral mixing and cabbeling in setting the T-S relation of mode waters.
The second set of simulations will be configured with a thermohaline front
collocated with a sheet of cyclonic vorticity modeled after flow observed in the
Gulf Stream. The submesoscale shear instabilities that develop and the isopycnal
mixing of temperature and salt they induce will be studied to determine how
cabbeling should be parameterized via an eddy diffusivity. In addition, the
potential dynamical feedbacks of cabbeling on the submesoscale instabilities
will be investigated.