* 1459480
* Coastal Ocean Carbon Cycling during Wintertime Conditions
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Miguel Goni, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2019
* USD 873,475.00

As is true for many coastal regions worldwide, the Pacific Northwest margin is
characterized by intense seasonal contrasts in conditions controlling carbon
flux between the atmosphere, land, and ocean. During the wintertime, rapid and
intense flooding of small coastal rivers and the associated inputs of
freshwater, nutrients, and organic matter are commonplace in the Pacific
Northwest. Impacts of these wintertime terrestrial-ocean transfers by small,
flood-prone rivers on the upwelling regions, such as the Pacific Northwest, have
been underestimated at both global and regional scales. In order to gain a
complete and predictive understanding of carbon cycling in ocean margins, the
biogeochemistry of periods of intense terrestrial-ocean transfers needs to be
comprehensively studied. This project will evaluate the dynamics of organic
matter cycling along an upwelling-dominated margin during the wintertime period
of active terrestrial inputs and biological cycling using a combination of
shipboard, glider, moored and remote measurements. New developments in ocean
observational technologies through the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI)* and
existing scientific infrastructure along the Oregon coast will be instrumental
in achieving this goal. This work will provide research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, and outreach will be conducted through the
Centers for Ocean Science Education Excellence Pacific Partnership, local
coastal community colleges, and interpretative centers such as Oregon State
University Hatfield Center, the Umpqua Discovery Center, and Oregon Coast
Aquarium in an effort to educate students and the public about the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Globally, most studies of carbon cycling in
eastern boundary regimes have focused on the upwelling phase during the summer
months, resulting in a much poorer understanding of non-upwelling periods. As is
many coastal upwelling systems, wintertime conditions along the Pacific
Northwest margin are characterized by southerly, downwelling-favorable winds and
moisture-laden storms that result in seasonal flooding by the numerous small to
medium-sized rivers in the region. Elevated discharges by these coastal rivers
translate into large inputs of land-derived biogeochemical relevant
constituents, including freshwater, dissolved inorganic nutrients, and dissolved
and particulate organic matter, which collectively rival or exceed those of the
Columbia River. To understand the impact of flood-derived terrestrial inputs on
the biogeochemistry of the coastal zone along the Pacific Northwest margin,
researchers will conduct a detailed investigation of biogeochemical processes in
the water column along the Newport Hydrographic Line off the central Oregon
coast during fall/winter conditions. The project includes an intensive field
effort that takes advantage of ship-based and autonomous platforms to gain
comprehensive wintertime coverage. Among the project outcomes, this effort will
lead to a revised paradigm of the biogeochemical drivers of carbon cycling in
coastal margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*The Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI)
is an NSF-funded, networked infrastructure of science-driven sensor systems to
measure the physical, chemical, geological and biological variables in the ocean
and seafloor. For more information about OOI, please visit the website:
www.oceanobservatories.org