* 1459522
* Investigating the influence of thermal history on coral growth response to recent and predicted end-of-century ocean warming across a cascade of ecological scales
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,12/31/2023
* Karl Castillo, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Brian Midson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 871,228.00

Rising global ocean surface temperatures have reduced coral growth rates,
thereby negatively impacting the health of coral reef ecosystems worldwide.
Recent studies on tropical reef building corals reveal that corals' growth in
response to ocean warming may be influenced by their previous seawater
temperature exposure - their thermal history. Although these recent findings
highlight significant variability in coral growth in response to climate change,
uncertainty remains as to the spatial scale at which corals' thermal history
influences how they have responded to ocean warming and how they will likely
respond to predicted future increases in ocean temperature. This study
investigates the influence of thermal history on coral growth in response to
recent and predicted seawater temperatures increases across four ecologically
relevant spatial scales ranging from reef ecosystems, to reef communities, to
reef populations, to an individual coral colony. By understanding how corals
have responded in the past across a range of ecological scales, the Principal
Investigator will be able to improve the ability to predict their susceptibility
and resilience, which could then be applied to coral reef conservation in the
face of climate change. This research project will broaden the participation of
undergraduates from underrepresented groups and educate public radio listeners
using minority voices and narratives. The scientist will leverage current and
new partnerships to recruit and train minority undergraduates, thus allowing
them to engage high school students near field sites in Florida, Belize, and
Panama. Through peer advising, undergraduates will document this research on a
digital news site for dissemination to the public. The voice of the
undergraduates and scientist will ground the production of a public radio
feature exploring the topic of acclimatization and resilience - a capacity for
stress tolerance within coral reef ecosystems. This project will provide a
postdoctoral researcher and several graduate students with opportunities for
field and laboratory research training, teaching and mentoring, and professional
development. The results will allow policy makers from Florida, the Mesoamerican
Barrier Reef System countries, and several Central American countries to benefit
from Caribbean-scale inferences that incorporate corals' physiological
abilities, thereby improving coral reef management for the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral reefs are at significant risk due to a
variety of local and global scale anthropogenic stressors. Although various
stressors contribute to the observed decline in coral reef health, recent
studies highlight rising seawater temperatures due to increasing atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentration as one of the most significant stressors
influencing coral growth rates. However, there is increasing recognition of
problems of scale since a coral's growth response to an environmental stressor
may be conditional on the scale of description. This research will investigate
the following research questions: (1) How has seawater temperature on reef
ecosystems (Florida Keys Reef Tract, USA; Belize Barrier Reef System, Belize;
and Bocas Del Toro Reef Complex, Panama), reef communities (inshore and offshore
reefs), reef populations (individual reefs), and near reef colonies (individual
colonies), varied in the past? (2) How has seawater temperature influenced rates
of coral growth and how does the seawater temperature-coral growth relationship
vary across these four ecological spatial scales? (3) Does the seawater
temperature-coral growth relationship forecast rates of coral growth under
predicted end-of-century ocean warming at the four ecological spatial scales?
Long term sea surface temperature records and small-scale high-resolution in
situ seawater temperature measurements will be compared with growth chronologies
for the reef building corals Siderastrea siderea and Orbicella faveolata, two
keystone species ubiquitously distributed throughout the Caribbean Sea.
Nutrients and irradiance will be quantified via satellite-derived observations,
in situ measurements, and established colorimetric protocols. Field and
laboratory experiments will be combined to examine seawater temperature-coral
growth relationships under recent and predicted end-of-century ocean warming at
four ecologically relevant spatial scales. The findings of this study will help
us bridge the temperature-coral growth response gap across ecologically relevant
spatial scales and thus improve our understanding of how corals have responded
to recent warming. This will lead to more meaningful predictions about future
coral growth response to climate change.