* 1459950
* Collaborative Research: Trade Costs, Preferences, and Government Policies: Understanding Market Outcomes in the World Automobile Industry
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Felix Tintelnot, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2020
* USD 254,631.00

The goal of this project is to quantify the sources of market segmentation, and
to understand the implications of trade and investment frictions on the world
automotive industry. The framework enables the PIs to assess the importance of
trade costs, preferences for domestic brands, and demand heterogeneity. The PIs
also quantify the impact of tariff and non-tariff barriers (e.g. arising from
differences in fuel prices and environmental regulation) on market outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;The project will be the first to develop consistent estimates of
automobile demand and marginal costs using data across several continents. This
geographical variation allows the PIs to estimate a variety of trade-related
costs while accounting for model-level unobserved heterogeneity and home bias.
This approach disentangles barriers set by policies from technological barriers
such as transport costs. The scope of their analysis will advance the state of
knowledge on the interactions between trade costs, preference heterogeneity, and
government policies in shaping market outcomes in the automobile industry and in
international trade more broadly. &lt;br/&gt;The study will evaluate the
importance of trade costs versus preference differences in the world trade in
automobiles---a major manufacturing industry. This will lead to further insights
into understanding the incentives of firms to conduct foreign direct investment
and conduct market-specific model development. The dataset with assembly
location included will be a valuable resource for analyzing the importance of
FDI in the auto industry. The estimates on the importance of tariff and non-
tariff barriers in the automotive industry will inform policy makers for the
ongoing Trade and Investment Partnership negotiations between the U.S. and the
EU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To undertake this research, the PIs first construct a
new data set by linking sales data from nine countries on three separate
continents, collected by the consulting firm Polk Automotive, with a world
census of assembly locations by model---collected by WardsAuto. They link these
datasets to yield a model-level data on sales, prices, characteristics, assembly
and headquarters location. Second, they use this data to estimate a structural
model of international demand for automobiles. Extending techniques pioneered by
Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995), they propose a model that accounts for inter
and intra country heterogeneity in tastes for characteristics and income to
flexibly estimate elasticities for automobiles in each country. This demand
model will measure the importance of ?home bias? or the tendency of consumers to
prefer their local manufacturers to foreign manufacturers. A key feature of
their model is to separate these demand driven explanations from supply side
drivers. Third, they use prices and demand elasticities to construct estimates
of the marginal cost of supplying each automobile to each market, and use them
to estimate the supply side of the model. Going forward, the cost and demand
estimates can be used to analyze firms? location and marketing decisions and
study the impact of potential policy interventions.