* 1459903
* Collaborative Research: Multi-scale Modeling of Public Perceptions of Heat Wave Risk
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Peter Howe, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 07/31/2018
* USD 153,322.00

Extreme heat events are currently the leading weather-related cause of death in
the U.S. and have numerous impacts on important social systems including food,
water, energy and infrastructure. It is vital to understand how both the public
at large and vulnerable populations perceive the risks of extreme heat, how they
decide to take action to mitigate these risks, and how their prior experiences
shape future responses. People can take action to reduce the health risks of
extreme heat, including the use of fans and air conditioning, proper hydration,
and avoiding overexertion, but they must first be aware of the risks and
appropriate mitigation behaviors. This research project will identify the
psychological, social, cultural, and geographic factors that are associated with
public perceptions of extreme heat risks, map these risk perceptions at high
resolution across the United States, and analyze how vulnerability to extreme
heat events corresponds with public risk perceptions. The results will enable
emergency managers and policymakers to precisely target preparedness efforts,
risk communication strategies, and other resources to protect vulnerable
populations from harm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about the factors
that influence risk perceptions of heat waves, even though such perceptions are
known to be a key determinant of how people respond to environmental hazards. To
investigate the factors and context that shape public risk perceptions and
responses to heat waves, the researchers will conduct a nationally
representative survey over the duration of the warm season (May-September) in
the U.S. The data will be used to create a spatially explicit statistical model
to identify factors related to heat wave risk perceptions, including personal
experience with heat waves, local climate, land cover, and socioeconomic
variables at the individual, neighborhood, and regional scales. Research on
other hazards suggests that recent personal experience is likely to play a major
role in risk perception, along with individual-level factors, such as age and
gender. Contextual factors, such as location relative to urban heat islands, may
amplify risk perceptions. Results from the statistical model will be applied to
create a high-resolution national map of risk perceptions at the county and
census tract levels, and model projections will subsequently be validated by
independent surveys.