* 1459665
* Collaborative Research: A Model-Based Synthesis of Mid Atlantic Bight Pioneer Array Data to Infer Across-shelf Fluxes, Frontal Variability, and Characteristics of the Array
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Andrew Moore, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 307,062.00

In support of the National Science Foundation Ocean Observatories Initiative,
the objective of the proposed research is to provide a synthesis of all existing
and future observations collected by the Pioneer Array in the Mid-Atlantic
Bight. Observation impact and observation sensitivity calculations will be used
to evaluate the observing array. Until now, this has been largely the domain of
numerical weather prediction. The proposed research will yield a sequence of
high quality circulation analyses for the Mid-Atlantic Bight that will shed new
light on the relative role of instability, eddy fluxes and surface forcing in
promoting cross-shelf exchange and in shaping the circulation of the region. The
resulting circulation analyses will be made available on a web server at Rutgers
University and will represent a valuable community resource. Model
configurations from this project will be used to frame lectures for
international summer schools addressing advanced methods in applied coastal
ocean modeling and data assimilation to senior graduate students and early
career scientists. The project will also train a graduate student.

The specific goals of the project are to: (i) compute retroactive and near real-
time analyses of the ocean circulation in the domain spanned by the Pioneer
Array using a state-of-the-art ocean model and data assimilation system; (ii)
explore the dynamics of shelf exchange processes; and (iii) evaluate the Pioneer
Array design using dynamically motivated metrics of the shelf circulation. The
Pioneer Array observations will be synthesized using a multi-scale configuration
of the Regional Ocean Modeling System and a 4-dimensional variational data
assimilation system. Being directly constrained by the observations, the
resulting 3-dimensional time-evolving circulation estimates will be more
reliable than either the model or the observations considered in isolation. The
circulation estimates are expected to span the period 2015-2018 and will provide
a valuable and seamless multi-year and multi-scale ocean data set that will be
used to explore the dynamics of shelf-break processes in the region including
seasonal variability in cross-shelf fluxes associated with stratification, eddy
fluxes, the formation of boundary layers, and the occurrence of episodic
exchange events across the shelf-break. The ability of the moored and mobile
components of the Pioneer Array to address specific science questions will be
evaluated using a suite of sophisticated analysis tools that quantify the impact
of individual observations and assets on specific circulation metrics that
target the aforementioned physical processes. The complimentary suite of tools
used will include observation impact and observation sensitivity calculations,
identification of the array modes, and observing system simulation experiments