* 1459789
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Law, the Environment, and the Social Construction of Public Interest
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Mona Lynch, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2017
* USD 21,944.00

Many Americans proclaim a preference for renewable energy over traditional fuel
sources, yet actual renewable-energy projects frequently draw opposition from
communities in which they may be sited. Complaints of environmental damage and
aesthetic blight are common responses to any unwanted development project,
pitting the clean energy against the preservation of land and landscape, memory,
and identity. This raises important questions for policymakers, scientists, and
communities concerned with sustainable development: What does it mean to be in
the public interest? Who has authority to define that interest? And through what
means might such definitions emerge or be
imposed?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of California, Irvine, doctoral
student, Alyse Bertenthal, under the supervision of Dr. Mona Lynch, will address
these questions through a case study of a recent proposal to develop a million-
panel solar farm that has generated significant controversy in a region that has
long struggled over the allocation and management of its soil, minerals, and
water. The researcher will use a mixed methods approach, including interviews,
participant observation, GIS/GPS mapping, and the historical analysis of court
documents to shed light on how laws, society, and the environment have
interacted over time. Examining these disputes both ethnographically and
historically allows the researcher to elucidate how individuals and groups
construct themselves as "the public" as they negotiate legal claims to land and
resources. By untangling constructions and contestations of public identity
through resource management, this project will contribute to efforts to
understand the discourses, logic, and practices through which people define
themselves; how they situate their pasts and futures in particular places; and
how law mediates these processes. Findings from this research will provide
insight into the challenges confronted by policymakers legislating a more
sustainable America and by the people who must sustain such policies.