* 1459293
* Collaborative Research: The cryptic diet of the globally significant pelagic tunicate Dolioletta gegenbauri (Uljanin, 1884.)
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Marc Frischer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2019
* USD 535,553.00

Gelatinous (soft-bodied) zooplankton can play a crucial role in food webs and in
cycling of materials in the world's oceans, and it has been suggested that they
may become even more important in the future. However, because they are so
difficult to study, gelatinous species remain poorly understood. This is
especially true for smaller filter feeding gelatinous animals such as pelagic
tunicates (salps, larvaceans, and doliolids). For example, it remains unclear
what and how much these abundant filter feeders eat in nature and who eats them.
This project will address this large and significant knowledge gap by using a
combination of new and traditional methods to investigate the diet of the
gelatinous pelagic tunicate Dolioletti gegenbauri, a species common on
productive continental shelves such as the South Atlantic Bight. This project
will also help train the next generation of ocean scientists to be competent in
classical biology, modern molecular biology, and ecosystem modeling. Training
will also focus on increasing representation of African Americans in the future
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide the first quantitative
estimates of the in situ diet of a key continental shelf gelatinous zooplankton
species, the doliolid Dolioletta gegenbauri. Large blooms of doliolids have the
potential to control the trophic structure of shelf pelagic ecosystems by
shunting primary production to the microbial food web and by limiting copepod
production via the consumption of their eggs. The long-term objective is to
understand the ecological role and significance of doliolids in continental
shelf pelagic ecosystems, specifically the underlying processes that lead to
their high level of spatial and temporal patchiness. The basic questions to be
addressed here include: What do doliolids eat, in situ, at different life
stages? Are early life stages of larger metazoans important components of their
diets? Do doliolids act as trophic cascade agents promoting primary production
and phytoplankton diversity? Because of methodological challenges, there have
not yet been definitive studies addressing these fundamental questions. In this
project, the investigators will conduct field-based studies that will combine
state-of-the art molecular techniques with more traditional methods in
zooplankton ecology to answer questions about trophic interactions. Monthly
oceanographic expeditions in the South Atlantic Bight will allow the research
team to study wild doliolids at different time points in their life cycle and
under different plankton bloom conditions. Application of recently developed
molecular diagnostic assays will enable the quantitative description of the
diversity and quantity of prey consumed, unbiased by experimental manipulation.
Additional experimental and theoretical modeling will allow the investigators to
link these data with larger ecological significance and scale.