* 1459757
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Anthropological Analysis of Political and Legal Reform in a Context of Democratization
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Erik Harms, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 17,325.00

American national interests and our economic competitiveness are served best
when the free flow of information, ideas, goods, and services are permitted
between nations. The success or failure of political and legal reform in new
democracies depends on how well such developments calibrate with the local
understandings about what constitute rights and obligations. This project, which
trains a graduate student in conducting rigorous, empirically grounded
scientific fieldwork, asks how such rights and obligations are being negotiated
in a newly democratizing context. The results will be useful to policy and
development practitioners who analyze the preconditions that are necessary for
democratization and political stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elliott Prasse-
Freeman, under the supervision of Dr. Erik Harms of Yale University, explores
how rights are invoked and technologies of rule are engaged in a context of
democratization. The research takes place in Burma (Myanmar), which appears to
be transitioning to a democratic system after a half-century of military rule.
The researcher's unique access to this site gives us an opportunity to explore
how rights discourse and democratic transition happens in real time. As former
military leaders of Burma have formed a tense pact with opposition politicians
to forge reforms, rights have been subject to debate. Reformers and
international partners endorse the political liberal idea of rights as
reflecting absolute standards that individuals have by the mere fact of being
members of a polity or which are fundamentally afforded to humanity; some
Burmese, on the other hand, appear to find a concept of rights (in which rights
are thought to exist outside of a specific context) as not reflecting their
realities. They instead look at rights as synonymous with 'opportunities' (the
words are interchangeable in Burmese language). Attaining a right is subject to
social position, negotiation skill, resources, and to some extent, randomness.
The project hypothesizes that in Burma 'rights' often have meaning only to the
extent that actors have the opportunities to realize them. In this perspective,
rather than delivering formal rights through reformed laws and policies, Burmese
may demand structural transformations of the existing distribution of power and
resources in their society. The project would advances scientific debates in
anthropology about the state and politics, discussions of political
organizations and power that earlier anthropologists had situated in Burma and
Southeast Asia, and rights and law. The project connects historic
anthropological debates about nonwestern political systems with contemporary
discussions of governmentality. The research will use a number of methods,
including: documentation and analysis of social movements and legal strategies;
semi-structured interviews (of lawyers and movement members); analysis of social
movement tactics; and, most importantly, ethnographic participant observation
with movement members and lawyers.