* 1459963
* Social Networks, Transactive Memory and Team Performance:  An Experimental Investigation
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Brandy Aven, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeryl Mumpower
* 03/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Teams are increasingly used in a variety of organizational contexts, including
education, health care, government and for-profit firms. Information about how
to increase their effectiveness promises to improve the performance and
competitiveness of organizations in the U.S. and the well being of their
members. Our proposed research has implications not only for teams in
traditional work settings but also in new emerging settings such as distributed
work teams and online communities. We identify the patterns of communication
that lead to the strongest transactive memory and the highest team performance.
Thus, the research will result in information that team members and leaders can
use to improve their team's performance. In addition, the development of a
behavioral measure of TMS would enable researchers to analyze TMS in large teams
and geographically distributed contexts, which are becoming increasingly
prevalent in organizations and online communities around the world. All
together, the results have the potential to advance our understanding of team
collaboration, team formation, communication networks and team
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research examines the effects of
communication networks on transactive memory system development and team
performance. A transactive memory system (TMS) is a collective system for
encoding, storing and retrieving information. Teams with well-developed TMSs
have been found to perform better across a variety of tasks compared to teams
lacking TMSs. Known as systems of "who knows what," a TMS emerges through
communications and interactions among team members as they learn and rely on
each other's skills and knowledge. Although a TMS hinges on communication and
interaction, very little research has been conducted on how communication
networks affect a group's TMS. Communication networks constrain or enable
communication within a team and thus potentially alter the development of TMS.
Our research investigates the characteristics of communication networks that
enhance the development of TMS in a series of studies incorporating
complementary laboratory and archival methods. First, we manipulate the
communication networks that exist within teams in an experiment to examine the
effects of network characteristics on the team's TMS and performance. We
investigate two dimensions of team performance: the number of errors and
creativity. Second, because in many contexts individuals choose their own
networks and/or their positions within the network, we compare the effects of
networks and position assignments that are imposed by the experimenter to those
that are chosen by participants. This enables us to determine if effects
observed are due to the communication network itself or due to participants'
enactment of the network. By manipulating the networks and using random
assignment to networks and to positions within the networks, we are able to make
causal statements about the effects of network characteristics on TMS
development and team performance. Third, using data from our experiments, we
will develop and refine a new unobtrusive, behavioral measure of TMS. This
measure will be applied to data from real teams who use online networks for
large-scale technology-mediated projects. Following the validation of this new
TMS measure, we will examine how it relates to performance for large online
teams.