* 1459879
* Federal Reserve Credibility and the Term Structure
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Aeimit Lakdawala, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2018
* USD 99,561.00

The award funds research on the relationship between monetary policy and the
term structure of interest rates (how interest rates with the length/term of a
loan). Understanding this relationship is important for central bankers, who
need to understand how their actions affect long-term interest rates and
therefore the economy as a whole. Investors also want to understand this
relationship, because it is important for making the best possible investment
decisions. Previous research has demonstrated that the credibility of a central
bank is an important factor in this relationship. If a central bank has no
credibility, then its current decisions do not affect investors' expectations
about the future and likely future interest rates. Alternative, a bank might
have "full commitment", where it chooses a monetary policy rule and does not
make any changes in that rule over long time periods. This project defines
commitment possibilities between these two options, in which a central bank has
the ability to commit to future plans but may sometimes revise these plans. The
research team will use data and a model of the US economy to identify past
periods where the Federal Reserve made changes in previous commitments and will
then explore how these episodes affected term structures. The results of the
project will give policymakers and investors new insight into the pros and cons
of central bank commitments.

The project considers a general framework of optimal monetary policy where
credibility is defined as the ability to commit to previously announced plans;
this nests the commonly used cases in the literature of full commitment and no
commitment. The definition of credibility is based on the theoretical literature
on time-inconsistency and estimated within a fully optimizing model. The
estimation framework uses recent Bayesian econometric techniques in the context
of regime-switching models which allows the identification of historical
episodes where Fed re-optimizations were more likely to have occurred. The
project will evaluate the quantitative effects of re-optimization episodes on
the term premium.