* 1459175
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Weather Risk, Climate Adaptation and Farmer Decision Making in the Southwestern United States
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Catherine Day, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2017
* USD 13,832.00

This project will focus on analyzing financial support and information available
to different groups of farmers in the southwestern United States, all of whom
are facing increasing weather challenges, especially in the form of water
shortages. The project will analyze how different sets of resources and access
to those resources may enhance farm resilience to ecological and economic
challenges. By analyzing the institutional and social influences on farm
decisions, the research will extend understandings of farmers' choices and the
ways in which those decisions shape the farm landscape. It will also broaden
understanding of how farmers in the industrialized world deal with climatic
change. The research will investigate how U.S. farm policy may be an effective
tool for decreasing farm vulnerability to weather risks. It will also highlight
current access of underrepresented minority farmers to farm support programs. In
addition, the project will assess the relative vulnerability of farmers of
different ethnicities with a variety of farm production styles and sizes. As
such, the project will analyze the differential effects of agricultural
institutions across contrasting farm types, highlighting for whom U.S. farm
policy may be effective in supporting responses to a variable climate. To offer
farmers and policy-makers a deeper understanding of how differing access to
resources may be affecting farms, the researchers will share the results of the
research through presentations and a publication.

The project builds on past research in network political ecology, applying the
framework for the first time to industrialized agriculture. Network political
ecology analyzes the system in which an actor, often a farmer, operates. It
parses the influences on individuals' decisions and analyzes which factors have
the greatest power over the decisions that are ultimately made. Factors may
include such influences as economic shifts, ecological conditions and social
context. The framework also determines how those factors interact in the
production of decisions. The research will focus on the question: How do
farmers' institutional ties, mediated by their network of social relations,
shape their farming strategies in the face of current and future weather risks?
Through a series of interviews with a variety of farmers in two New Mexico
counties, the researchers will identify sets of farmer networks to analyze.
Interviews will center on farmers' decisions and which factors have most
significantly influenced those decisions. Farmers will aid the researchers in
constructing their decision-making histories. The researchers will interview
other key actors, such as extension agents and insurers, to gain additional
information about how institutions shape farm decisions and how social
relationships with individuals in institutions may affect the way farmers
ultimately use information and resources. Interview data will be analyzed to
determine how key decisions and their relationships to weather events differ
among different networks of farmers. Particular attention will be paid to farmer
decisions that result in highly positive outcomes for farms in years when
weather presents significant challenges.