* 1459536
* Phenotype and genotype of coral adaptation and acclimatization to global change
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2021
* Andrea Grottoli, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/28/2021
* USD 348,133.00

Coral reefs are among the most diverse ecosystems on the planet, housing an
estimated 25% of marine species. Global climate models predict that by the end
of this century, tropical seawater temperatures will be up to 3Â°C warmer than
they are today and at least twice as acidic, which threatens the long-term
survival of coral reef ecosystems. Elevated temperature and ocean acidification
have been shown to cause reduced coral growth rates and increased coral disease
and mortality rates. To date, the assumption has been that corals will not be
able to adapt because the rates of anthropogenically driven ocean acidification
and climate change are too high. This study aims to measure changes in coral
physiology to determine if coral adapt or acclimatize to global change. If they
can adapt, how fast is the adaptation rate? How do adaptation rates differ among
species and geographic locations? Answers to these questions are key to
developing strategic coral conservation and management plans. To address these
questions, eight species of Hawaiian corals will be studied using a two-part
approach: 1) a survey of natural corals found across natural temperature and
acidity gradients and 2) a two-year mesocosm study which will expose corals
collected in part 1 to temperature and acidity conditions expected at the end of
this century. This work is especially important in Hawaii for preserving coral
biodiversity in a UNESCO World Heritage Site - the Papahanaumokuakea Marine
National Monument (PMNM). PMNM encompasses the northwestern Hawaiian Islands, is
renowned as one of the most pristine and highly protected coral reefs remaining
on the planet, and is one of the largest marine conservation areas in the world.
This research will also provide critical data input for models used to project
the persistence of reefs in the future. Findings from this work will be
communicated at scientific meetings, through peer-reviewed journal publications,
and via press releases, public lectures, website platforms, and classroom
teaching. This project will train future scientists (one PhD student, 3
undergraduates, and 2 high school students) and provide an environment that will
foster their passion and skills necessary to pursue career options in science.
Thus, this work has the potential to transform our conceptual and empirical
understanding of how corals respond to rapid environmental change and make an
impact on coral conservation efforts and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will test the assumption that corals will not be able to adapt because the
rates of anthropogenically driven ocean acidification and climate change are too
high. The investigators will quantitatively measure changes in coral physiology
to determine if coral adapt or acclimatize to global change. In brief, this
study proposes to evaluate the adaptation and acclimatization capacity of eight
species of Hawaiian corals to long-term exposure of elevated temperature and
ocean acidification (OA) conditions using a two-part approach: 1) a survey of
natural corals found across natural temperature and pCO2 gradients and 2) a two-
year mesocosm study where corals collected in part 1 to a range of temperature
and pCO2 conditions expected this century. In both approaches, the phenotypic
(i.e., physiological and biogeochemical) responses of corals to future climate
change will be measured by the investigator in conjunction with the genotypic
(i.e., genomic and transcriptomic) responses of the same corals. This study will
address variation at both the population and species level. It will also be the
first study to examine the effects of elevated temperature and pCO2 on corals in
replicated mesocosms over a multiannual timeframe with a comprehensive suite of
physiological, biogeochemical, and genomic tools. The proposed study includes
~97% of the coral species in the Hawaiian archipelago, yielding extensive
spatial and biological relevance for the study.