* 1459393
* Quantifying plankton dynamics in the internal tide using swarms of buoyancy-controlled robots
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Peter Franks, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 633,569.00

Coastal waters are among the most heavily used and threatened systems on the
planet. Successful prediction and management of coastal resources can only come
from a deep understanding of the dynamics of the species in these regions.
Fluctuations of coastal invertebrate and vertebrate populations are often driven
by the supply of planktonic larvae to the adult habitat by ocean currents.
Numerous studies have associated the cross-shelf transport of plankton -
including the larvae of economically valuable species - with the internal tide:
a wave in the ocean's interior that oscillates at the tidal frequency. Though
the interactions of plankton with internal waves have been studied for decades,
it has not been possible to track individual plankton underwater. Thus, the
dynamics underlying the cross-shelf transport of plankton in internal waves and
internal tides remain conjectural. This project will use undersea swarms of
novel, autonomous plankton-mimicking drifting robots to quantify, in situ, the
cross-shore transport of plankton driven by high-frequency internal waves and
the internal tide. This research will significantly enhance our understanding of
the distributions, settling patterns, and population connectivity of coastal
species. One PhD student will be supported and educational outreach in
collaboration with the Ocean Discovery Program in San Diego will support
curricula creation, after-school programs, and teacher development.

These researchers have recently gained the capability to deploy swarms of
plankton-mimicking, autonomous, drifting robots in the ocean. These robots,
Autonomous Underwater Explorers (AUEs), are 1.5-liter cylinders with temperature
and pressure sensors, a hydrophone, and a piston that regulates buoyancy.
Subsurface three-dimensional localization is accomplished through an acoustic
long-baseline navigation system. The three-dimensional position of each AUE is
obtained every 12 seconds with ~1 m horizontal and <1 cm vertical accuracy with
a range of ~5 km. This high spatial and temporal resolution represents a major
advance over traditional neutrally buoyant floats. Swarms of 20 AUEs will be
programmed with either depth-keeping or isotherm-following behaviors, and
deployed in the internal tide on the shelf to quantify their transport,
accumulation, and vertical movement over a tidal cycle. The swarms will move
through a mooring array consisting of a vertically profiling Wirewalker, a
thermistor chain, and two bottom-mounted Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers.
Data from these deployments will be combined with process studies using a
numerical model to test long-standing hypotheses concerning the effects of
plankton behavior on transport and accumulation in internal waves and the
internal tide. This research will increase the operational capacity of AUEs,
advancing the state of the art in studying cross-shelf transport due to internal
waves, and lead to new insights into the physical and biological interactions
controlling larval transport across the shelf.