* 1459010
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rethinking Urbanization and Development in the 21st Century
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Victoria Nguyen, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2016
* USD 25,200.00

The rapid urbanization being experienced today around the world is both lauded
and feared by policy and development experts. Yet there are no standardized
definitions of what constitutes the "urban" or how it should be measured, even
in United Nations data bases. Consequently, urbanization projects are informed
by variable and shifting definitions and goals. Because these projects include
not only the expansion of cities and rural development but also large-scale
demolition of urban spaces and relocation of city residents, urbanization can no
longer be thought of as simply population shift or city growth. We need to
better understand the effects of the shifting aims and ideologies that direct
current urbanization policies and programs in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Chicago doctoral student Victoria
Nguyen, who is supervised by Dr. Judith Farquhar, will undertake 12 months of
ethnographic field research on the contemporary meaning and significance of
urbanization. She will focus in particular on how diverse state, institutional,
and everyday urban actors articulate and mediate changing ideologies and
expectations of "correct urbanity." The research will be conducted in Beijing,
China, a particularly apt research site because China is presently executing one
of the most ambitious urbanization programs in modern history. The country's New
National Urbanization Plan seeks to move 250 million rural residents into cities
and towns within the next 12 years and also to remedy what it diagnoses as
pervasive "urban disease" in China's largest and oldest cities. Beijing's
antiquity should make the conflicts around urbanization particularly visible and
therefore amenable to social scientific research. Nguyen's research will take
place at four sites: a state-owned development firm, a cultural preservation
NGO, international urban think-tanks, and within the neighborhoods of Old
Beijing. Using such research methods as interviews and participant observation,
the researcher will collect information on how shifting ideals of urban life
affect built and social environments, the delineation of urban and non-urban
spaces, historical preservation and demolition, and social inclusion and
exclusion. Findings from the research will have applicability to theorizing the
significance of urbanization in the world today, wherever it takes place,
including in the United States. Her findings should also be helpful to planners,
policy makers, and citizens who confront and must respond to urbanization in
their daily lives.