* 1459815
* Collaborative Research: The impacts of mating system variation on ecological performance and evolutionary diversification in a clade of marine snails
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Richard Grosberg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2021
* USD 703,262.00

At present, virtually nothing is known about how mating systems vary within and
among individuals, populations, and species of marine organisms. Indeed,
characterizing mating system variation in the sea, and its effects on
fundamental ecological and evolutionary patterns and processes, now represents a
challenge perhaps equal in importance to the study of population connectivity
that has occupied many marine ecologists for the last three decades. Snails in
the genus Nucella are important intertidal predators and provide an exceptional
model system for exploring how mating systems control critical ecological and
evolutionary processes and patterns. By integrating insights from population and
behavioral ecology, and life-history theory, combined with genetic,
experimental, and phylogenetic approaches, this project will generate novel
insights into the impacts of mating system variation on the ecological and
evolutionary dynamics of marine systems. This project will significantly advance
our understanding of how mating system variation in marine systems influences
individuals, populations, and species, with important implications for better
predicting how processes such as climate change, habitat fragmentation, and
harvesting will influence population dynamics, speciation, and ecosystem
function. In collaboration with a number of ongoing programs this project will
train numerous under-represented students, scientists, and teachers in modern
ecology, genetics, and phylogenetics. In addition, the project interfaces with
multiple educational programs through partnerships with the Exploratorium,
NOAA's expansion of west coast marine sanctuaries and outreach programs, and
science communications programs at UC Davis and UNCW.

Worldwide, anthropogenic and natural processes are rapidly modifying patterns of
environmental variation that affect the traits of individuals, populations,
species, and communities, and that ultimately threaten both biodiversity and
ecosystem functioning. These threats are often viewed in the context of (a)
reductions in population size or density; (b) changes in demographic and genetic
connectivity; and (c) Allee effects, where reduced local densities limit mating
success. Though less-well studied - especially in marine systems - environmental
perturbations can also rapidly alter the mating systems of populations. Numerous
studies show that intra- and inter-specific variation in mating systems has
major impacts on a broad spectrum of ecological and evolutionary processes
(e.g., dispersal, population dynamics, life-history diversity, and speciation),
that can profoundly influence the sustainability of marine ecosystems. The
investigators' previous NSF-funded work established, for the first time in any
marine organism, that the mating system strongly influences both offspring size
variation and reproductive compatibilities in the predatory marine snail Nucella
ostrina. This work raised several major questions regarding the ecology of
marine organisms. Through field experiments, mating trials, genetic analyses,
and phylogenetically explicit comparisons, the present project will
comprehensively examine the fundamental roles that mating systems play in (1)
generating ecologically relevant trait variation; (2) driving reproductive
isolation; and (3) shaping macro-ecological patterns of life-history variation.
This research will broaden our understanding of the critical role that mating
systems play in the ecology and diversification of marine organisms, and provide
the foundation for understanding how changes in population demographics and
mating systems can influence both short term population dynamics and longer term
responses to environmental change.