* 1459437
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluating the Impact of Rapid Population Growth on Urban Infrastructures
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Ravindra Khare, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2016
* USD 3,667.00

Rapid urban population growth creates enormous challenges for the management of
civil infrastructure. As urban centers tend to be composed of individuals of
highly varied cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds, infrastructural management
requires a system of engineering that can appropriately identify and adapt to
these differences. This project, which trains a graduate student in conducting
rigorous, empirically grounded scientific fieldwork, asks how organizational
practices aimed at improving infrastructure management vary according to the
socioeconomic contexts in which they are implemented. The results will be useful
to engineers and public health officials tasked with the responsibility of
building and managing these systems, and ensuring that people are motivated to
comply with them.

Jacqueline Cieslak, under the supervision of Ravindra Khare of the University of
Virginia, explores the relationship between cultural ideas about cleanliness,
the social relations that produce it, and sanitation development work. The
research takes place in Delhi, India, which is an ideal site for exploring rapid
urbanization under conditions of challenged sanitation infrastructure as it is a
sprawling metropolis of some 22 million residents and has a crucial need for
improved mechanisms for handling human waste. In development discourse this
improvement is conceived as a linear trajectory from a caste-based manual
scavenging model, in which cleanliness is understood in terms of purity and
produced in the relationships between hierarchically-arranged communities and
persons, to a mechanized waste management model, in which cleanliness is
configured in terms of hygiene and practiced by disciplined, autonomous
individuals as a civic responsibility. Despite the clarity of this trajectory in
popular discourse, the researcher's preliminary data has found that
organizations in Delhi orient themselves in radically different ways relative to
the interrelated issues of social organization and cleanliness in these two
models. By exploring how two sanitation NGOs draw on models of purity and/or
hygiene to generate both their internal organizations and development programs,
this comparative project will contribute an understanding of: a) how caste is
made and unmade in relation to waste in urban contexts, and b) how orientations
toward cleanliness and social relations constitute different ethical regimes
that create the conditions under which development programs either reproduce or
break established social forms. Methods include a baseline survey, and a range
of conventional anthropological ethnographic research techniques including
participation observation, interviews, and the analysis of census and legal
documents. The project will contribute anthropological debates about the impact
of socioeconomic inequalities (such as class and caste differences) on
infrastructure development and government services delivery. It will also
advance anthropological and broader social scientific theories about political
economy and development, infrastructure, and socioeconomic disparities.