* 1459370
* IRES: US-South Africa Collaboration on Sustainable Sanitation and Energy and Resource Recovery from Wastewater
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Natalie Mladenov, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2019
* USD 249,304.00

Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the rise in global population
and rapid growth of urban and coastal areas worldwide, providing clean water is
a major challenge particularly when basic sanitation needs are not met. Water
scarcity, poor sanitation, and economic disparity tend to characterize many
densely populated urban areas throughout the world. There is no doubt that new
solutions are needed to improve the availability of clean water and basic
sanitation for underserved populations. Moreover, solutions that also recover
energy and resources for net-zero impact have the potential to lessen the burden
for communities dealing with water scarcity, and energy and food security
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consequently, there is a need to improve
fundamental knowledge on decentralized wastewater systems technologies (DEWATS)
that lead to net-zero energy and resource use. IRES students from San Diego
State University and California State Poly-technical University in Pomona will
contribute to fundamental research in collaboration with the University of
KwaZulu-Natal (UKZN) on biological and physico-chemical processes in DEWATS and
resource and energy recovery from wastewater. Students will use traditional
methods (microbiological techniques, water chemistry and solids analyses) and
novel applications of fluorescence spectroscopy to evaluate the performance of
an anaerobic baffled reactor (ABR) with water reuse for agricultural
applications. This IRES project aims to be a transformative scientific and
cultural experience for US students that will advance fundamental knowledge of
ABR and other DEWATS treatment processes implemented at the full-scale in South
African communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a unique opportunity for
environmental engineering undergraduate and graduate students to visit the UKZN
in Durban, South Africa, where they will conduct fundamental research on
resource and energy recovery from wastewater, new perspectives on wastewater
treatment, and sustainable sanitation. Over the course of the three year
project, fifteen US students will be supported to work on novel research at the
nexus of water, energy, and food with a focus on decentralized wastewater
treatment systems in growing urban centers. Students will be mentored by active
research faculty at the Pollution Research Group at UKZN and obtain an enriching
international experience on topics highly relevant for environmental scientists
and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research experience will equip upper-
level undergraduates with research skills needed to transition to graduate
school and strengthen the research and mentoring skills of graduate student
participants. The US student cohorts will be recruited from groups, including
those underrepresented in environmental science and engineering, at San Diego
State University and California State Poly-technical University in Pomona. A
pre-departure orientation program is designed to promote team building, cultural
sensitivity, and adequate preparation for students to conduct collaborative
research internationally. As part of the evaluation of this project and for
knowledge transfer from cohort-to-cohort, exit surveys will be conducted and
videos of the research and student perceptions will be disseminated to
subsequent cohorts. Participants will present their research at UKZN and at
local and regional research symposia, professional society meetings, or
conferences. IRES participants will conduct outreach for K-12 audiences via
after-school programs.