* 1459158
* Personalized Resource Allocation
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Larry Samuelson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2018
* USD 168,333.00

Economists have a good understanding of how prices are formed in competitive
markets, featuring large numbers of small, anonymous, well informed people, as
well as how these markets allocate resources. These markets are useful examined
with the supply-and-demand analysis that makes its first appearance in
introductory economics, and is still the workhorse approach to a great deal of
economic analysis. Of course, not all markets are competitive, and large bodies
of work have moved beyond this point of departure to study the effects of
various frictions; some participants may constitute sufficiently large parts of
the market as to be able to affect prices, giving rise to the study of
oligopolistic and monopolistic markets; some people may not be well informed,
giving rise to the study of asymmetric information; and so on. The research
described in this proposal takes the study of resource allocation in a
complementary direction by relaxing the anonymity that plays an important role
in competitive markets. Instead of assuming that economic activity is mediated
through common but faceless prices, with people not caring and often not knowing
with whom they trade, we examine cases in economic activity is mediated through
personal interactions whose participants recognize and know one another. These
personalized interactions may arise in the context of markets, but with agents
who are neither homogeneous nor anonymous, or may arise in the context of more
individual relationships. The standard finding in economics is that market
frictions lead to inefficient outcomes. In contrast, we show that personalized
resource allocation mechanisms may often have salutary efficiency implications,
and may play an important role in cases where prices and markets are
ineffective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has three components.
The first component will examine market interactions between agents who can use
distinguishing features -- skills and investments that they bring to the market,
or reputations they have accumulated in past interactions, or connections in a
network structure -- to tailor the attendant resource allocation to individual
characteristics. We will identify cases in which the resulting personalization
enhances efficiency, and will examine the forces behind these effects, as well
as cases in which the result is a misallocation of resources. Attention will be
particularly devoted to cases in which the matching process that brings people
together in the market creates the appropriate incentives to undertake efficient
pre-match investments or to reveal critical information. The second component
will focus on personalized relationships between individuals. This research will
begin by examining an abstract model of agency that uses duality techniques from
convex analysis to extend and simplify many existing results. This analysis will
provide new tools and results and will also establish a useful connection
between agency problems and matching markets. This abstract analysis will be
complemented by more specific applications to repeated agency and to bargaining.
The third component of the research will examine the foundations of the
preferences and belief-formation processes that shape individual behavior. This
work will emphasize evolutionary foundations, and will spill over into the
evolution of communication in biological settings. The goal here is a better
grounding for the models of individual behavior that provide the inputs for the
study of markets and relationships.