* 1459108
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Railroads, Railroad Workers, and Geographies of Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2016
* James Biles, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,933.00

This project will focus on the role of railroads and railroad workers during the
Mexican Revolution (1910-1920) in order to systematically analyze the role of
transportation in the production of space and democratic social change. Although
the Mexican Revolution is usually thought of as a series of agrarian revolts,
the railroad and railroad workers played an important and often decisive role at
various stages of the Revolution. This project focuses on railroad workers and
their working conditions in order to understand how transportation
infrastructures are fundamental to social change. In so doing it will offer new
insights into the process of national identity formation and make novel
theoretical contributions to labor history, transportation geography, and
critical social theory. An additional benefit of this study is the indexing of a
variety of archival materials and the creation of original, historical GIS
datasets that future scholars can build upon. As a defining moment in the
country's history, the Mexican Revolution of 1910 to 1920 continues to shape the
politics and culture of Mexican society. Although the Revolution has been
extensively documented, the role of the railroads, railroad workers and the use
of rail infrastructure remain largely unexplored from an historical, as well as
a geographical, perspective. This work blends theoretical concepts from
political economy, actor-network theory and labor geographies and uses a mixed
methods approach that combines archival research, prosopography and historical
GIS to reconstruct the socio-spatial environments of railroad workers. By
analyzing railroads and railroad workers as active agents in the Revolution this
project aims to understand how a means of accumulation like the railroad became
an instrument to achieve democratic social change.