* 1459918
* Auction Design for Allocating Allowances and Licenses: Consignment and Price Containment Mechanisms
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Charles Holt, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2018
* USD 148,298.00

Auction Design for Allocating Allowances and Licenses

Auctions are being increasingly used to allocate scarce public resources or to
limit externality-producing activities like urban traffic congestion. Regulatory
agencies in the US and the EU, for example, use auctions extensively to allocate
"allowances" that limit particular types of emissions. Other examples include
the sale of auto licenses to limit traffic congestion, the sale spectrum for
wireless communications services, or the sale of government assets like energy
leases or securities. Some types of auctions may be better than others in terms
of transparency, public revenue generation, and selection efficiency (ensuring
that low-cost providers or high-value users are more likely to obtain permits).
Auction performance, however, may be sensitive to underlying market and
information conditions in ways that are difficult to model using standard
mathematical and statistical methods. The properties of various auction designs
can be evaluated with laboratory simulations using financially motivated
subjects. An auction that is easily manipulated in the lab is unlikely to
perform well in the field. Such experiments can be used to detect design flaws
and improvements at an early stage, before implementation, and to think outside
the box by testing novel auction procedures in stressful environments. The
proposed experiments are designed to evaluate alternative auction processes for
government sales of "permits" in a fairly wide class of settings that cover
emissions, securities, broadcast frequencies, and leases.

Auctions that are tailored to particular policy issues can result in a greater
understanding of how economic institutions moderate strategic behavior to
produce desired welfare and revenue-enhancing outcomes. For example, an
understanding of the behavior of participants who can both sell (consign) and
bid to buy in the same auction would be important for the design of auctions
that repurchase licenses (e.g. spectrum or fishing rights) and simultaneously
repackage them for sale to more efficient users. The proposed scope of the
project also includes the sustained development of web-based market experiments
and associated teaching materials for economics and other social sciences. These
web-based experiments will continue to be freely available on the Veconlab
website.