* 1459698
* Cyanate in the Sea: Sources, Sinks, and Quantitative Significance
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Kenneth Mopper, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2019
* USD 491,410.00

Nitrogen is a critical nutrient in the world's oceans because, among other
things, it is a major component of living organisms and can be a driver in
primary productivity. Nitrogen is present in the ocean in a number of organic
and inorganic forms, which vary in their ease in being assimilated by marine
organisms. Cyanate is a simple form of organic nitrogen present in the ocean,
although its abundance and importance to the ocean nitrogen cycle is poorly
understood. Using newly developed and tested methods for measuring ambient
cyanate concentrations and its uptake in seawater, researchers will analyze the
distribution, sources, and geochemistry of cyanate in shelf waters of the
Atlantic Ocean. Results from this project will elucidate the importance of
cyanate in the marine nitrogen cycle and transform understanding of cyanate
production and assimilation in the sea. This project will provide a unique
opportunity for both graduate student research and undergraduate training, and
will likely expose underrepresented groups to marine
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although physiological and genomic evidence
suggest that marine microbes can utilize a broad array of inorganic and organic
nitrogen compounds, cyanate's role in the marine nitrogen cycle has not yet been
examined. As one of the simplest organic nitrogen compounds, cyanate has likely
been present in the environment over Earth's long history. Evidence suggests
that cyanate metabolism appeared early on in bacterial genomes and thus, the
study of cyanate assimilation in the contemporary ocean may illuminate microbial
processes with deep evolutionary roots. However, a decade since discovering the
genomic capacity for cyanate utilization in marine cyanobacteria, little is
still known about cyanate distributions in the environment, how it is produced,
and how widespread cyanate utilization is among marine microbes. To further
understanding of cyanate's role in the marine nitrogen cycle, a combination of
geochemical approaches will be used to assess: 1) the distribution of cyanate in
the marine environment, 2) potential sources of cyanate and the timescales at
which cyanate is produced, 3) the rate of cyanate removal via microbial uptake
and spontaneous decomposition, and 4) the geochemical coupling between cyanate
production and consumption. Results generated from this study will be important
for augmenting knowledge of the marine nitrogen cycle, refining biogeochemical
models, and further understanding of the functioning of marine microbial
communities.