* 1459280
* A New View of Pliocene Glaciations
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Timothy Herbert, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 02/29/2020
* USD 409,242.00

The Earth's climate system has gone through major changes over time that serve
as natural experiments to test our understanding of linkages and feedbacks that
may come into play if the Earth continues to warm. This project investigates
patterns of climate change between the northern and southern hemispheres during
the mid-Pliocene epoch (~3 to 4 million years ago) when the overall climate
state was warmer than today. Critically, evidence suggests that the amount of
ice on Antarctica was similar to today, but that there was little or no
permanent ice on land in the northern hemisphere. Most climate scientists have
therefore supposed that climate change would focus on the region around the
Antarctic. Recent results by this research team suggest that instead, change
initiated in the northern hemisphere propagated all the way southward, and
actually determined the timing and amount of temperature change globally. This
project will use marine sediment cores widely distributed in the ocean to
generate reconstructions of mid-Pliocene climate. A major emphasis is to link
data and concepts of orbital-scale variability into international efforts to
synthesize Pliocene data and modeling through the international PRISM (Pliocene
Research, Interpretation and Synoptic Mapping ) program. Funding also supports
research and mentoring of a postdoctoral researcher from a demographic
underrepresented in geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chief intellectual
merit of this research is to assemble for the first time an array of data
sampled at adequate resolution and geographic range to test a new model of
northern hemispheric pacing for dynamics of the period, and to cover the
transition from this regime to the later "41 kyr world" of cyclic large-scale
glaciation of the northern hemisphere. The research team will constrain the
phasing of isotopic and temperature changes recorded in marine sediment cores by
synchronizing paleoclimate proxy records to African and Asian monsoonal climate
signals with a unique northern hemisphere precessional dependence, following the
approach used successfully by Hilgen and colleagues to improve the Neogene time
scale. The results are expected lead to advances in the geochronology of late
Pliocene time period, a fundamental aspect of paleoclimatic and paleobiological
studies of the period. Proxy data that constrain past ocean surface temperatures
and global ice volume will be analyzed at roughly 3,000-year resolution in
laboratories at Brown University. The hypotheses to be tested in this proposal,
especially a revised correlation of orbital forcing to Pliocene climatic
features, are central to the PlioMIP (Pliocene Model Intercomparison Project)
community, now focused on a time slice at 3.205 Ma and transient simulations
between 3.3 and 2.8 Ma.