* 1459287
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Arctic section: Spatial variability of lead concentrations and isotopic compositions in the western Arctic basins
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Edward Boyle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2018
* USD 376,331.00

In this project, investigators participating in the 2015 U.S. GEOTRACES Arctic
expedition will measure lead concentrations and isotopic compositions in
seawater, snow, and aerosol samples collected in the western Arctic Ocean. In
common with other national initiatives in the International GEOTRACES Program,
the goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to identify processes and quantify
fluxes that control the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the
ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of these distributions to changing
environmental conditions. Some trace elements are essential to life, others are
known biological toxins, and still others are important because they can be used
as tracers of a variety of physical, chemical, and biological processes in the
sea. Lead is an important substance to measure because it is a toxic trace
element, ranked 2nd in the US Agency for Toxic Substances Disease Registry, and
can be utilized as a tracer of ocean processes. The study will provide for the
training and support of graduate and postdoctoral researchers.

Lead (Pb) is emitted into the atmosphere by high temperature industrial
activities and leaded gasoline consumption and is globally dispersed by the
atmosphere. High concentrations of Pb have been observed in Arctic ice cores and
aerosols, and there are significant concerns about Pb, mercury, and other toxic
trace elements in Arctic ecosystems. However, there remain significant questions
about how these toxic trace elements and their isotopes currently exist in the
Arctic, as well as how they will change in the future Arctic as a result of
retreating summer sea ice and extensive drilling, mining, and industrialization.
This proposal is aimed at remedying this deficiency in scientific knowledge by
measuring Pb and Pb isotopes from seawater profiles, sea ice/seawater interface,
snow and aerosols that will be collected during the U.S. GEOTRACES western
Arctic transect. Specifically, researchers will gain knowledge on 1) the
penetration of anthropogenic lead into the Arctic Ocean, 2) the primary sources
of lead to surface waters, 3) the distributions of lead and their relation to
scavenging processes and rates, 4) how the exchange with sinking particles
contributes to lead?s distribution, and 5) ocean circulation in the Arctic using
lead as a tracer. Results from the study will have important implications for
human health by increasing understanding of the distribution and abundance of a
toxic trace element.