* 1459433
* In situ monitoring of reaction progress during serpentinization of oceanic lithosphere using synthetic fluid inclusions
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Esther Schwarzenbach, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 02/28/2019
* USD 316,200.00

Few techniques exist where visual observations and compositional measurements
can be made of mineral reactions inside natural host minerals in real-time. This
research by two investigators at Virginia Tech, one of whom is early career,
explores an exciting and potentially transformative new experimental method by
which synthetic fluid inclusions, filled with fluids of seawater-like
composition, are grown in the laboratory and then held at temperatures and
pressures at which important geological mineral reactions occur. In these
reactions, secondary minerals precipitate inside the inclusion due to the
reaction between the fluid and host mineral. This research targets
serpentinization of the ocean crust, which involves the formation of serpentine,
a hydrous mineral, and other secondary phases from anhydrous magnesium-rich
silicate minerals (olivine, pyroxene,and garnet) that are the primary
constituents of seafloor lavas. Serpentinization of ocean crust releases H2O
into the mantle which can trigger melting and arc volcanism. It is also linked
to the generation of abiotic organic compounds due to the release of hydrogen
during mineral reaction. These organic molecules can form the base of the food
chain for microbes living in in the ocean crust. Broader impacts of the work
include (1) developing new experimental methods and demonstrating their utility,
(2) developing the Raman spectroscopic identification of hydrous minerals
associated with serpentinization reactions, (3) support of an early career
female scientist and a minority graduate student; and (4) creation of podcasts
on science in Spanish to inform and excite Hispanic audiences about science and
the proposed research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experimental program will
react fluids in minerals at ~280 degrees C for a number of weeks and monitor the
dissolution and precipitation reactions that take place in the fluid inclusions
as a function of time, temperature, fluid composition, and host mineral
composition using a variety of state-ot-the-art analytical techniques that
include: microthermometry, Raman spectroscopy, laser ablation inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry, micro-FTIR (Fourier Transform Infrared)
spectroscopy, and FIB-SEM (focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy). An
additional research goal is to develop Raman spectroscopy as a tool for the
identification of phases associated with serpentinization, including the
identification of chrysotile, lizardite, antigorite, and magnetite, as well as
the protolith phases undergoing reaction. Results of the experiments will be
compared with predictions from thermodynamic models. Successful development of
this experimental technique and demonstation of its applicabilty has the
potential to impact other fields of science such as pharmachology and materials
science where the ability to observe chemical reactions and their rates of
reaction in host crystals in real-time may lead to breakthroughs in
understanding.