* 1459228
* REU Site: Dynamic Urban Environmental Systems and Sustainability in Newark, NJ
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Alexander Gates, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2021
* USD 356,412.00

A new program will be established to provide research experiences for
predominantly underrepresented minority undergraduate students from urban areas
in urban environmental sciences. A cohort of 12 students per year will be
recruited largely from the Garden State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation and other similar programs for an 8-week summer research
experience at Rutgers University in Newark and nearby field sites. Impoverished
inner city areas in the United States represent the largest untapped source for
human resources in STEM. This program will encourage students from this
background to pursue environmental sciences by showing relevance and importance
of the research to their lives and communities in terms of public health and
quality of life. The students will be challenged by the dynamic complexity of
the interacting environmental systems and the specter of attempting to develop
ways to make such impacted systems sustainable. The goal is to transition this
challenge into a desire to pursue research in it and ultimately to create a
pathway for inner city youth into STEM research careers by making them of
personal interest. Although students will conduct research in distinct areas of
environmental geophysics, geochemistry, ecology, biogeoscience and geospatial
analysis, all efforts will be interrelated for the students so they can
appreciate the importance and interplay of each project. Projects will look at
the geochemistry of inorganic pollutants in soils and their effect on plant
growth, phosphate and other fertilizer runoff and sequestration in mineral
species, the movement and natural attenuation of contaminants in shallow
groundwater systems and the effect of air pollutant fallout on natural systems
among others. The program will especially utilize the nearby highly impacted but
now protected Hackensack Meadowlands as a unique natural laboratory for
projects. The research experiences will be integrated into the student
educational experiences to unify them rather than having them be stand-alone
experiences. This will be done through a series of workshops which will also
connect the research and educational experience to graduate education and
careers. The integration of research experience, college education, graduate
studies and career will form the cornerstone of the model pathway.