* 1459702
* Theoretical studies of eddy mixing
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Glenn Flierl, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 351,401.00

The overall goal of this study is to understand how material is transported by
fluctuating motions in the ocean and the atmosphere. The project involves
creating a number of models which can be run in real-time and can be used to
illustrate visually the distinction between stirring and diffusion and the
rapidity by which both together can homogenize a tracer. The approach can help
in the understanding of the importance of eddies and weather systems in
determining the transports and distributions of pollutants, components of
ecosystems, heat, and ozone. The models will be made available on the web as
well as in an interactive textbook on numerical fluid mechanics. The project
includes training of a graduate student.

This project will investigate eddy mixing processes using idealized flow models
for which the diffusion can be precisely controlled. The specific aims of the
study are to contribute to improved understanding of: (1) the ways in which
fluxes are non-local (i.e., depend on more than just the value of the gradients
of the mean at the point of interest), (2) the effects of inhomogeneities both
in the means (where the non-local nature of stirring comes into play) and in the
eddy properties, and (3) how fluxes for reacting fields such as biogeochemical
variables differ from passive tracers. Simulations together with analytical
methods will be used to gain a deeper insight into the processes acting and the
interplay among them.