* 1459256
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Faith-Based Organizations, Race and Community Development
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Steven Holloway, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 09/30/2018
* USD 16,000.00

This research project studies the role of faith-based organizations in
responding to poverty in contemporary cities. Specifically, the researchers seek
to understand how and to what extent the community development work of faith-
based organizations reinforces or challenges the racial inequalities that
underlie urban poverty. Through a case study of one faith-based organization's
work in Atlanta, Georgia, researchers will investigate the manner in which
faith-based community development organizations understand the connection of
race to the Christian community development framework and the impact of their
activities on neighborhood development and the alleviation of racial inequality.
The study will provide the historically significant African American
neighborhood of South Atlanta with an Oral Histories and Futures in Atlanta
Neighborhoods online audio and video archive that will include recordings of
residents from a range of Atlanta neighborhoods. The research will also be used
to engage in constructive conversations with faith-based organizations and
nonprofits or policymaking bodies that seek to make cities better places for all
people to live, particularly those marginalized along racial lines. To fulfill
this goal, the researchers will disseminate research findings at a wide range of
conferences and meetings.

Scholarship on race, the literature on the resurgence of religious faith in
cities, and cultural geographies of religion form the theoretical cornerstones
of the project. Using this conceptual framework, the research examines the
processes by which participants in faith-based organizational networks interpret
the significance of race and create racial meanings through their work.
Specifically, the researchers will examine what such understandings imply for
faith-based organizations' roles in shaping cities, and how these meanings are
reinforced, in conflict, or contested. To address these questions, the
researchers will engage in direct and participant observation, semi-structured
interviews, and document collection with members of faith-based organizations.
The Christian Community Development Association (CCDA), a national network of
evangelical Christian groups working in cities, is the project's primary case
study subject. Data will be analyzed using critical discourse analysis
techniques and an interpretive method that is attentive to on-the-ground
complexities and contradictions.