* 1459726
* Scales of pH variability on Pacific coral reefs reconstructed from skeletal boron and boron isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Christopher Charles, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 03/31/2020
* USD 325,058.00

The decreased vitality of coral reef ecosystems is often cited as one of the
most prominent costs associated with the progressive oceanic uptake of fossil
fuel carbon dioxide and the consequent ocean acidification. Yet, despite the
prominent concerns, it is presently unknown whether and how regional
oceanographically-induced pH variability is actually manifested at the site of
coral calcification. This uncertainty requires comprehensive monitoring of
diverse reef systems. As a complementary approach to in situ monitoring
installations, a research team from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography will
make use of the known changes in Pacific ocean/atmosphere variability of the
late 20th century as a retrospective monitoring system. In effect, the system of
measurements from this targeted network of coral samples will provide a direct
comparison to hindcast expectations of the pH variability forced by
oceanographic change. These results of this project will allow a direct
assessment of the extent to which massive corals in various oceanographic
settings were actually sensitive to historical changes in regional pH. The
project will serve as the doctoral research of a student who broadens
participation of severely underrepresented groups. The project will also be used
as a platform for public outreach through SIO Birch Aquarium exhibits.

The research team will measure coral skeletal chemistry in existing coral cores
from locations that represent very different geographic poles of historical
Pacific basin-wide changes. Specifically, they will apply the boron isotopic
proxy for pH, in conjunction with a suite of other skeletal tracers that might
be sensitive to perturbations in seawater carbon chemistry, to generate
seasonally-resolved records of environmental changes. Two of the study sites,
Palmyra and Moorea, feature on going, multi-year in situ pH sensor
installations. Accordingly, the research team will collect and analyze the most
recent coral growth at these locations, which will provide the best available
means for field calibration of the skeletal proxies. In general, the assessment
of the scale of pH variability manifested at the site of calcification--and,
especially, its relationship with oceanographic perturbations--is essential for
establishing the proper perspective for projections of future anthropogenic
effects on reef carbon chemistry.