* 1459137
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Immigration and the Politics of Citizenship and Race
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Jamie Winders, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,999.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine issues related to the
principle of jus soli citizenship, which is the practice of unconditional
birthright citizenship for people born in a country, a practice found in the
United States and about 30 other nations, mostly in the Americas. The project
will focus on the geography of political and economic conditions and
transnational networks that sustain the practice of women who travel to another
nation to give birth in order to secure citizenship in that nation for their
children. Although considerable scholarly attention has been given to other
forms of migration, relatively little scholarly attention has focused on what
has been labelled as "birth tourism." Project findings will provide new insights
and information that will contribute to broader understanding in a range of
fields, such as transnational migration, immigration reception, race and place-
making, and citizenship studies. The project also will foster greater knowledge
about birthright citizenship's impacts on immigration politics, particularly in
relation to racial formations and national belonging, and it will shed light on
the changing geographies of migrant arrivals within established U.S. gateway
cities. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral student will
conduct a case study that focuses on Chinese birth tourism in southern
California. The project's objectives of this research are to gather basic
factual information about the process of birth tourism; investigate local
perceptions about birth tourism; and analyze how birth tourism influences ideas
about race in neighborhoods and regional institutions in local, regional, and
national contexts. The student will employ a range of ethnographic research
techniques, including participant observation, interviews with key stakeholders
and families (especially women) who engage in this practice, and analysis of
relevant documents such as media reports and legal policies.