* 1459543
* Agulhas System Climate Array (ASCA)
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2022
* Lisa Beal, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 2,556,548.00

The Agulhas Current is the western boundary current of the South Indian Ocean
subtropical gyre and, as such, it dominates the heat budget of the Indian Ocean
basin. Variability in sea surface temperature and heat content is central to
many aspects of climate over the Indian Ocean basin, such as East African
rainfall, tropical cyclone activity, and sea level rise. More than 50% of
decadal Sea Surface Temperature variability over the Indian Ocean is explained
by uniform, basinwide warming or cooling and it is hypothesized that this could
be linked to changes in the meridional overturning circulation. Understanding
the links between Indian Ocean overturning, meridional heat transport and sea
surface temperature is currently hampered by lack of observations. Estimates of
the Indian Ocean meridional overturning circulation have been made less than a
handful of times over the past 50 years. Yet, one can expect its short-term
variability to exceed the span of these few estimates, just as it does in the
Atlantic. The poleward heat transport that exits the Indian Ocean via the
Agulhas Current feeds both northward into the Atlantic, where it is believed to
influence meridional overturning and hence climate in that basin, and southward
into the Southern Ocean. Measuring Agulhas variability and investigating its
relationship to wind forcing and Agulhas leakage proxies will lead to a better
understanding of how these phenomena are linked in the real ocean. An integral
component of this project is to provide skills-transfer to South African
scientists and technicians so that they can lead and sustain an Agulhas array in
the longer term. Resource sharing, capacity building, an open data policy, and
collaborative analyses will promote greater productivity and better quality
research from the western Indian Ocean oceanographic community in general. The
principal investigator will be a visiting Professor at the University of Cape
Town in 2015 and 2018 and teach a 2-week Honors module on large-scale dynamical
oceanography, as part of this project. A U.S. graduate student, a postdoctoral
researcher and an early career scientist will be trained.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Agulhas System Climate Array (ASCA) project is a
collaboration between South African, Dutch, and US scientists to implement
sustained observations of the Agulhas Current, as part of the Global Ocean
Observing System. This five-year phase for ASCA will establish measurements of
velocity, temperature, and salinity variability in the Current, including its
influence on coastal waters. These measurements will be synthesized with
satellite and Argo data to achieve the following major scientific
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Characterize the relationship between
volume and temperature transport in the Agulhas Current.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Quantify
the seasonal variability in basin-wide overturning and heat transports of the
Indian Ocean, by synthesizing ASCA measurements with Argo and satellite data
over the ocean interior.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Investigate the annual and interannual
variability of the Agulhas Current in the context of wind forcing and changes in
retroflection and leakage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three ASCA research cruises
(2016, 2018 and 2019) will take place aboard South African research vessels,
during which the international team will deploy and maintain a linear array of
seven full-depth current meter moorings with additional temperature and salinity
sensors interspersed with four bottom-mounted Current and Pressure-sensing
Inverted Echo Sounders. Finally, three coastal moorings will be added to the
array at the shelf break and inshore, all in less than 200 m of water. These are
led by the South African partners, whose motivation is to study the regional
impact of Agulhas Current variability on coastal currents, upwelling, and the
annual sardine run. During deployment and recovery of the mooring, hydrographic
sections across the Agulhas Current near 34&amp;#9702;S will be collected. The
sampling plan is based on moored velocity observations that have been
successfully collected before in this location under the Agulhas Current Time-
series experiment funded by NSF. This project is a contribution to the U.S.
CLIVAR (CLImate VARiability and predictability) program.