* 1459049
* Runups of Unusual Size: Predicting Unexpectedly Large Swash Events
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Peter Ruggiero, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 799,712.00

The goal of this project is to improve our understanding of unusually large wave
runup events on ocean beaches. Such runup events are seen with only a small
fraction of the waves, yet they are important for the prediction of dune
erosion, inundation and coastal flooding during storms. A second type of unusual
runup event is also distinguished in that it is sudden and unexpected even if
the landward reach of the runup is not a statistical extreme. These large and
unusual runup events are the leading cause of death by drowning along the U.S.
Pacific Northwest. In order to understand the causes of unexpectedly large runup
events, and to begin to forecast their potential occurrence, this project will
use existing data, a new multi-year data set and a hierarchy of numerical model
simulations and link the events to various generation mechanisms. Finally a
model will be developed and tested for forecasting the risk of such events. The
team will work with the National Weather Service offices as well as exploring
other outlets to communicate severe event forecasts to the public. In addition
to increased public safety, this project will also help coastal management
efforts. These efforts rely on predictions to outline flood hazard zones and
regions appropriate for development. Additionally, findings from the numerical
modeling portion of the study will document and potentially advance the
accuracy/capabilities of nearshore hydrodynamic models, which will benefit
coastal zone management in other geographic settings. Finally the project will
contribute to education efforts by directly involving graduate and undergraduate
students in the research, paying specific attention to the entrainment of
individuals from under-represented groups.

The study of swash zone hydrodynamics has seen sustained progress over the last
decade, with much of the focus on the characterization of bulk and extreme runup
statistics. However, the physical causes of large, and especially of unexpected,
events have received considerably less attention. This project will conduct data
collection and analysis and numerical model studies designed to distinguish
between linear generation mechanisms related to super-position and nonlinear
generation mechanisms related to bore-bore capture, incident wave-infragravity
wave interactions and uprush-backwash events for large as well as unexpected
runup events. Morphodynamic differences between two drastically different
beaches, Agate Beach, OR and Duck, NC, will help reveal the role of beach type
on the generation of both large and unusual runup events. The observations will
allow the team to test and improve the skill of simple extreme runup parametric
models during storms.