* 1459969
* Collaborative Research: Reference-Dependent Job Search
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Stefano DellaVigna, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2018
* USD 263,594.00

With sustained long-term unemployment as one of the key challenges in the US
labor market, it is critical to consider alternative approaches to understand
unemployment. The project proposes that behavioral economics can contribute to
our understanding of unemployment, and in particular, focuses on reference
dependence in job search. Reference-dependence suggests avenues for a potential
redesign of unemployment insurance systems, including the switch to multiple-
step unemployment systems. The PIs examine evidence in this regard from a
natural experiment on an existing unemployment system, and from an upcoming
survey of unemployed workers. Based on this analysis, they will be able to
elaborate policy recommendations on possible reforms of the Unemployment
Insurance system.

The intellectual merits of the project are threefold. First, it incorporates one
of the best-established behavioral phenomena, reference dependence, in a job
search model and shows that reference dependence leads to a potentially novel
understanding of job search patterns. Reference-dependent unemployed workers are
particularly sensitive in their job search to recent cuts in benefits. Hence,
they display a unique response to the path of unemployment benefits, and in
particular to switches from a 1-step system to a 2- or 3-step UI system. Second,
the project tests the predictions of the reference-dependent job search model
using a reform in Hungary which changed the delivery of unemployment insurance
benefits from a single-step system to a two-step system, holding approximately
constant the overall generosity. This reform is an almost ideal testing ground
for the model and provides a setting to derive predictions about the welfare
implications of altering the path of UI benefits. Third, the project develops a
new survey of unemployed workers that will elicit longitudinal search effort
information from job seekers. This panel data set will allow for testing a
unique prediction of the reference-dependent model: that search intensity
increases leading up to benefit expiration, and then decreases again.

The project builds on and expands new insights from the field of Behavioral
Economics, which emphasizes the importance of reference points (such as past
benefit levels or the income of a comparison group) to advance the understanding
of the job search behavior of individuals who are receiving UI benefits. The
researchers intend this project to be a step in building sustained interest in
Behavioral Labor Economics as an active research area, both in their own future
research and in attracting interest by other researchers and policy-makers.