* 1459835
* Variability in particle size distributions, sinking velocities, and fluxes in the northern Gulf of Alaska
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Andrew McDonnell, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The sinking of particles from the sunlit zone of the ocean into the ocean
interior constitutes a dominant component of the sequestering of carbon into the
deep ocean, otherwise known as the ocean's biological carbon pump. The
quantities of particulate matter being exported out of the sunlit zone, as well
as the tapering-off of these fluxes with respect to depth, have a substantial
impact on the distribution of carbon and other important elements throughout the
oceans and control the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. For
these reasons, it is critical that we gain a comprehensive understanding of the
magnitude of these elemental fluxes, their variability in space and time, and
the processes that control them. The focus of the of this project is to make
new, broadly informative discoveries with regard to the function of the ocean's
biological carbon pump and the ability to quantify and monitor its strength and
efficiency at high spatial and temporal resolutions. In addition, this project
will provide the first quantitative and mechanistic study of sinking particle
fluxes in the northern Gulf of Alaska by working in conjunction with the ongoing
Seward Line Long-term Observational Program. The project will be carried out
under the direction of an early career faculty member and provide a training
opportunity for a postdoctoral researcher. Results from the study will be shared
with the broader public through a variety of print and digital
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fluxes of carbon out of the euphotic zone
and through subsurface waters are poorly quantified and understood, especially
relative to other dominant oceanic carbon flows such as the air-sea gas exchange
of carbon dioxide or rates of primary production in surface waters. The
inability to differentiate between variability in particle concentration and
sinking velocities as the drivers of flux variability is a critical gap in our
understanding of the biological carbon pump. The Gulf of Alaska is an optimal
site for investigating these processes as the cycling of carbon and other
elements in waters above continental shelves, such as the Gulf of Alaska, is
highly complex due to the dynamic interplay of chemical, physical, biological,
and anthropogenic processes. Using a creative application of short-term sediment
trap deployments combined with the use of a unique pair of in situ optical
instruments, the researchers will aim to accomplish two specific goals: 1)
Quantify the average sinking velocities of small particles and their
contribution to the total carbon flux from particles of all sizes; and 2)
Determine the relative variability in particle abundances and sinking velocities
and assess how it translates into variable patterns of particle flux in the
northern Gulf of Alaska.