* 1459872
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Scale Modeling of Public Perceptions of Heat Wave Risk
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Anthony Leiserowitz, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 07/31/2018
* USD 223,141.00

Collaborative Research: Multi-scale Modeling of &lt;br/&gt;Public Perceptions of
Heat Wave Risk&lt;br/&gt;Extreme heat events are currently the leading weather-
related cause of death in the U.S. and have numerous impacts on important social
systems including food, water, energy and infrastructure. It is vital to
understand how both the public at large and vulnerable populations perceive the
risks of extreme heat, how they decide to take action to mitigate these risks,
and how their prior experiences shape future responses. People can take action
to reduce the health risks of extreme heat, including the use of fans and air
conditioning, proper hydration, and avoiding overexertion, but they must first
be aware of the risks and appropriate mitigation behaviors. This research
project will identify the psychological, social, cultural, and geographic
factors that are associated with public perceptions of extreme heat risks, map
these risk perceptions at high resolution across the United States, and analyze
how vulnerability to extreme heat events corresponds with public risk
perceptions. The results will enable emergency managers and policymakers to
precisely target preparedness efforts, risk communication strategies, and other
resources to protect vulnerable populations from harm.&lt;br/&gt;Little is known
about the factors that influence risk perceptions of heat waves, even though
such perceptions are known to be a key determinant of how people respond to
environmental hazards. To investigate the factors and context that shape public
risk perceptions and responses to heat waves, we will conduct a nationally
representative survey over the duration of the warm season (May-September) in
the U.S. The data will be used to create a spatially explicit statistical model
to identify factors related to heat wave risk perceptions, including personal
experience with heat waves, local climate, land cover, and socioeconomic
variables at the individual, neighborhood, and regional scales. Research on
other hazards suggests that recent personal experience is likely to play a major
role in risk perception, along with individual-level factors, such as age and
gender. Contextual factors, such as location relative to urban heat islands, may
amplify risk perceptions. Results from the statistical model will be applied to
create a high-resolution national map of risk perceptions at the county and
census tract levels, and model projections will subsequently be validated by
independent surveys.