* 1459761
* CRII: NeTS: Characterizing, Quantifying and Modeling Network Complexity
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Xin Sun, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 10/31/2016
* USD 150,384.00

Networks with higher degrees of complexity generally require more manual
intervention to manage, are more difficult to reason about, and are more prone
to human errors. Despite its critical importance, complexity remains one of the
least understood aspects of a network, and has not been well characterized or
modeled. There is a general perception that for the same target network multiple
designs often exist to meet the same set of operational objectives (e.g.,
security and resiliency requirements), and that some designs could be
significantly easier to manage than others; however the decisions on complexity
are typically made subjectively or via qualitative terms.

This project aims at developing a fundamentally new understanding of, and
metrics and models for, network complexity. The project studies how a network's
design characteristics impact the complexity in its management, through a novel
white-box approach that involves reverse-engineering the network design from
device configurations, identifying design patterns that differ from conventional
wisdom, and iterative discussions with network operators to capture perceived
complexity. A suite of bottom-up metrics will be developed to accurately
quantify the complexity of a given design. These metrics enable comparisons of
alternative design proposals and "what-if" analyses of how design changes might
impact the management complexity. A top-down framework will be developed to
model the interplay among network design, operational objectives, and the
resulting management complexity. The framework formally abstracts the objectives
of a given design task thus allowing reasoning about whether and how a
combination of design primitives will meet those objectives, decomposes the
design task into its constituent primitives, and applies the metrics to quantify
the complexity of individual primitives.

If successful this project will advance the state-of-the-art in understanding,
quantifying, and modeling network complexity. The modeling framework enables
complexity-aware top-down network design by guiding the search through the
design space. The insights obtained from this project may inform the design of
future network architectures, management applications, and configuration
languages. The project's PI will actively interact with the research community,
operator community, and Internet Engineering Task Force to disseminate the
research findings. Results from the project will be incorporated into graduate-
level network management classes. As Florida International University is a
designated Hispanic-serving institution, this project will serve as a vehicle to
advance the involvement of underrepresented minorities in computer science
research.