* 1459636
* Assessing the Extent and Causes of Fluctuations in the Seawater Sr/Ca Ratio to Improve Coral Paleothermometry Calibrations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Johan Schijf, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2020
* USD 569,935.00

Geologic archives of past climate variability enable scientists to put recent
climate changes in broader temporal context and to investigate the mechanisms
behind climate variability on longer timescales than is possible using
instrumental climate data alone. Massive corals are one such geologic archive.
Strontium-to-calcium elemental ratios (Sr/Ca) in coral skeletons are influenced
by the temperature of the water in which the coral grew. This relationship,
combined with the relatively fast growth rates and long life-span of some
corals, enables scientists to reconstruct centuries-long records of tropical
ocean temperatures from coral geochemistry. A major assumption underlying coral
Sr/Ca-based temperature reconstructions is that the Sr/Ca ratio of seawater is
the same everywhere in the ocean and is constant over at least the time period
spanned by the coral record. However, there are processes that may cause
variations in the Sr/Ca ratio of seawater, especially in shallow coastal areas
where corals grow. This research investigates the magnitude of seawater Sr/Ca
fluctuations over time and space in different coral reef settings using an
analytical method that will be developed for rapid, inexpensive seawater Sr/Ca
determinations. The method is designed to enable seawater Sr/Ca measurements to
be a routine part of coral paleoclimate sample collection. The anticipated
findings will enable valuable recommendations to the scientific community
regarding site selection criteria and seawater sampling for future coral Sr/Ca-
based paleoclimate research and should ultimately lead to greater accuracy and
reliability of this important scientific tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will include substantial efforts to communicate the research to lay audiences.
With help from the University of Maryland's Chesapeake Biological Laboratory
(CBL) outreach coordinator, a secondary school teacher will be invited to
participate in a field expedition. Both of these educational specialists will
work with the project Principle Investigators to maintain a blog, create a video
journal, and develop/disseminate a lesson plan compatible with new curriculum
standards and used in the classroom as well as in educational activities of the
CBL Visitor Center. By sharing the science with teachers, their students, and
Visitor Center volunteer staff and patrons, the project participants will engage
citizens in the local community as well as the nearly 2700 tourists that enjoy
the Visitor Center annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific approach will
be to conduct a spatially and temporally intensive study of seawater Sr/Ca
ratios and other associated variables on fringing reefs in three physiographic
settings: a continental-scale carbonate platform (Florida Keys), a small
siliciclastic island (St. John, US Virgin Islands) and a small carbonate island
(Anegada, British Virgin Islands). Analysis of Sr/Ca ratios in the seawater
samples will be based on the existing ICP-AES method for aragonite analysis
modified to consistently attain accuracy and precision of 0.1% or better in a
complex seawater matrix. Other techniques, including ICP-MS or ion
chromatography will be used to verify the accuracy of measured Sr/Ca ratios and
to analyze complementary geochemical data. Seawater samples will be collected in
the winter and summer from channel cuts, lagoon, patch reef, reef crest, fore
reef, and open ocean sites in the Florida Keys. Continuous records will be
collected with osmosampler pumps in these locations during the intervening
periods. Concurrent measurements of temperature with thermistors, and subsequent
Sr/Ca analysis of coral nubbins placed near the equipment will enable
verification and quantification of the impact of both water chemistry and
temperature on coral aragonite Sr/Ca ratios. This sampling scheme will allow
assessment of the influences of salinity, upwelling, river and groundwater
inputs, and variations in productivity. The impacts of different physiographic
environments on coastal seawater Sr/Ca will be assessed by comparisons between
similar data collected in the FL Keys and British Virgin Islands. Differential
effect of various parameters on the entire dataset in space and time will be
determined by a combination of time series and principal components analysis.