* 1459487
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Status and Healthcare Access in the U.S.-Mexico Borderlands
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Kathryn Fleuriet, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2016
* USD 23,134.00

Social scientists know that access to critical services, including healthcare,
depends not only on cost and availability but also on a multitude of social,
cultural, and political factors. These factors include the status of those
seeking care, where they live, how they interact with healthcare providers, and
if they fit cultural notions of being deserving. However, what is not well
understood is how these factors interact and come together in any individual's
actual experience of care and its outcome. This research project will address
this gap by exploring in detail the multiple pathways through which legal status
affects the experiences of Latin American immigrants who seek dialysis treatment
for end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in the lower Rio Grande Valley of south
Texas. The research will be conducted by University of Texas at San Antonio
doctoral student Milena A. Melo, under the supervision of Dr. Kathryn J.
Fleuriet.

The South Texas borderlands are characterized by some of the highest rates of
both poverty and undocumented residents in the country. Increasing
militarization of the border has made crossing into Mexico for healthcare a
virtual impossibility for undocumented immigrants. As a result, these
borderlands are a particularly appropriate research site in which to pursue
questions of the effects of external factors on healthcare. The particular lens
through which these issues will be studied is the lived effects of immigration
law and healthcare policy implementation for immigrants with different legal
statuses. Methods will consist of twelve months of participant observation,
surveys, and semi-structured interviews with healthcare professionals and low-
income, Latin American dialysis patients. Findings from this research will
contribute to understanding the relationship between normative understandings of
rights, citizenship, and the social production of health disparities. While
previous research has tended to generalize both the providers and the recipients
of care, this project is structured to disaggregate these groups and to see how
they navigate differently within the system, which will contribute to both
better theory and better policy.