* 1459150
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: The coupled impact of conflict and imprecision of multiple forecasts
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* David Budescu, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 01/31/2017
* USD 15,442.00

Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;People often rely on projections from multiple
experts to make decisions. This includes daily decisions like utilizing multiple
weather forecasts as well as life-changing decisions like seeking multiple
doctors' opinions about a serious diagnosis. Previous research has
differentiated between conflicting and imprecise forecasts. Conflict is observed
when multiple advisers offer different, but precise, forecasts (e.g. one expert
projects 6 inches of snow and another projects only 1 inch). Imprecision is
observed when the advisers agree in their imprecision (e.g. both experts
forecast 1 to 6 inches of snow). Previous models treat conflict and imprecision
separately, but they are rarely well-differentiated and often correlated (e.g.
one expert predicts 1 to 5 inches of snow and another predicts 2 to 6 inches).
This proposal examines how various combinations of these two factors (conflict
and imprecision) alter people's perceptions and choices based on the theoretical
hypothesis that conflict and imprecision are functions of the underlying
attributes of the forecast sets. The ultimate goal is to determine optimal modes
of aggregating and presenting multiple forecasts to invoke accurate perceptions
of the information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan includes a series of
online experiments involving nationally-representative samples comparing various
combinations of conflict and imprecision varied by the type and degree of two
key set factors, similarity and symmetry. Similarity refers to the relationship
between the forecasts and has three categories: disjoint sets that do not
overlap, intersecting sets that partially overlap, and nested sets where one set
is fully embedded in the other. Symmetry refers to the balance of the sets
around the center (or mathematically, the relative deviation of the mean of all
forecasts from their median). The direction of asymmetry can vary, so positively
(negatively) skewed sets have fewer high (low) values. Participants will view
several sets of interval forecasts in well-defined domains and will estimate the
most likely value, range of possible values, and rate the sets on key attributes
(e.g., ambiguity, credibility, informativeness, etc.). We will also manipulate
the topic domains (using finance, health, and politics contexts) to test the
generalizability of the results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance&lt;br/&gt;The analysis will quantify the effects of the various
factors manipulated on the decision makers? decisions. We will also use various
dimensionality reduction and classification techniques (multidimensional scaling
paired with cluster analysis) to map the various projection sets based on their
"psychological distances" to help understand the cognitive processes that drive
people's responses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is an important step toward
improving the communication of risk and uncertainty based on empirically
observed psychological principles. Such steps are vital to bridging the gap
between experts and laypeople because non-experts are often disproportionally
influenced by how information is presented. These results are relevant to many
domains such as military intelligence, climate forecasting, etc., which must
make careful decisions to invest their scarce time and money to reduce
uncertainties between and within experts.