* 1459009
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Scientific Knowledge, Market Development and Adaptation to Ecological Change
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Wendy Wolford, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,999.00

This project will examine the use of shrimp farming as an adaptation strategy in
low-lying regions vulnerable to sea level change. The project will investigate
how the introduction of shrimp farming as a strategy to adapt to the impacts of
sea level change has transformed land, landscape, and livelihoods in coastal
delta regions. A key issue to consider is the extent to which the introduction
of shrimp farming as an economic opportunity generates other forms of ecological
degradation and economic vulnerability. The project will focus on a case study
of the Khulna district of Bangladesh to analyze how communities understand and
respond to major economic and environmental transformations. In so doing, it
will address how different understandings of vulnerability and ecological change
shape development strategies, landscapes, and livelihood decisions. The
objective of the research is to inform policy and practice around sea level
change adaptation by advancing understanding of how market development
strategies impact the rural poor.

To accomplish this goal, the project will examine the social and ecological
changes taking place in coastal Bangladeshi communities, the drivers to which
these communities attribute these changes, and the variety of strategies
employed by these communities themselves to address them. The study will address
three linked questions: 1) How do different development practitioners (e.g.
donors, development agencies and government officials) understand ecological
change in Bangladesh and how is this knowledge shaping a new development
paradigm; 2) How has shrimp aquaculture been articulated, designed and
implemented from the state and capital city to rural communities; and 3) How are
both ecological change and shrimp aquaculture understood, experienced and
negotiated on the ground by rural communities? The research will be conducted
through interviews and ethnographic research in Dhaka, the capital of
Bangladesh, as well as in three communities in southern Bangladesh where these
social and ecological dynamics are being negotiated in different ways. Policy
makers, government, and development agencies are urgently seeking solutions and
strategies for addressing ecological change and crisis. Many emergent strategies
offer technical solutions to profoundly social and historical processes. This
research shifts debate to place social dynamics and outcomes at the center of
such conversations.