* 1459794
* Collaborative research: Crustal magma plumbing of the Santorini volcanic system
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Douglas Toomey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 513,400.00

Santorini is an active arc volcano associated with the Mediterranean subduction
zone, which accomodates tectonic convergence between Africa and Europe.
Santorini recently experienced geologic unrest and this study will document the
current distribution of subsurface magma. Because the volcanic system is semi
submerged Santorini is an ideal site for detailed imaging using marine
instrumentation. Onshore-only studies cannot achieve broad enough aperture or
dense enough coverag to allow mapping of magma throughout the crust. By
determining the physical properties of the crust, this international team from
the U.S., U.K., and Greece, seek to understand how magma at different depths
crystallizes and what that might imply about both a basic research question- how
does crust that eventually makes up continents form, and a geohazard question-
does the current distribution of magma indicate a likelihood of sustained
volcano inflation that might precede a major eruption? A US student will gain
seismic data acquisition experience and training in state-of-the-art processing
methods, while also learning to work within an international research
team.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Seismic imaging of the crust at Santorini volcano is
designed to constrain the distribution of subseafloor magma and any variation in
extent of apparent degree of crystallization with depth. This site is viewed as
representative of silicic arc volcanoes worldwide, so results could be
representative of other arc volcanoes. Ocean bottom seismometers, and land
seismometers will be deployed for a few-week field experiment. Active source
signals will be recorded by these instruments as well as by a towed, multi-
channel streamer. Tracklines laid out along a north-east trending, 10 x 50 mile
swath, with Santorini at the center, will be image the lower crustal structure
with unprecedented resolution. Data analysis emphasizes complementary seismic
approaches: (1) Dense 3D isotropic and anisotropic travel time tomography (2)
Full waveform inversion tomography and waveform modeling to obtain higher
resolution and more accurate elastic properties and their spatial variability.