* 1459931
* Collaborative Research: Flexible and Robust Data-driven Inference in Nonparametric and Semiparametric Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Matias Cattaneo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 190,000.00

This award funds research that will develop new statistical methods for use in
analyzing economic data and testing economic theory. The goal is to develop new
procedures that are more robust (i.e. less sensitive) to the specifics of their
implementation. The project advances science because the new methods will give
economists and other social scientists better methods for statistical testing of
economic models. Drawing valid inferences from available data is important as
well in a variety of policy settings. The ideal method would be flexible,
simple, and robust in the sense that the results would not be overly dependent
on the specific way the method is applied in any given context. While previous
work in econometrics has developed new nonparametric and semiparametric methods
to meet the first two goals, these methods are not very robust. Their use in
practice requires choices whose effect in finite samples is not known. As a
result, many empirical social scientists employ parametric methods. By
developing new nonparametric and semiparametric methods that are robust, the PIs
hope to develop methods that avoid misspecification bias while also being
attractive for practical use.&lt;br/&gt;They plan to employ an alternative
asymptotic theory to derive novel distributional approximations for non-and
semi-parametric statistics. They plan four lines of research: (i) alternative
asymptotic results and bootstrapping validity for non-linear semiparametrics;
(ii) alternative asymptotic results and consistent standard-errors for linear
semiparametrics, (iii) higher-order expansions for the alternative asymptotic
results, and (iv) new robust nonparametric and semiparametric methods employing
local-polynominal techniques.