* 1459189
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: State-Making Amidst Precarity
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* James Smith, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2016
* USD 23,266.00

New nation states, both outlaw and legitimate, continue to arise in the modern
world. Some are welcomed into the world community while others remain on the
fringes, where they may be the source of significant political and economic
concerns. Social scientists know that new states do not come about at a single
moment. Rather, they are the outcome of a long process in which individual
people come together to create new institutions and a collective identity and
sense of purpose. The process begins long before a state receives recognition
and it continues long afterward. However, despite the importance of new states
for global security, exactly how they develop, particularly post-independence,
is not well understood. In the research funded by this award, University of
California at Davis graduate student, Christian Doll, who is supervised by Dr.
James H. Smith, will take advantage of the rare opportunity provided by the
recent coming into existence of a particularly precarious new state to
investigate the initial stages of post-independence state-making on the ground.

Doll will analyze state-making in the new nation of South Sudan, which was
founded only in 2011. He will undertake a year of ethnographic research in South
Sudan's capital city, Juba, where ideas of the state and of national identity
are being actively debated and newly enacted. He will employ a mix of social
science research methods to gather data from multiple stakeholders and
organizational levels. He will conduct semi-structured interviews with state
planners, regulators, and community representatives. He will employ participant
observation methodologies during state ceremonies on national holidays to
understand how official ideas of the South Sudanese state and South Sudanese
national identity are formed and performed. He also will conduct participant
observation in a Juba neighborhood to collect data on how the state is made and
experienced in everyday interactions and experiences. Specific attention will be
paid to contestation over land, the building of new housing and offices, the
running of businesses, the implementation of government and international
organization projects, and public discussions of current events. By capturing
official and local ideas and actions, the research will provide a needed
understanding of how state-making takes place in the world today, information
needed both for social theorists and for policy makers.