* 1459812
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding how neuroscience is changing the relationship between the state and US veterans with war disabilities
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Jane Desmond, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2019
* USD 24,329.00

Mild Traumatic Brain Injury (mTBI) and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) are
the signature injuries of the recent US wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Such
injuries pose difficulties in transitioning to civilian life and long-term
challenges for veterans and their families. Veterans with war-acquired
disabilities constitute a population needing immediate and long-term social,
vocational, and medical support. Knowledge of how veterans understand and use
biomedical and neuroscientific research can enhance communication between
scientists, clinicians, and veterans, and also promote improved scientific and
health literacy on mTBI and PTSD. This project also aims to document veterans'
unmet needs, while collaboratively identifying solutions among key stakeholders
in veteran care. Finally, this study hopes to aid clinical and social
understandings of the individual and deeply personal meanings attached to a
diagnostic category as it moves between the bench of basic science research and
the bedside of clinical practice. The results of this research will be shared
with military and healthcare professionals, and among anthropologists and other
social scientists interested in studies of war trauma, neuroscience, veteran
health, and disability. The project also will provide for the training of an MD-
PhD graduate student in anthropology.

Mobilized by the need to better care for returning veterans, the US Government,
clinicians, scientists, and soldiers have increasingly turned to the
neurosciences to provide insights into these war-acquired disabilities. Jennifer
Baldwin, under the supervision of Dr. Jane Desmond of the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, will explore the emergent meanings produced by
neurscientific research, and the effect of this new knowledge on how veterans,
clinicians, and researchers at Veteran Affairs (VA) hospitals understand the
different types of traumas with which veterans are suffering. This project
employs participant-observation, interview, and community health methodologies
to evaluate: a) What role do evolving neuroscientific knowledge and technologies
play in transforming understandings of PTSD and mTBI for clinicians,
neuroscience researchers, and veterans? b) Are research developments in the
neurosciences changing how veterans diagnosed with these conditions characterize
themselves, their conditions, and their life goals? And if so, how? c) What do
neuroscientific explanations of war-acquired brain/mind traumas allow and
disavow with regards to veterans' own understandings of their experiences at war
and upon homecoming? and d) How does the use of neuroscientific knowledge and
techniques by VA clinical and research spaces influence the relationship between
these veterans and the state? This research contributes to the study of medical
and cultural anthropology by analyzing how recent neuroscientific research on
PTSD and mTBI is transforming how the state cares for returning veterans, as
well as clinical, social, and veterans' perspectives about the effects of
violence, trauma, and war. This study thus contributes broader insight into the
relationship between medical authority, state power, and new forms of
citizenship that emerge and are negotiated in VA clinical spaces.