* 1459047
* Investigating Flat Slab Subduction and Plate Edge Tectonics in Northern South America
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Alan Levander, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 599,816.00

The northern South American countries of Colombia and Venezuela have high
seismic hazard. These countries are subject to frequent large earthquakes along
strike-slip fault systems and subduction zones with the same combined seismic
hazard potential as California's San Andreas system, and Oregon, Washington, and
Alaska's subduction zones. Recent space geodesy measurements suggest that
northwestern South America is overdue for a great (M&gt;8) earthquake along the
flat Caribbean subduction zone under northern Colombia and the Lake Maracaibo
region. Although both countries have modern earthquake monitoring and seismic
hazard assessment agencies, Fundación Venezolana de Investigaciones Sismológicas
(FUNVISIS) and Servico Geológico Colombiano (SGC), seismic hazard in both
nations is exacerbated by poor, unregulated construction practices and a growing
population of urban poor. The two nations have a combined population of ~80
million, and rapidly growing urban populations. Both the Venezuelan and
Colombian civil and petroleum infrastructures are at risk from large seismic
events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For a variety of reasons, including proximity,
both Venezuela and Colombia are of strategic significance to the U.S. [Miami and
New Orleans are closer to Bogota and Caracas than they are to Seattle, for
instance]. Venezuela is of international importance, with hydrocarbon reserves
that exceed Saudi Arabia's and extensive hydrocarbon production facilities.
Venezuela currently supplies the U.S. with ~ 8% of its oil imports, only
slightly less than imports from Saudi Arabia. The U.S. is Venezuela's most
important trading partner. Scientific exchange between the U.S. and Venezuela
and Colombia is important for developing scientific capacity in these nations,
and for training their earth science workforces. Over the course of its history,
the Rice Earth Science department has continuously enrolled M.Sc. and Ph.D.
students from Venezuela and Colombia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roughly 10% of
modern subduction zones exhibit flat slab segments, including 3-4 along western
South American (SA). Geologic history suggests ~70% of the western SA margin
experienced flat subduction in the Cenozoic. Slab flattening is attributed to
slab buoyancy, mantle wedge properties, and mantle flow dynamics. Flat
subduction causes deformation in the overriding plate substantially different
than that caused by normal subduction, as seen in seismicity, type and
distribution of magmatism, and in some cases, basement cored uplifts. It is now
recognized that the Caribbean subducts at low angles under northwestern SA,
forming the basement cored uplifts of the Santa Marta, Perija, and Merida Andes
ranges. These may be modern analogs to the late Mesozoic-early Cenozoic Laramide
basement uplifts of the western United States. With FUNVISIS and SGC, the
investigator team will install a large broadband seismograph array to image the
subduction zone geometry and measure plate coupling rheology of the northern SA
flat slab, with a goal of understanding the geodynamic development of basement
uplifts. The local and regional earthquakes recorded by their seismograph array
will be used for seismic hazard assessment in northern South America.