* 1459993
* New Econometric Approaches to Models with Unobserved Heterogeneity
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Kirill Evdokimov, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 239,964.00

This project develops new methods for the statistical analysis of certain kinds
of economic data. The first part of the research focuses on developing a new
method for performing data analysis that requires less computational power than
other competing methods. The result will speed data analysis for a class of
problems in several different fields of economic analysis. The second part of
the research considers a new method for using statistics to measure possible
causal effects to measure treatment effects. The work will allow other
researchers to improve empirical analysis in two different ways. Because
computational costs are lower, researchers will be able to analyze larger data
sets or consider larger and more realistic models. Second, the work will improve
the methods empirical researchers use to test for causal effects. The PI plans
to involve students in the research, and will make computer programs for the
statistical methods available at no cost to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has two components. The first
project develops a new statistically and computationally efficient method of
estimation by simulation. Methods such as the method of simulated moments and
indirect inference are widely used. However, when a finite number of simulation
draws are used, these estimators are consistent but in general are not
efficient. The new method will render these estimators efficient with as little
as one simulation draw per observation. The second project considers issues of
inference in instrumental variable models with heterogeneous treatment effects.
In these cases, researchers interpret two stage least squares results as
estimating local average treatment effects. While this interpretation is
popular, it poses significant challenges. In particular, in these kinds of
models one can no longer use the J-test of overidentifying restrictions to test
the validity of exclusion restrictions. The project will develop a novel
methodology for diagnostics of the exclusion restriction, a method motivated by
ideas of subgroup robustness analysis.