* 1459778
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding Community Resilience in Response to Industrial Mine Closure and Industrial Decline
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Jordan Haug, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 13,960.00

Throughout the United States many communities closely tied to extractive
industries have been subject to intensive periods of booming growth and often-
subsequent decline. Closures of industrial extractive industries often have long
standing social impacts that are currently poorly understood. This project,
which trains a graduate student in how to conduct rigorous, empirically-grounded
scientific fieldwork, explores what role local moral, ethical, and religious
values have for people in these communities struggling against dramatic
geopolitical and economic decline. The findings can be extrapolated and inform
other contexts where scientists are attempting to understand human resilience in
response to socioeconomic and ecological stress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jordan
Haug, under the supervision of Suzanne Brenner of the University of California
at San Diego, aims to understand the impact of industrial mine closure and
industrial decline on local communities, as well as how communities vary in
their response to those impacts. The research takes place on the island of
Misima, Papua New Guinea, which in 2004 became the site of one of the most
significant industrial mine closures in Oceania. Since that time, the
possibilities for the island's geopolitical, infrastructural, and economic
advancement have dramatically declined. Misimans have responded to these
challenges by engaging in a number of moral projects in the area of education,
cooperative fund raising, and Christian worship. This research asks whether
these moral projects enable Misimans to overcome the seemingly insurmountable
pressures of inequality and decline. Through a mixed qualitative and
quantitative methods approach of participant observation, personal interviews,
group discussions, and household surveys, this project will seek to understand
the long-term social impacts of mine closure on the island of Misima. In doing
so, this project aims to make broad contributions to the scientific study of the
economic and social impacts of extractive industries on vulnerable communities
and how such communities seek to overcome the challenges of decline. By
understanding how Misimans respond to a decade of decline, this project seeks to
provide possible answers for similar communities through the world, and the
United States, may be able to similarly deal with the pressures of industrial
closure and decline.