* 1459521
* Collaborative Research: The Paradox of Salt Marshes as a Source of Alkalinity and Low pH, High Carbon Dioxide Water to the Ocean: A First In-depth Study of A Diminishing Source
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Zhaohui 'Aleck' Wang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2019
* USD 336,731.00

Carbon production in vegetated coastal systems such as marshes is among the
highest in the biosphere. Resolving carbon production from marshes and assessing
their impacts on coastal carbon cycling are critical to determining the long-
term impacts of global change such as ocean acidification and eutrophication. In
this project, researchers will use new methods to improve the assessment of
carbon production from salt marshes. The overarching goals are to understand the
role of coastal wetlands in altering carbonate chemistry, alkalinity, and carbon
budgets of the coastal ocean, as well as their capacity to buffer against
anthropogenically driven chemical changes, such as ocean acidification. This
project will involve training for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
researchers, and will provide educational opportunities for students from a
local Native American tribe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tidal water, after
exchange with intertidal salt marshes, contains higher total alkalinity (TA),
higher carbon dioxide, but lower pH. These highly productive, vegetated wetlands
are deemed to export both alkalinity and dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) to the
ocean. This creates an apppartent paradox in that salt marshes are both an
acidifying and alkalizing source to the ocean. Limited studies suggest that
marsh DIC and alkalinity export fluxes may be a significant player in regional
and global carbon budgets, but the current estimates are still far too uncertain
to be conclusive. Unfortunately, tidal marsh ecosystems have dramatically
diminished in the recent past, and are likely to diminish further due to sea
level rise, land development, eutrophication, and other anthropogenic pressures.
To assess the potential impacts of this future change, it is imperative to
understand its current status and accurately evaluate its significatce to other
parts of the carbon cycle. Similarly, little is know about the distinct sources
of DIC and alkalinity being exported from marshes via tidal exchange, although
aerobic and various anaerobic respiration processes have been indicated. In this
study, researchers will undertake an in-depth study using new methods to vastly
improve export fluxes from intertidal salt marshes through tidal exchange over
minutes to annual scales, characterize and evaluate the compostiion (carbonate
versus non-carbonate alkalinity) of marsh exported TA, the role and significance
of the DOC pool in altering carbonate chemistry and export fluxes, identify
sources of DIC being exported in tidal water, and investigate how marsh export
of TA and DIC impacts carbonate chemistry and the carbon and alkalinity budgets
in coastal waters.