* 1459095
* Installation of a Seafloor Geodesy Observatory in the Northern Chille Subduction Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2024
* Jeffrey McGuire, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 640,768.00

The last ten years has seen many magnitude 8-9 subduction zone megathrust
earthquakes, several of which generated remarkably destructive tsunami. A
majority of fault slip during such events occurs offshore underneath the
continental shelf of the overriding plate. Limitations in the state of knowledge
before these great earthquakes, and documentation of their rupture process, is a
direct result of the lack of offshore seismic and geodetic instrumentation above
the fault rupture zones. This study adds to an international effort that will
initiate installation of seafloor instrumentation on the Iquique segment of the
Nazca-South American plate boundary, on which a strong to devastating (Mw
&gt;8.5) earthquake is expected to occur. Installing instrumentation now will
allow monitoring of deformation in the terminal stage of a seismic cycle leading
up to a great earthquake. The region is unique in that predicted likelihood of
its readiness for a major quake appears to be well-
founded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent M8.1 earthquake just to the north of the
study area demonstrates that geodetic coupling models were correct that this
segment of the Nazca-South America plate boundary has been locked and built up
considerable strain that will continue to be released seismically. A number of
mechanical and hydrological properties control whether a given large subduction
earthquake will involve high-hazard, shallow slip near the trench or not. One
factor that can be quantified in a short-term study is the ongoing deformation
of the forearc near the trench, which can be related through numerical models to
the locking (versus slowly, aseismically slipping) status of the underlying
fault. The onshore/offshore seismic and geodetic observatory to be installed in
the Iquique segment through a Chilean-German-US collaboration has potential to
be the first interseismic-coseismic-post-seismic dataset for a M&gt;8 earthquake
with instrumentation spanning all the way from the trench through the locked
zone. The US component of the study will deploy 9 seafloor acoustic ranging
instruments along a 15 km transect across the forearc slope for 3 years.
Stations will be sited on the basis of new AUV seafloor mapping and will be
nested within a ~100 km shelf-trench transect deployed for the main study. The
colocation of each group's different acoustic instruments provides an important
opportunity to cross calibrate different technology, which can help transition
seafloor geodesy out of the past proofing stage into a robust science. Training
of a graduate student in acquisition and processing of the geodetic data will
increase the workforce in this developing research area.