* 1459396
* Changes in Family Systems and Child Well-Being
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Valarie King, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 03/31/2017
* USD 83,453.00

More than 30% of all U.S. children will spend at least some time growing up in a
stepfamily. Earlier research has raised concerns about the implications of
stepfamily formation for children's well-being, suggesting that children in
stepfamilies generally have lower well-being than children in households with
two biological parents. More recent research suggests that there is greater
variability in stepfamily functioning and in the quality of parent-child
relationships. Recent research has elucidated factors associated with positive
relationships between stepfathers and stepchildren, yet we still know very
little about how the transition to stepfamily living affects the quality of
mother-child relationships-a factor known to influence children's well-being.

The proposed study draws on two waves of data from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Adolescent Health. The primary aim is to understand how children's
ties to their biological mothers are influenced by the entrance of stepfathers.
To the extent that children's ties to mothers are weakened or negatively
affected by the entrance of stepfathers, there is cause for concern. If,
however, the entrance of a stepfather improves the mother-child relationship,
then child well-being may be enhanced. Multiple dimensions of mother-child
relationships (emotional closeness, the frequency of shared activities, open
communication, maternal availability, and mothers' expectations for their
children's educational attainment) will be considered. The study will compare
children living with married and cohabiting stepfathers to see whether parents'
marital status makes a difference. The study will also test factors that are
hypothesized to moderate the influence of stepfathers on mother-child ties,
including race and child gender. This project focuses on children who gain a
stepfather during adolescence. As children enter adolescence, many families
experience declines in parental involvement and increases in parent-child
conflict. These processes can be exacerbated in stepfamilies, especially those
formed during this time. However, close, supportive parent-child relationships
are thought to be especially important for adolescents in stepfamilies because
they are more vulnerable to peer influence and are at greater risk for poor
outcomes. The project will expand the scope of prior research in the following
ways: (1) The study will examine families before and after they transition to a
stepfamily, an improvement over most previous studies, which have relied on
cross-sectional data or have observed stepfamilies only after their formation.
By controlling for mother-child ties before the entrance of the stepfather-a
potentially important source of selection into new partnerships-the study design
supports stronger inferences about the effects of a new stepfather on mothers
and their children. (2) The study will include cohabiting stepfamilies, a family
form we know little about. (3) The study will incorporate multiple dimensions of
the mother-child relationship as well as potential moderating factors, going
well beyond what has been examined in prior research. The findings can aid in
the creation of more effective interventions and policies to promote positive
stepfamily functioning and enhance the well-being of children growing up in
stepfamilies. These findings should be especially relevant to practitioners who
have been developing programs in recent years to improve family functioning and
parent-child relationships in stepfamilies. The project will also facilitate the
professional development, training, and mentoring of graduate students who
participate in this research.