* 1459190
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying competing loss rates of viral lysis and microzooplankton grazing on Emiliania huxleyi mortality
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Matthew Johnson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 04/30/2018
* USD 603,007.00

Processes that either promote growth or cause mortality drive the abundance of
all organisms. For microbes such as phytoplankton, that have a lifespan measured
in hours to days, small changes in these processes can have significant impacts.
Phytoplankton are the central currency in the flow of material and nutrients
throughout the marine environment. Even small shifts in their growth and
mortality rates will have large-scale implications for ecosystem structure and
biogeochemical cycling. While factors that influence growth are often examined,
less is known regarding the regulation of phytoplankton mortality. This project
will focus on quantifying competing modes of mortality on the bloom-forming
coccolithophore, Emiliania huxleyi, a globally important phytoplankton species
that contributes significantly to ocean carbon and sulfur cycles. Mortality due
to grazing by single-celled microzooplankton is the largest contributor to
phytoplankton loss in the marine environment. However, E. huxleyi also has a
well-characterized relationship with a virus that can result in mass mortality.
Therefore, E. huxleyi serves as a good model organism for examining how
mortality is partitioned between grazing by microzooplankton predators and lysis
due to viral infection. Quantifying these mortality mechanisms will help to
inform mathematical models for the accurate prediction of shifts in E. huxleyi
population dynamics and ultimately, primary production and biogeochemical
cycling. This work will involve collaboration with a high school science teacher
in a school system with a large proportion of students from underrepresented
groups, in the creation and implementation of short film clips that depict
important ecological interactions. These film clips will then be incorporated
into laboratory activities to communicate these concepts to students. Further,
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will be trained at both
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute and Rutgers University, to perform laboratory
research on mortality processes on phytoplankton. This research will also
provide training and career development for a postdoctoral
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mortality mechanisms in phytoplankton have
generally been studied independent from one another, however in nature, these
processes act concurrently. The relative proportion that microzooplankton
grazing and viral lysis contribute to overall E. huxleyi loss and how they may
interact to shape bloom dynamics is largely unknown. Understanding the relative
importance of these processes, as well as their interaction, is critical due to
their contrasting influence on the structure and function of marine food webs
and biogeochemical cycles. While grazing tends to channel phytoplankton biomass
to higher trophic levels, viral lysis stimulates microbial loop activity and
vertical particle export flux. This research will determine the effect of one
mortality process on the other, as well as their net effect on E. huxleyi
population dynamics and export in both laboratory and field mesocosm
experiments. This integrated approach will provide a unique mechanistic
perspective of multi-trophic microbial interactions, thereby increasing the
potential for accurate predictions of E. huxleyi population dynamics and
biogeochemical cycling. The outcomes of this research have the potential to
yield broadly applicable insights into how microbial interactions can drive
ecological and biogeochemical dynamics in the marine environment.