* 1459453
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Negotiating Care in Intercultural Integrative Medicine
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Kathleen DeWalt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 3,150.00

Providing culturally appropriate care for diverse populations has become a
significant challenge for health care systems. There is significant debate among
healthcare professionals about appropriate methods of practice in intercultural
integrative settings. Common approaches have included training traditional birth
attendants and incorporating ethnomedical practices within biomedical
facilities. But significant questions remain about the how intercultural
communication and healthcare delivery are transformed through these
interventions. This project, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct
rigorous, empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, examines how biomedical
practitioners negotiate medical authority and social inequalities within
intercultural healthcare settings. The results of this research will be shared
with healthcare professionals, and among anthropologists and other social
scientists interested in studies of biomedicine and healthcare inequalities.
Findings from this study will be presented to the participating clinic, and
disseminated through academic and non-academic publications, presentations, and
reports in English and Spanish with the aim of developing care outcomes and
strategies for improving intercultural health care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trisha
Netsch Lopez, under the supervision of Dr. Kathleen DeWalt, will explore how
conflicts over the delivery of healthcare in intercultural contexts are
reflected, reproduced, or contradicted implicitly within everyday interactions
between healthcare providers. The study will take place at an intercultural
health clinic in Ecuador, a setting internationally recognized by biomedical
health professionals for its inclusion of intercultural healthcare in delivery
methods. This research examines the most intrinsic challenges to culturally
appropriate health programs: who has the authority to define the role of
culture, the limits of participation, and the direct and indirect beneficiaries
of such programs. It will also make important contributions to medical and
linguistic anthropology by combining linguistic and ethnographic methods to
explore the intersection of political discourses of health and everyday care
encounters. The study will combine quantitative and qualitative linguistic
analyses of maternal health appointments with policy document analysis and
interviews with health care providers, health officials, indigenous activists,
and community members. This combination of methods allow for a multi-level
analysis to understand how the act of intercultural communication shapes/is
shaped by political discourses of culturally appropriate health care and
indigenous rights, as well as the needs and viewpoints of patients, providers,
and the surrounding community.