* 1459880
* A co-evolutionary approach to a complex adaptive system
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Rebecca Bird, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2016
* USD 304,500.00

Do humans always have devastatingly negative environmental impacts? The answer
to this question is surprisingly unclear. On the one hand, there is good
evidence that human activities have resulted in multiple species extinctions.
But, on the other hand, ecologists also have found that large vertebrate
consumers and predators, a category that includes humans, can have positive
ecosystem effects, as well. Large vertebrates may construct diverse habitats for
other organisms, as a beaver does in damming a stream, or keep herbivore
populations in balance through predation so that they do not overgraze plant
communities, as wolves do for elk and deer. Removing this important -- or
"keystone" -- species can cause catastrophic ecosystem transformation and the
rapid extinction of a wide range of species that can no longer co-exist without
the positive effects provided by the keystone. But ecologists also point out
that the scope and scale of disturbance matters: if beavers were to flood huge
areas, diversity would likely decrease, rather than increase; if wolves took too
many elk, the elk population would crash and streams would be choked with too
much vegetation, causing fish to suffer. Likewise, too few beaver ponds or too
little predation on elk would be environmentally ineffective. Is there such a
sweet spot of intermediate disturbance with the most positive effects for human
activities, too? Anthropologist Dr. Rebecca L. Bird of Stanford University will
investigate the idea that humans can be a keystone species through intensive
study of a small-scale society, where environmental impacts tend to be more
intermediate in scope and thus an excellent site for pursuing these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Bird and her team will focus on one human
disturbance in particular, indigenous burning, which appears to have helped to
shape the distribution of plants and animals in many parts of the world for
millennia. If indigenous populations function as a keystone species, native
plants and animals may have coevolved with burning. They are particularly
interested in whether traditional burning by an indigenous population has
positive impacts on both native plants and animals and, in so doing, helps to
support indigenous welfare by facilitating reliance on traditional foods. Few
indigenous communities in the United States are able to burn in traditional
ways, so the team will travel to a remote community in the arid grasslands of
Western Australia where burning has continued for millennia. The researchers
will survey plant and animal species distributions over different habitat
regions to see how they are affected by human hunting, gathering, and burning
activities; develop a detailed desert food web; and analyze 25 years of
satellite and aerial photography to map out the history of fire use in each
region. These data will be used to develop and validate a computational fire
landscape model to simulate foraging decision-making dynamics, social structures
of sharing and resource distribution, and the effects of patch mosaic burning on
landscape structure and composition, and small mammal habitat diversity. While
the model will be developed for the Australian grassland case, it will be
generalizable to other fire-dominated ecosystems, such as California. The
researchers will bring the model to colleagues and collaborators in the Yurok
tribe, who are currently attempting to restore native ecosystems and traditional
foods with prescribed fire. Besides increasing scientific understanding of the
ecological role of humans, findings from this research will inform conservation
and land management policies. If the research supports the hypothesis that
humans can act as keystones, the ecological goods and services they supply
through traditional management may be quite significant, saving millions of
dollars annually in habitat restoration and prescribed fire.