* 1459609
* Basin scale forcing of flows on western-boundary shelves
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2021
* James Pringle, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 369,663.00

The flow along western boundary shelves drive regionally significant heat fluxes
with significant regional climate impacts, and is an important biogeochemical
transport pathway linking high and mid-latitude regions. The exchange of water
between continental shelves and the deep sea is an important transport pathway
between land and sea for carbon and other important chemical species. Recent
work has shown that the magnitude and inter-annual variability of these flows
structures the spatial distribution of benthic species and their genetic
variability, and determines which life-history strategies are evolutionarily
stable. It is difficult to understand, predict, or model these flows, and their
effects, without a quantitative understanding of the forces that drive them.
From a modeling perspective, embedding a regional model in a larger scale model
is problematic if one does not understand what the larger-scale model must
simulate accurately to provide sufficient boundary conditions. It is also hard
to define observational strategies to understand variability in shelf flows
without understanding the timescale of their variability, and how the phase and
amplitude of this variability may vary across the shelf. A satisfactory
understanding of shelf flows cannot be claimed if the source of the mean
alongshore flow, and its interannual variation, is not known. To address these
questions, a series of process-oriented investigations will be conducted to
clarify the mechanisms leading to the mean and long timescale alongshore flows
on these shelves and quantify the time-scale and origin of their variability.
The main goal is to re-establish a link between the flows along western boundary
continental shelves and the dynamics of the deep ocean. With a clear
understanding of the source of observed alongshore pressure gradients, it will
be possible to understand the links between large-scale variation in the
ocean/atmosphere system such as the North Atlantic Oscillation and shelf
dynamics. This will place the coastal oceans back into the broader context of
the global ocean, and allow for a better quantitative understanding of how they
are coupled. The project will support the training of a graduate student and 2
to 3 undergraduates to prepare them for careers in the sciences or industry. The
graduate student will participate in the "Preparing Future Faculty" program that
develops teaching, mentoring and writing skills in our students. The
undergraduates will be progressively trained, and will be mentored by both the
PI and graduate student. Each undergraduate will work on a simple starting
project for the school year, and then a more independent project over the
summer. This will culminate in a capstone project required for graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of the alongshore flow along western-boundary
continental shelves have failed to explain the dynamics of the mean and long-
time scale flows along these shelves. The best studied example is the eastern
shelf of North America. It has long been noted there that to close local
momentum balances an along-isobath pressure gradient of unclear origin must be
invoked. Mean winds would drive a circulation opposite to that observed; along
and cross-shore buoyancy gradients are of insufficient magnitude to explain the
circulation. Interannual variations in the winds explain less than half of the
inter-annual variability in the alongshore transport. The main hypothesis of
this project is that this "mean" flow (and perhaps its interannual variation) is
largely driven by basin scale circulations, and in particular the swift currents
along the Western Boundaries. While this idea is not new, recent advances in the
understanding of Western Boundary Current dynamics provide a plausible and
quantitatively tractable mechanism for how these basin scale flows can drive
shelf flows. Support for this hypothesis is provided by recent modeling efforts
for the Argentinean and Chinese shelves. A combination of analytical work and
idealized numerical modeling will explain how changes in basin scale forcing
alter the mean and interannually varying flow along western-boundary shelves.
This will reveal the links between basin scale forcing and exchange between the
shelf and ocean, how Western Boundary Currents modify shelf hydrography, and the
role of along-shore topographic features in enhancing the interactions between
the shelf and slope.