* 1459932
* Language, Laws, and Labor Contracts in the 20th Century
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Suresh Naidu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 05/31/2017
* USD 160,000.00

This resaerch will contribute to our understanding of how firms and workers
allocate authority, and how this can be organized to increase productivity and
reduce conflict. These questions go back to Ronald Coase and Herbert Simon, as
well as the institutionalist school of labor economics. Outside of economics,
our results will relate to the large literature in labor and legal history,
sociology, and American political development that has concerned itself with the
role of the law in the labor contract. Our new integrated data set of labor laws
and labor contracts will be of value to both qualitative and quantitative
researchers interested in computational linguistics, contracts, law, and the
history of U.S. labor unions in the 20th century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
productivity gains associated with successful firm-worker relationships rely not
only on the terms of written agreements, but also on the background legal
institutions that interpret, enforce, and elaborate such agreements. The purpose
of this research is to explore the complementary roles of laws and contracts
through the construction and analysis of a new data set on collective bargaining
agreements. After merging the contract data with data on laws and firms, we use
natural language processing tools to extract those textual features of statutes,
court cases, and contracts that matter for economic outcomes. We then address
two central questions. First, does the law affect written contracts? Second, do
contracts affect economic performance?