* 1459975
* A Computational Implementation of GMM
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Han Hong, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 183,000.00

The PI requests funds for research in econometrics that will develop new methods
for data analysis. Many theories developed in economics (and other social and
behavioral sciences) predict complicated relationships between variables of
interest, relationships that do not fit simple linear regression models. Testing
these models requires statistical estimation of non-linear models. In general,
estimating economic models of this kind involves a complicated numerical
optimization problem. This optimization problem is often combined with the use
of numerical simulations (for example, as in maximum simulated likelihood
estimation). The result is an extremely complicated computational problem.
Computational constraints limit the size of datasets and also limit the kinds of
models that can be estimated. The PI seeks to develop methods that are not
limited in these ways. This project promotes the progress of science because we
must use statistical methods to test hypotheses in many
circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and others have proposed ideas that
combine simulation with nonparametric regression as a way to reduce the
computational problem. Here he proposes to use those ideas to study a
statistical method of implementing quasi-Bayes estimators for nonlinear and
nonseparable GMM (generalized method of moments) models. He will study both
kernel and local polynomial methods and allow for both exact and over
identification. The project will also demonstrate the asymptotic validity of
inference based on simulated posterior quantile regression. The PI will study
the combination with sieve and bootstrap methods.