* 1459240
* IRES: A New US-CERN Summer Program on ATLAS Experiment of LHC at CERN for California State University System
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Yongsheng Gao, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 07/31/2019
* USD 249,863.00

This project will provide international research experience for students from
the California State University (CSU) system through collaborative research
projects and educational experience on the ATLAS experiment of the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in
Switzerland. This program will send 5 CSU students per year to work on ATLAS
research projects for ATLAS Run-2 and ATLAS detector upgrades. The physics
potential of incoming Run-2 will be 10 to 100 times greater than Run-1 during
which the Higgs boson was discovered. The CSU students will improve the NLO
Monte Carlo generators (NLOjet++, APPLGRID, etc.), perform jet cross-section
related simulations and measurements with ATLAS data, extract the Parton
Distribution Function (PDF), and understand systematic uncertainties in Top
quark reconstruction. The measurements of spin and polarization properties of
the Top quark are important tests of the Standard Model and are sensitive to new
physics beyond the Standard Model. On ATLAS detector upgrades R&amp;D, the CSU
students will work on the installation and data analysis of small stand-along
pixel detectors, and improving software packages in monitoring various inner
detector components. On ATLAS Trigger and Data Acquisition (DAQ), the CSU
students will develop associative memory variables for Fast Tracker (FTK),
improve and optimize FTK variable resolution patterns, and conduct offline and
online testing of FTK resolution patterns performance. The students will also
attend the renowned CERN Summer Student Lecture Series given by top physicists
from all over the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Higgs discovery by ATLAS and
CMS experiments of LHC in 2012 has captured the attention and imagination of the
public and students throughout the world. This International Research
Experiences for Students (IRES) project will support 15 students over three
years working on the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. This CSU international
research project is focused on the largest university system in the country with
23 campuses and total population of approximately 430,000 students. Because CSU
has very large minority and first-generation college student populations,
student recruitment in this project will attract underrepresented students. Upon
returning to the US, student participants will give colloquia, seminars, and
invited talks at CSU campuses, high schools, and local communities about their
ATLAS research work and the CERN summer experience.