* 1459067
* Collaborative Research: Three-dimensional Onshore-Offshore MT Investigation of Cascadia Margin--Interpretation Phase
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Kerry Key, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 03/31/2018
* USD 60,631.00

The principal goal of this project is to understand the distribution of water
deep in the Earth along the northwest margin of North America, where the
subduction of the Juan de Fuca oceanic plate beneath the continent has produced
devastating mega-thrust earthquakes in the geologic past. Water trapped between
the subducting plate and overlying continent is hypothesized to play an
important role in controlling the occurrence and magnitude of these earthquakes,
as well as other modes of crust and mantle deformation in the region. This study
uses electromagnetic geophysical data that was collected recently with an
onshore-offshore array of sensors covering the Oregon and Washington continental
margin, to construct a three-dimensional image of crust and mantle electrical
conductivity. Since this physical property is sensitive to the concentration of
fluids in the Earth, our results will provide unique constraints on spatial
variations of fluids and physical state. This information will be integrated
into comprehensive seismic hazard models derived from the wealth of geophysical
and geological studies in this region. A secondary goal of this project is to
develop robust modeling software for the three-dimensional interpretation of
large-scale onshore-offshore electromagnetic array data, something that has
rarely, if ever, been attempted to date. The tools and methods developed through
this project will have broad application to future amphibious electromagnetic
studies for tectonic imaging, as well as amphibious commercial electromagnetic
surveys for energy and mineral exploration.

There is now considerable evidence that fluids play an important role in the
relatively recently discovered phenomenon of episodic tremor and slip. At the
least, fluids control rheological properties in the subducting and overriding
plates and reduce effective normal stress along the plate interface; more
speculatively fluids may be critical to episodic tremor and slip dynamics
through mechanisms which range from permeability pumping and hydrofracturing, to
rate-and-state dependent frictional slip. Dipping low seismic velocity layers
along the plate interface, and regions of low Vp/Vs ratios that can only be
explained by over-pressured fluids, further implicate fluids in the subduction
megathrust cycle. Magnetotelluric data are highly sensitive to the presence and
connectivity of fluids, and thus represent an ideal geophysical tool for imaging
this critical component of the system. Approximately 150 magnetotelluric sites
(half onshore and half offshore) collected in a recent NSF funded campaign
across the Oregon and southern Washington margin, combined with data from the
EarthScope program (transportable and flex array) and legacy data from the
region, represent a unique dataset for a detailed study of fluids in a
subduction zone setting. The main focus of this project is a complete analysis
and three dimensional inversion of this merged amphibious magnetotelluric
dataset, imaging the distribution of fluids from the incoming plate to near the
magmatic arc. The availability of offshore data will allow improved
understanding of poorly understood but critical details, such as fluid inputs at
the trench, their impacts on the ?locked zone? between the two plates, and the
distribution of fluids released from the down-going slab, including along the
transitional zone where episodic tremor and slip occurs. The relatively dense
three dimensional array coverage will greatly refine our understanding of margin
segmentation, resolving the structure and fluid distribution along the Siletzia
and Klamath provinces and the relationship of these to the spatial pattern of
episodic tremor and slip. The project will also lead to development of improved
methodologies and tools for three dimensional interpretation of amphibious
magnetotelluric datasets, which will be of value to ongoing and planned
initiatives for studies of continental margins, and will help support training
of the next generation of interdisciplinary electromagnetic researchers.