* 1459826
* Collaborative Proposal:  Optimizing Recruitment of Neocalanus copepods through Strategic Timing of  Reproduction and Growth in the Gulf of Alaska
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Russell Hopcroft, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 414,961.00

The Gulf of Alaska supports a diverse and productive marine community that
includes many commercially important fishes. Toward the base of this food web
are small planktonic crustaceans that serve as the primary food source for many
of these fish, as well as seabirds and marine mammals. The copepod Neocalanus
flemingeri is one of these crustaceans, and it experiences rapid population
growth during each spring's algal, or phytoplankton, bloom. An apparent mismatch
between the presence of the youngest stages of the copepod, or nauplii, in early
winter and the unpredictable timing of the spring phytoplankton bloom several
months later raises important questions about when females reproduce and how
this relates to survival and growth of nauplii. Two types of dormancy, diapause
in adult females and physiological quiescence in nauplii, may be the key to the
success of this copepod species. Timing and duration of the egg-laying period by
adult females is linked to emergence from diapause. In addition, nauplii may
enter a state of physiological quiescence while food resources are low, resuming
growth after phytoplankton levels increase. This research will address a long-
standing goal of biological oceanographers to understand dormancy and its role
in controlling population cycles in marine copepods. It will use new
technologies in molecular biology called transcriptomics to catalog the messages
used by the cells to control copepod life processes, in this case those related
to dormancy in adults and nauplii. Undergraduate students and a postdoctoral
investigator will be trained in interdisciplinary research, and students from
Native Hawaiian and Native Alaskan groups will be targeted for participation.
Fishing is a major industry in the Gulf of Alaska, and outreach will focus on
communicating the role copepods play in marine ecosystems. New content,
including images, will be generated for existing websites: the Seward Line long-
term observation program, the Alaska Ocean Observing System and the Gulf Watch
Alaska Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment to the Neocalanus flemingeri
spring population is dependent on successful emergence from diapause followed by
reproduction, survival, and growth of the next generation. Individual-based
models have made significant progress in predicting population growth in
calanoid copepods using food, temperature, and advection as key environmental
factors. Few of these models include predictors for naupliar recruitment,
however, because little is known about this part of the life cycle given
sampling difficulties and the lack of biomarkers to evaluate physiological
state. This study will leverage existing monitoring efforts to track the N.
flemingeri population during the winter and early spring. The research team will
combine laboratory and field approaches to determine duration and
synchronization of reproduction in emerging females and strategies for naupliar
survival during low food conditions. Zooplankton samples will be processed to
enumerate nauplii to species and to determine physiological condition of both
nauplii and adult females. Gene expression studies will develop molecular
markers for female dormancy and reproductive readiness and for naupliar growth
and possible dormancy, which in turn will be used to evaluate field collected
individuals. This will be the first comprehensive study to combine molecular and
traditional tools to connect diapausing adults, naupliar production, and the
resulting spring population of copepodites.