* 1460949
* REU Site in Animal Behavior: mechanisms, cognition, and evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2023
* Emilia Martins, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2023
* USD 490,450.00

This REU site award to Indiana University, located in Bloomington, Indiana, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2015-2019. The site award is administered by the Center for the Integrative
Study of Animal Behavior, a multidisciplinary group promoting the scientific
understanding of animal behavior. Based on their interests, students will be
matched with potential faculty mentors from a range of departments including
Biology, Psychology, and Anthropology. In addition to obtaining intensive
research experience, students receive training in research ethics, experimental
design, how to present research, strategies in taking GRE tests, interview
skills, and career options in science and education. The overall goal of these
activities is to increase students' likelihood and ability to successfully enter
graduate school or embark on a science-related career. Students from
institutions with limited research opportunities and those from groups under-
represented in science are especially encouraged to apply. Applications can be
submitted via the online website listed below. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 50 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. With guidance from a
mentorship team, students will have the opportunity to perform and complete
their own research projects-including designing experiments, collecting and
analyzing data, and presenting their findings. Projects are typically in active
areas of research, and students may go on to present their work at national
meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate
for Biological Sciences), as well as focal groups and other events during the
summer, will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program.
Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
at http://www.indiana.edu/~animal/REU, or by contacting Linda Summers
(812-855-9663 or cisab@indiana.edu) or the Program Director, Dr. Laura Hurley
(812-856-1991 or lhurley@indiana.edu).