* 1460716
* REU Site: Program in Nanotechnology for Biology and Bioengineering
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Denis Wirtz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 616,837.00

This REU Site award to Johns Hopkins University, located in Baltimore, MD, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2015-
2017. This award is supported by the Division of Biological Infrastructure in
the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO/DBI) and the Division of
Engineering Education and Centers in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG/EEC).
The proposed REU will provide undergraduate students with challenging research
experience in the rapidly growing area of nanobiotechnology, a discipline at the
interface of biology, chemistry, physics, materials science, and engineering.
Students work on interdisciplinary projects and interact with researchers from
several academic departments ? Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Materials
Science and Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Physics, and Chemistry. Example
projects include the development of safe carriers for in vivo gene transfer,
engineering skeletal muscles, molecular mechanics of cell shape change, 3D
printing of microvessels, and others. In addition to research, students
participate in orientation, ethics and safety training, graduate school
preparation, resume building, and a poster presentation at the end of the
program. Students with limited opportunities for research at their home
institution and those from underrepresented groups will be recruited to the
program. Students will be selected based on academic record, letters of
recommendation, and their statement of purpose.

It is anticipated that over 3 summers, a total of 30 students will be trained in
the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at regional and national conferences. Upon
completing the program, REU students will have a greater understanding of the
development and applications of nanotechnology in biology, a solid grounding in
research methodologies in these areas, and a deeper appreciation for the
contributions that improved technology in these areas can make to people's
lives.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://inbt.jhu.edu/education/undergraduate/reu/, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Wirtz at wirtz@jhu.edu), the co-PI (Dr. Herrera-Alonso at
herrera@jhu.edu).