* 1460244
* Collaborative Research: CDS&E: Sculpting fluid flow using a programmed sequence of micro-pillars
* ENG,CBET
* 08/14/2014,08/31/2017
* Jaroslaw Zola, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 67,843.00

CBET 1306866/1307550/1307743 Collaborative Research: CDS&E: Sculpting fluid flow
using a programmed sequence of micro-pillars PI(s) Ganapathysubramanian (Iowa
State U.), DiCarlo (UCLA), Zola (Rutgers)

Controlling the shape and location of a fluid stream provides a fundamental
tool for creating structured materials, preparing biological samples, and
engineering heat and mass transport. Methods to manipulate the cross-sectional
shape of fluids have focused on creating chaos and mixing by fluid twisting
instead of ordering or structuring streams with precise sequences of fluid
perturbations. The ability to engineer the cross-sectional shape of a fluid
using the integrated inertial flow deformations induced by sequences of simple
microstructures (i.e. pillars) was recently demonstrated. Discretization of
single pillar operations followed by their programmed superposition allows for
the hierarchical assembly of complex flow programs. Although this approach has
allowed for the sculpting of complex fluid shapes, creating user-defined flow
shapes important for practical applications currently requires laborious and
time-consuming trial and error design iterations, and often complex fluid shapes
of interest are not achievable in a reasonable time frame. The ability to create
a user-defined flow shape and automatically determine a sequence of pillars that
yields this shape is a significant and impactful advance, which is ideally
addressed by computational approaches. This challenge motivates the objectives
of the CDS&E project: (i) Computationally explore and create a library of
pillar-induced transformations annotated at different levels of granularity to
aid in computational selection using parallel CFD simulations. (ii) Develop
efficient computational methods to solve the inverse problem and select pillar
sequences for a set of desired flow transformation. This part of the project
will explore mathematical and computational issues related to uniqueness of
solution sequences, scalable approaches to deal with the large libraries of
pillar transformations, and choice of cost-functionals to enable efficient
solution to the design problem. (iii) Test the computational framework and
associated solutions by fabricating microfluidic designs with the defined pillar
sequences that address three transformative applications in medicine and
materials, including fabricating tailored cross-sectional polymer fibers, and
capturing biomolecules on microchannel surfaces.

The introduction of a general strategy to program fluid streams in which the
complexity of the nonlinear equations of fluid motion are abstracted from the
user can impact biological, chemical and materials automation in the same way
that abstraction of semiconductor physics from computer programmers enabled a
revolution in computation. As part of dissemination efforts, gaming and
educational modules involving immersive simulations and directed rubix-cube like
puzzles will be developed that will allow the public and interested parties to
experiment with different pillar programs and learn about fluid mechanics and
applications in a gaming environment. These outreach and workforce development
activities will emphasize to the community the crucial role of computing in
science and technology. This outreach will synergistically enable crowd-sourced
design of complex flow transformations for applications that have a major impact
on cell diagnostics, nano-materials fabrication, and thermal cooling.