* 1460880
* REU Site: Center for Neural Science Summer Undergraduate Research Program (SURP)
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Chiye Aoki, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 628,273.00

This REU site award to New York University, located in New York City, NY, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2015-2019. Students will conduct research in neural science -- the study of the
biological basis of human nature -- and use their basic knowledge in biology,
mathematics, physics and chemistry to solve research problems needing a
multidisciplinary approach. A wide variety of projects are available, ranging in
scale from the molecular to cellular, and from neuronal network to behavior.
Examples of questions students can investigate include: how individuals learn
and memorize; what parts of the brain are activated when risky versus carefully
calculated decisions are made; how attention modifies perception; how neonatal
sensory experience affect mental capacities in adulthood, etc. Students are
selected based on their desire to partake in basic research, as well as a match
between their expressed topic of interest and those of mentors. The program aims
to diversify the workforce in the field of neuroscience by attracting highly
motivated individuals interested in pursuing a graduate degree in neuroscience.
Students who are underrepresented in the field of neuroscience and have limited
research opportunity at their home college/university will be given high
priority for the program. For the application process, students will submit a CV
and a personal statement describing their research interest in the field of
neural science, and obtain two letters of recommendations.

It is anticipated that approximately 50 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and students will be required to present their
results through a poster and oral presentation at the SURP symposium. Student
will also be required to write a scientific paper describing the results of
their summer research.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system (SALG URSSA). More information
is available by visiting http://www.cns.nyu.edu/undergrad/surp/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Chiye Aoki at ca3@nyu.edu) or the co-Director (Dr.
Margarita Kaplow at mkaplow@nyu.edu).