* 1460947
* The role of medial prefrontal cortex in motivated social cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Jennifer Beer, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 520,339.00

This project explores the neural mechanisms that permit us to evaluate ourselves
in the way we would like. Self-evaluation is a core social-cognitive process
that affects healthcare decisions, emotional well-being, interpersonal
relations, and productivity at school and work. If we deny a problem exists or
view our abilities through rose-colored glasses, we are not likely to seek help
or allow adequate time to perform a task. Disordered self-evaluation is a
feature of many mental health issues such as depression, schizophrenia, and
autism. Currently little is know about how self-evaluation is affected by
neurobiological development in the general population or the neurobiological
impairments associated with disorders. Our lack of knowledge stems from the fact
that neural models of self-evaluation trail far behind psychological models.
Thus, there is a great need to develop neurobiological models of self-
evaluation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will use a combination of
fMRI, psychological theory, and computational modeling to address two critical
bottlenecks that impede development of neural models of self-processing. First,
the studies will illuminate the neural architecture of motivational influences
on self-evaluation. Motivational influences on self-evaluation play a
fundamental role in psychological models yet are currently ignored by
neuroscience. Additionally, the studies will disentangle a critical confound
present in most of the existing research on self-evaluation. Specifically, the
project will examine whether the medial prefrontal cortex, the region most
consistently associated with self-evaluation, serves to support socioemotional
processing or cognitive properties of social evaluation. Results will transform
our conceptualization of the neural basis of disorders such as depression,
schizophrenia, and autism which feature disordered self-evaluation but are
currently only understood through neural models of other processes. The results
will bridge gaps between psychological and neurocognitive models to inform the
next generation of self-evaluation research as well as inform related inquiries
into reward-processing, selective attention, and decision-making.