* 1460791
* REU Site: University of Maryland Eastern Shore REU in Marine and Estuarine Science
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Paulinus Chigbu, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2018
* USD 284,169.00

This REU Site award to the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, located in
Princess Anne, MD, will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during
the summers of 2015- 2017. The program focuses on marine and estuarine science.
Students will be offered a broad range of mentorship in various areas including,
but not limited to, fish and macroinvertebrate population dynamics, marine
microbiology and parasitology, molecular biology, genetics, environmental
chemistry, and ecotoxicology. REU interns will also participate in field trips
along the Maryland Coastal Bays and Pocomoke River. Students, particularly
rising sophomores, will be recruited by various means, including use of flyers
describing the program and by digital-based advertising. Students with limited
opportunities for research, particularly in coastal systems, and from groups
under-represented in science are particularly encouraged to apply. Selection is
based on academic record, letters of recommendation, and interest in further
studies in the areas of marine and environmental science. Students will receive
a stipend and travel support. Housing and board will be provided.

It is anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences. In addition to research, workshops will be conducted
to train students in science communication, data analyses, scientific ethics,
and various contemporary topics in marine science such as global climate change,
and anthropogenic eutrophication. Interns will present their results at a
symposium that will be held at the Paul S. Sarbanes Coastal Ecology Center.
Interns will also prepare a short report of their research.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are
required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email
sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://www.umes.edu/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Paulinus Chigbu at
pchigbu@umes.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Maggie Sexton at masexton@umes.edu).