* 1460927
* Injury Science Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,11/30/2018
* Flaura Winston, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 11/30/2018
* USD 362,683.00

This proposal extends the highly successful Injury Science Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) site at The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP)
with the long-term objective of developing a diverse, internationally
competitive, and globally engaged science and engineering workforce with a focus
on pediatric injury prevention. The REU Site will conduct fundamental research
on the causes and consequences of injury in youth and translational research to
apply this scientific foundation into evidence-based prevention products,
programs, policy, and interventions. Noting a dearth of funding for research
training in injury prevention as a major barrier to the development of the field
of injury prevention research, the National Academies called for increased
injury prevention research training opportunities. This site will train a cadre
of talented interns to help to ensure the growth, innovation, and continuity of
the field to reduce injuries and death in youth. The comprehensive training will
prepare diverse, internationally-competitive, and globally-engaged leaders in
science and engineering. Their research findings will inform interventions to
reduce injuries and deaths in youth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU program will
offer a 10-week intensive summer research experience for a total of 33 interns
over a three year period (8 interns per year funded by the NSF plus 3 interns
funded by CHOP and Drexel) which includes: 1) individual research projects with
a faculty mentor, 2) ethics training, 3) intern meetings, 4) seminars, 5) field
trips, 6) student presentations, and 7) career guidance, networking
opportunities, and mentorship. Recruitment will focus on interns from schools
with limited STEM opportunities. Disciplines that will be targeted include
engineering, behavioral science, population science, and statistics. Training
will draw upon the multi-disciplinary expertise of a NSF I/UCRC and an
internationally recognized research organization, the Center for Injury Research
and Prevention. The site includes faculty and resources from the University of
Pennsylvania and Drexel University. REU interns will gain rigorous research
experience, learning the value of interdisciplinary work and applying research
results to real world prevention.