* 1460400
* CAREER: A New Vivo Brain Circuit Analysis Method using Real-Time, High-Resolution Optogenetic fMRI
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Jin Hyung Lee, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 118,783.00

1056008&lt;br/&gt;Lee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal utilizes a brand new
technology called optogenetic fMRI (ofMRI)(pioneered by Dr. Lee) combined with
advanced imaging, computation, and applied mathematical algorithms.
Optogenetics, is a genetic technology that allows neural circuit elements to be
triggered selectively based on their genetic identity with temporal precision,
while passband b-SSFP fMRI, provides high quality functional brain activation
maps to be obtained of MRI is a technology that combines the two to visualize
precise causal response of the brain circuit upon selective triggering. This
allows the brain circuit element's causal role in the system level outcome to be
evaluated. However, in order to parse through the massive combination of the
brain circuit's response, real-time interactive monitoring is necessary while
the small, dense structures of the brain requires high resolution acquisition.
The PI aims to design and implement novel parallel computation and compressed
sensing (CS) reconstruction algorithms to achieve these goals. The
implementation will then be utilized to look at brain circuit responses to a
range of frequency stimulation. In particular, the motor cortex (M1), striatum,
thalamus, and substantia nigra (Stn) will be stimulated in order to precisely
map the system known to be correlated with the motor symptoms of Parkinson's
disease. Brain activity amplitude, shape, and distribution will then be
carefully compared to analyze the circuitry.