* 1460205
* Anisotropic Layering in the North American Upper Mantle Using a Combination of Seismological Approaches
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Barbara Romanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 06/30/2020
* USD 354,291.00

The formation and evolution of the oldest parts of continents is still not fully
understood, and in particular why they have cold but light roots in excess of
200 km thickness that have survived destruction over billions of years. Recent
seismological studies of their fine scale structure has revealed the presence of
fine scale structure within these roots. There is an indication that the
shallower half has a distinct structure from the deeper part which suggests that
they may have formed successively, through somewhat different processes.
Applying state-of-the-art tools of seismic imaging to a high quality dataset
(from the USArray seismic network of Earthscope) that allows unprecedented
illumination of the deep structure of the conterminous United States, down to
and beyond the continental root, this project aims at detailed mapping of the
major structural elements and their transitions across the north American
continent. This information will serve as a starting point for other
geophysicists and geochemists to further address the fundamental questions of
continental formation and coupling of tectonic plates with deep mantle flow. The
methodologies developed will also serve as basis for studies in other parts of
the world. The proposed work will support the career development of a post-doc
and a graduate student at Berkeley, and a senior female seismologist, whose
influence as role model may be appreciated.

Evidence for widespread layering in the cratonic upper mantle in north America
comes primarily from two types of seismic studies: 1) anisotropic tomography,
and 2) receiver functions (RF). Both indicate the presence of a mid-lithospheric
boundary (MLD) in cratonic areas. However, the nature of this MLD is not known
nor is it clear whether the two types of data see the same boundary. The goal of
this proposal is to combine high resolution continental scale anisotropic
waveform tomography in the craton and proterozoic provinces of north America
(NA), with 1D forward modeling of local layered anisotropic structure using a
novel approach based on fully non-linear trans-dimensional Bayesian inversion,
in order to map major structural and clarify the nature of lithosphere and
asthenosphere layering east of the Rocky Mountain Front. It will shed light on
the nature of the MLD and of the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary, which is
consistently detected as an anisotropic boundary, but is not consistently
detected by RFs under the craton. The models and methodologies produced in this
study will be made available to other investigators through the Earthscope/IRIS
websites. As part of the proposed work, we will develop general methodologies
for probabilistic integration of different data types, at different scales
(frequencies). We thus expect the theoretical framework and algorithms developed
here in the framework of trans-dimensional inference can be extended to include
other types of data and will be useful to other researchers in seismology and
Earth sciences.