* 1460195
* Subsistence, Economic Diversity And Resilience In Response To State Level Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Christopher Morehart, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 231,822.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Christopher Morehart will
undertake archaeological and paleoecological research in the Basin of Mexico to
elucidate how political and environmental shifts shaped peoples' lives as well
as how peoples' responses to these circumstances contributed to regional
transformation. Understanding how people respond to and are affected by broader
transformations in their world is fundamentally important not only for the
social sciences but for the general public. Archaeology represents a field that
can effectively examine this issue. Archaeologists have access to long term
datasets. Archaeological research on material remains and landscapes captures a
wide spectrum of past life. Archaeologists are trained as inter-disciplinary
scientists who integrate information from multiple fields in the social and
physical sciences. As an archaeological project, this research contributes to
understanding the role that political and environmental conditions have across
time and space. Such work addresses contemporary problems by speaking to
processes ongoing today, where political and ecological conditions that often
emanate from afar directly affect peoples? livelihoods. Studying local responses
to regional change represents an important area for society to understand the
dynamic nature of transformation. Moreover, this research incorporates
researchers and students from the United States and Mexico, providing valuable
scientific training and the opportunity for long-term, international
collaborations. As a regional project in Mexico, this work will occur in several
communities. Students and project members, thus, will engage directly with
cultural resources and contemporary community organizations. This project, in
short, will make a lasting impact on science, students, and local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project selects an excellent case study to
examine this issue: the Epiclassic (ca. 650-900 CE) to the Early Postclassic
(ca. 900-1200 CE) periods in the northern Basin of Mexico. Major political,
social, and environmental changes occurred during this time: the rise and fall
of powerful states, migration, conflict, and climatic fluctuations. To
understand how these processes related to peoples' livelihoods, this research
centers on local subsistence and economic strategies. This project asks four
simple questions. (1) How does the diversity of subsistence strategies change in
communities? (2) How does diversity in economic production and exchange change?
(3) How did environmental conditions change? (4) How did people?s responses to
regional political and environmental processes shape local resilience and
regional transformation? To address these questions, the project combines
ecological and archaeological research, including investigations to characterize
environmental conditions, archaeological excavations of households within two
community centers and one village, as well as archaeological research at a
larger sample of settlements in different ecological zones. By collecting data
to address the project?s core questions, the research will determine the impact
of changing political and natural environments on practices fundamental to human
life: subsistence and economics. In so doing, this research will elucidate not
only the extent to which regional ecological and political systems influence
human livelihood but also how human responses to broader situations shape both
the degree of local resilience and peoples' ability to either navigate or
contribute to historical transformation.