* 1460714
* RAPID Proposal: Psychological distance, risk perceptions and communication behaviors  during the Ebola outbreak
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Janet Yang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2016
* USD 84,110.00

This project assesses the American public's views of the Ebola outbreak and how
these views influence their communication behaviors related to the outbreak such
as information seeking, information sharing and information processing. The
project focuses on the degree to which such views are influenced by the public's
perceptions regarding the importance and personal relevance of this issue, as
well as their emotional responses to the outbreak and whether they perceive this
issue as psychologically distant and abstract. The research involves a survey,
based on a nationally representative sample of 1,000 participants, who are
randomly assigned to two experimental conditions (one emphasizing that there are
no known cases or Ebola transmission in the United States, and the other that
avoids this fact). The use of this experimental survey design provides a unique
capacity to understand why one third of the U.S. adults (measured in a September
2014 survey) are concerned that there will be a large Ebola outbreak in the U.S.
The participants in the surveys are being drawn from an academic-quality,
probability-based online panel.

In addition to the issue-specific value of knowing more about risk perceptions
related to the Ebola outbreak, findings from this project will inform the design
of communication messages related to risk issues that are often perceived to be
psychologically distant by the American public, such as climate change and
overpopulation. The specific mechanisms through which the study variables
influence risk communication behaviors will also inform communication campaigns
aimed at encouraging greater public engagement with risk information. In doing
so, the proposed research will integrate theory from social psychology and risk
communication to explore the utility of psychological distance in informing
public communication about emerging public health risks.