* 1460980
* REU Site: Integrative Marine Biology for the 21st Century (IMBio21)
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Nancy O'Connor, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 10/31/2018
* USD 343,070.00

This REU Site award to the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, located in
North Dartmouth, MA, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2016-2018. Students will be mentored by faculty whose
research projects illustrate collaborative, interdisciplinary, and integrative
approaches to the study of marine biology, ranging from the genetics of marine
organisms to their ecology and behavior, as well as fisheries science and
management and coastal ecosystem dynamics. Students will also be introduced to
the historical, economic, and cultural contexts of marine biology through visits
to the port city of New Bedford, Massachusetts. Weekly workshops will focus on
research proposal development, research ethics, career preparation, and
presentation of research results in poster format. Student skills and mindsets
regarding conducting and communicating research will be assessed through poster
presentations, writing, and surveys. Applications from first-generation and
under-represented minority students at community colleges and liberal arts
colleges with limited research opportunities are strongly encouraged.
Applications and instructions will be available online at
http://www.umassd.edu/cas/biology/nsfreu/. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 10 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences as well as at a poster symposium at the end of the
summer. Students will attend career-oriented professional development workshops
and historical and cultural workshops where they will learn about relationships
between marine biology and the social sciences and humanities. Students will
also write about their research for a general audience through poems and
blogs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for
Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond
to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is
available by visiting http://www.umassd.edu/cas/biology/nsfreu/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Nancy O'Connor at noconnor@umassd.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Tara Rajaniemi at trajaniemi@umassd.edu).