* 1460152
* IRES: Research Training in Climate Change Microbiology in Greenland and Denmark
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* William Holben, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 262,553.00

Over a three-year period, this International Research Experience for Students
(IRES) program will engage two U.S. undergraduate and two U.S. graduate students
annually, for a total of twelve participants, at research sites in Greenland and
Denmark to study Arctic microbiology and biogeochemistry under multiple climate
change scenarios. Following required training and research preparation at the
University of Montana, students travel to Copenhagen for orientation and
introduction to international mentors before they depart for three weeks of
field work in Greenland. Throughout, students are co-mentored by William Holben,
the U.S. principal investigator (PI), and a team of experts associated with the
Greenlandic Center for Permafrost Studies (CENPERM), a center that is
administered by the University of Copenhagen and the Geological Survey of
Denmark and Greenland. Each student's research training will include experience
with planning and implementing field strategies for permafrost, ice sheet, and
hot spring and glacier sampling in a way that promotes student ownership of
individual projects, while facilitating the integration of multiple data sets
obtained throughout the duration of this IRES activity. Results are expected to
contribute to what is known about thawing permafrost and accelerated microbial
decomposition of large amounts of organic matter stored in Arctic
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following each season of fieldwork and sample
processing in Greenland, participants return to Copenhagen to prepare collected
samples for metagenomic DNA and mRNA sequencing and bioinformatic analysis.
These will be studied for patterns of microbial community change that reflect
differing and changing environmental parameters. Upon returning to Montana
students will continue the computational and bioinformatic aspects of their
studies. Results should provide new insights into microbial community structure
and activities on sheet ice and glaciers, as well as microbial biogeochemical
cycling contributions to greenhouse gas emissions from permafrost soils. Over
the course of this IRES program, the U.S. and CENPERM partners expect to deepen
their collaboration through international teamwork, research training, and
cultural interaction, as they mentor and engage a cadre of diverse students,
including Native Americans, to become the next generation of climate change
experts. For broader impact, all participating U.S. students will benefit from
early career experience with the kind of long-term relationship, professional
network and research collaboration that is increasingly necessary to address
complex global ecological issues.