* 1460360
* Collaborative Research: Capitalizing on EarthScope Transportable Array Data to Better Characterize Induced Seismic Sequences
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Kristine Pankow, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 03/31/2020
* USD 255,709.00

The increase in the number of felt and damaging earthquakes near injection sites
in Middle America has the public's attention. Given this, there is an ever-
growing need to better understand how these sequences develop and to educate the
public about the science of induced seismicity. The problem is that the low
station density in the central and eastern United States means that many small
earthquakes are not easily identified using standard analyst review techniques,
and the lack of a complete catalog of small earthquakes greatly impedes induced
seismicity studies. Additionally, while temporary networks are often deployed
after a sequence has started producing significant or felt earthquakes, these
networks miss the initiation of the induced earthquake sequence. Our solution is
to use data from the EarthScope Transportable Array, to establish more complete
catalogs that better describe the full characteristics (both before and after)
of induced seismic sequences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To obtain a better
understanding of the source physics of induced seismicity, we propose to
systematically identify currently uncataloged small magnitude earthquakes
located near fluid injection sites in the central and eastern US by applying a
newly developed frequency domain detection algorithm and array visualization
mapping techniques to transportable array data. Using newly detected events, we
will build a template waveform catalog for use as subspace detectors. The
detections will be used to build more complete catalogs for eight geographically
dispersed basins. These enhanced catalogs will be analyzed to address the
following questions: (1) Are there detectable events in basins where other
catalogs show no seismicity or are some basins aseismic? (2) To what extent are
the template events we identify similar in waveform characteristics and/or
location to previously cataloged events? (3) Are observed rate increases
consistent with the Gutenberg-Richter relation and is there a predictable change
in b-value with time? (4) Do transient stresses from the passage of relatively
large surface waves dynamically trigger additional induced events or otherwise
change the distribution of induced seismicity? This study will more fully
develop frequency domain detection algorithms and subspace detectors tuned to
identify small earthquakes, and will be used to create new earthquake catalogs
with magnitude of completeness levels lower (magnitude less than 2.4) than most
existing catalogs. This large spatial scale analysis has the potential to
provide new information about induced earthquakes and provide a quantitative
measure of the ubiquity of induced seismicity in different regions.