* 1460767
* REU Site: Solar and Heliospheric Physics at UAH and MSFC
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Amy Winebarger, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2021
* USD 621,923.00

This REU Site is a joint effort by the University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH)
and the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) to promote diversity and
retention in scientific fields related to solar and heliospheric physics. The
synergy between these entities is facilitated by the colocation on the UAH
campus of (i) the newly formed UAH Space Science department; (ii) the UAH Center
for Space Plasma and Aeronomic Research (CSPAR); and (iii) the NASA MSFC Solar
Physics group. Each year 10 students will be selected and paired with scientists
from either UAH or MSFC to work for 10 weeks over the summer on projects related
to data analysis, instrumentation design and testing, simulations of plasma
physics phenomena, or the development and implementation of theoretical and
modeling techniques. Careful pairing of students skills with the requirements of
the research projects, will allow acceptance of undergraduates across a wide
range of experience levels, including those who have only completed their
freshman year. A workshop is held during the first week of the program that
includes lectures about the Sun and its interaction with the interstellar
environment, and hands-on session that teach the basics of computer programming.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project centers
on the research performed by students, which they present as a poster at the end
of the summer program. In addition, each participant is encouraged to submit
their work to a scientific session at the annual American Geophysical Union
conference held each December. The program has funds to partially support
students attending this conference. The broader impacts of the project relate to
the retention of students in STEM fields and the participation of minorities in
science. To meet these goals recruitment efforts are targeted towards colleges
and universities in the South-Eastern United States whose level of research
activity is comparatively low or are minority serving institutions. Evaluation
of applicants will include a ?need? factor in addition to more traditional
assessments of academic preparation. This additional factor enables a keen
student from a low research institution, who may have little or no understanding
research experience, to compete acceptance into this REU with students from more
research intensive schools. This program will aim to select a cohort of students
each summer with a range of experience levels so that participants may learn
research skills from peers in addition to their mentors.