* 1460173
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Indigenous Ontologies of Land and Land Politics: A Critical Analysis of Forest Rights Legislation
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Jacque (Jody) Emel, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 06/30/2016
* USD 15,992.00

This doctoral dissertation study will examine different ontologies
(conceptualizations) of land and land rights of states and indigenous peoples to
more fully understand conflicts over land and their possible resolution.
Indigenous peoples account for a significant proportion of people who are
displaced by state-led development initiatives, yet they often refuse alternate
lands in compensation because of their historical ties to particular lands.
Their ideologies accord value to specific socio-ecologically significant lands,
giving rise to complex and multiple land use patterns and behaviors that are
often illegible to policy makers and put them in conflict with the State.
Through a case study analysis of the 2006 Forest Rights Act of India, this
project will investigate how different ontologies of land and land rights impact
the implementation of land policy in different communities. How do States frame
land rights? How do indigenous communities understand their relationship to
specific lands? How do different ontologies of land and land rights shape land
policies, conflicts and negotiations? By enriching current understandings of the
connection between ontology and political practice surrounding land, the
findings of this research can positively impact land, development and
environmental policy in various contexts, while contributing theoretically to
the fields of political ecology, critical development studies, environmental
theory, sustainability studies, and indigenous and decolonial studies.

This research will be conducted in two indigenous (Adivasi) communities in
Kerala, India that continue to be displaced by development projects, while being
simultaneously placed via forest and land conservation policies, specifically,
the Forest Rights Act (FRA), as legitimate residents of forestlands. The FRA is
historically reparative legislation that recognizes various communal land rights
but has failed to prevent dispossession since its implementation in 2009. While
the Adivasis express a socio-ecological ontology of land, the State expresses a
different understanding of land as property/resource, and the meeting of the two
has historically resulted in conflict. In an attempt to understand this conflict
and build tools to mitigate future conflicts, this research will examine the
political process of implementing the FRA to: a) examine the underlying
ontological assumptions and beliefs of the Adivasis; b) determine whether and
how these ontologies translate into political practice; and c) illustrate how
Adivasi ontological beliefs about land converge and diverge with those of the
Indian state that underlie the FRA. An empirical case-study approach utilizing
qualitative analysis of narrative interviews, participant observation, focus
group discussions, event ethnography and archival research will be conducted in
15 hamlets and with state officials to answer the following research questions:
What does the FRA implementation process reveal about Adivasi versus state land
ontologies? How have these different systems of valuing land been expressed, or
not, in land use policy, and politics? Data will be analyzed to discern the
discourses, stories and practices that the Adivasis and the State utilize in
articulating their differing ontologies of land, and their knowledge and
understanding of each other, land, and their knowledge and understanding of each
other.