* 1460568
* REU Site: Ole Miss Physical Chemistry Summer Research Program
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Nathan Hammer, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 270,000.00

In this project funded by the Division of Chemistry, the University of
Mississippi (Ole Miss) will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site with a focus on physical chemistry. The site leaders will bring 10 students
to campus for 10 weeks each summer to conduct original research and participate
in mini-courses, seminars, and organized social events. This REU Site will allow
undergraduates who are recruited from other institutions to participate as a
cohort in the Ole Miss Physical Chemistry Summer Research Program, which is an
established summer program that has a demonstrated track record for fostering
communication and collaboration between the members of the physical and
computational chemistry research groups at Ole Miss. These students will perform
original research in successful, funded, and collaborating research groups and
take part in a summer-long schedule of organized academic and social activities
with Ole Miss undergraduate and graduate students, faculty, and staff. This
project will increase participation, especially from underrepresented groups and
institutions without research opportunities, of students in chemistry research,
graduate programs, and careers, as well as increase literacy in high performance
computing and its applicability to chemistry.

Student participants perform original research in the laboratories of faculty
members and also at the Mississippi Center for Supercomputing Research (MCSR).
Twelve senior personnel will administer the program and these individuals will
mentor students in original research, present lectures on physical chemistry-
related topics, administer mini-courses, and organize social activities.
Centered around experimental and theoretical physical chemistry, the research
projects include synthetic design of light-harvesting, photoemissive, and
catalytic materials, characterizing the photophysical properties of newly-
developed materials, developing squeezed light lasers, the spectroscopic study
and computational modeling of important biologically relevant interactions, and
the computational modeling of newly-developed materials with important energy or
drug development applications. Students in the program gain practical experience
in the physical sciences while applying knowledge in chemistry to real world
problems.