* 1460982
* REU Site: Willamette Mathematics Consortium Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Joshua Laison, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 02/28/2018
* USD 267,555.00

The Willamette Mathematics Consortium REU is an intensive eight-week summer
research program which immerses undergraduate students in a challenging,
transformative, authentic research experience. Each summer, three research teams
engage in three different but simultaneous research projects which share a
common unifying theme. Each research team consists of three undergraduates and
one faculty mentor. Research teams live and work in close proximity. This
proximity, combined with several organized social outings, give participants
ample opportunities to collaborate and establish new and lasting bonds within
the greater research community. Program activities include the creation of new
mathematics, career development workshops and training, and presentations at
regional and national conferences. These activities are designed to increase
participants' knowledge of mathematical content and process, strengthen their
technical communication skills, and increase their awareness of and preparation
for careers in mathematics and other STEM fields. Student applicants are
recruited nationwide, with targeted recruitment of underrepresented groups and
students from schools with limited research opportunities.

Research each summer is organized around a broad mathematical field: ring and
matrix theory in the first summer, statistics and random processes in the
second, and graph theory and combinatorics in the third. Specific projects
planned are algebraic voting theory, predicting decompositions for complete
intersections, and unipancyclic matroids for the summer of 2015, mixing times of
Markov chains, topological and statistical data analysis, and the modified
Ehrenfest chain for the summer of 2016, and geometric intersection graphs,
visualizing dessins d'enfants, and competitive graph coloring for the summer of
2017. These projects are chosen from the faculty mentors' ongoing research
programs and expertise. Mentors have a proven track record of leading
undergraduate research in these areas, having collectively guided 142
undergraduate students on research projects resulting in 73 external research
presentations by undergraduate participants, 10 publications, and 13 papers in
progress, all with student co-authors.