* 1460899
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Physics at Purdue University
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Sergei Savikhin, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2019
* USD 478,105.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) and Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET) site will provide 12 undergraduate physics majors from across the
country with a ten-week long genuine research project emphasizing one-to-one
mentoring with faculty from a wide range of disciplines within the Purdue
University Department of Physics. Interactions with the community of scientists
is emphasized with a interdisciplinary science seminar series, two required
public talks on their research, a poster at a general Purdue-wide undergraduate
research conference, tours of Purdue scientific facilities including the unique
Brick nanotechnology center, field trips to national facilities at Fermilab and
Argonne, and the REU Olympics at Notre Dame University, plus various social
activities. The weekly seminar initiated and hosted by Physics Department
combines Physics REU participants with students from other Purdue summer sites
(REU & SURF at Biology, Chemistry, Engineering etc.) to emphasize
interdisciplinary opportunities and interactions among students across many
fields. Similar objectives are desired for two RET participants, whose research
activities will be reflected in their subsequent classroom teaching, inspiring
their own students about careers in research.

The participants in this REU and RET program will collaborate with their mentors
and other researchers to advance diverse state-of-the-art areas of physics, such
as: nanophysics of electrons in reduced dimensional conductors, the dynamical
behavior in proteins, the quantum mechanisms of photosynthesis, single
molecule/protein dynamic imaging, the use of cosmogenic nuclei as chronometers
in geoscience, coherent imaging of tumors, particle detectors with improved
hardness and resolution, detectors for TeV radiation, investigation of dark
matter, novel application of nuclear detectors for sensing hazardous materials,
properties of graphene, applications of biofilms in seismic measurements, the
fundamental nature of nuclear decay, enhanced long-baseline imaging for radio
astronomy, seismic propagation in structures of geologic interest, the quantum
nature of bird magnetoreception, analysis of data collected by scientists at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN, and other current topics of importance.