* 1460319
* CMG Collaborative Research: Tempered Stable Models for Preasymptotic Pollutant Transport in Natural Media
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Yong Zhang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2016
* USD 123,857.00

Contaminant transport through natural aquifers typically exhibits pre-asymptotic
or transient anomalous behavior on the space and time scale critical to most
environmental concerns. Complex and usually unpredictable medium heterogeneity
at all relevant scales motivates the application of non-local transport
theories. The proposed work will develop tempered stable models, which
generalize standard non-local transport theories by adjusting fractal power-
laws, to simulate pre-asymptotic transport and reveal the nature of real-world
dispersion missed previously. There will be three major outcomes, including (1)
a novel non-local transport theory and model based on tempered power laws that
can efficiently simulate transient anomalous diffusion, (2) a quantitative
linkage between the observable statistics of natural heterogeneous media and the
model parameters built by a systematic Monte Carlo study, and (3) a convenient
software suite with open source codes that solve and apply the model. This
collaborative research will also test the model, the solver and the model
predictability, by using historical tracer data and well-studied aquifer
information. A careful consideration of the physical meaning of model
components, and connections to statistical aquifer properties, will ensure that
the resulting model is not limited to curve fitting
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate prediction of contaminant migration
in real-world aquifers is critical to groundwater protection and cleanup. The
proposed work will develop appropriate transport theory and build effective
modeling components to address this problem. Hence this research is both highly
theoretical and applied. In particular, the proposed work more accurately
represents the underlying link between fractional calculus and power-law
statistics in real aquifer material. The PI team includes mathematicians and
hydrologists, forming interdisciplinary cooperation in cutting edge research.