* 1460719
* Score-Based Tests of Measurement Bias in Explanatory Item Response Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Edgar Merkle, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 280,000.00

Large-scale, standardized ability tests have a prominent role in society,
impacting college admissions, occupational decisions, and resource distribution.
This research project will involve the development of novel statistical methods
that make it easier to determine whether or not the items making up a test are
fair. If a test (or specific items on a test) were to unfairly advantage one
group of students over others, then some students from the disadvantaged groups
may miss out on the opportunities that they deserve based on their abilities.
Thus, it is important to ensure that standardized tests are fair to the diverse
groups of students taking the tests. The new methods will be implemented in free
software, and all data resulting from the project will be openly disseminated
via the internet. The project also will support a doctoral student in
psychometrics, which is a STEM discipline with a documented shortage of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop statistical methods
that are designed to be used with item response models. Item response models are
considered to be state-of-the-art methodology for educational test development
and analysis. The new methods involve generalizations of the score test (also
known as the Lagrange multiplier test) that is well known to statisticians.
These generalizations have been relatively unexplored in psychometrics, so that
the methods developed in this project will address unresolved problems related
to the study of test fairness. In particular, these new methods will allow one
to study novel hypotheses of fairness using simpler statistical models than are
required for traditional methods. The new methods will further allow for the
study of fairness across many groups of students and within a large class of
item response models, many of which are more complex than traditional models.
Along with theoretical development and software implementation, the project will
illustrate the methods' abilities via simulation. The simulations will directly
compare the new methods to traditional methods and compare multiple novel
statistics to one another. The project will provide researchers with novel
methods to study test fairness, free software to carry out the methods, and
simulation results that guide researchers in the methods' optimal uses.