* 1460022
* Impact of Nonlinear Barotropic Tides in the North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Douglas Luther, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 389,881.00

The daily surface tides in the ocean, forced by gravitational perturbations
arising from the motions of Earth and its Moon, exert a profound influence on
the biology, chemistry, geology and circulation in both pelagic and coastal
environments. As more accurate models of the tides have been developed, it has
been realized that non-linear interactions among the tides in the shallow seas
and continental shelves (which are all forced by the pelagic tides) result in a
flow of energy back into the open ocean, but at altered frequencies and
wavelengths. The impact of this energy flux can have significant consequences
not only for modeling the diurnal and semi-diurnal tides themselves, but for the
energetics of phenomena dependent on the tides such as abyssal mixing. This
study explores two lines of research. The first is to determine how much the
coastal non-linear tides "contaminate" what is generally considered to be the
linear diurnal and semi-diurnal tides in the pelagic ocean. The second addresses
the question of whether the flux of coastal nonlinear tide energy dominates the
entire suite of surface gravity wave motions in the pelagic ocean at periods
shorter than the tides, even as short as 15 minutes, a possibility that has
ramifications both for the ocean's energy budget and other geophysical phenomena
(e.g., Earth's "seismic hum"; fragmentation of ice shelves) that are now known
to depend on these waves. The project involves training of one graduate student.

The broad objectives of this study are to elucidate, using observational tools,
(i) the nature (e.g., amplitude, structure) of the pelagic, barotropic,
nonlinear tides, especially within the diurnal and semi-diurnal tide bands; (ii)
the specific source locations for the energy in the pelagic, barotropic,
nonlinear tides; (iii) the flow of energy from the principal, linear barotropic
tides to gravity waves in other frequency bands; (iv) the nature (e.g.,
isotropic or not) and sources of the gravity wave energy at periods of 15
minutes to 2 hrs. These objectives will be accomplished by analyses of existing
long (> 1 year) bottom pressure records in the North Pacific that well observe
these waves and tides. The methodologies include least squares harmonic analysis
and a variety of auto- and cross-spectral techniques, some borrowed from
seismology.