* 1460742
* Coupled Processes that Determine the Basic States of Tropical Indian Ocean SeaSurface-Temperature (SST) and Asian Monsoon Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2015,10/31/2020
* H Annamalai, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 10/31/2020
* USD 500,028.00

The overall goal of the proposed work is to identify the major causes for the
persistent errors in simulating the Indian-Ocean monsoon in coupled models. This
project will identify coupled air-sea interaction processes that are critical
for shaping the basic state of monsoon precipitation in the Indian Ocean as well
as investigate the sensitivity of the basic state to variations The research
will help to train young climate scientists through the support of graduate
students and a postdoctoral fellow.

A coupled ocean-atmosphere model (the coupled atmosphere-ocean-sea ice model for
the Earth Simulator, CFES) will be used as a tool to examine the following three
hypotheses: (i) In the Indian-Ocean monsoon region as well as in the deep
tropics, necessary conditions for the occurrence of deep convection are
processes that moisten the free troposphere, e.g., the entrainment rate and
fraction of convective precipitation exposed to evaporate. (ii) Positive
precipitation errors in the southwestern Indian Ocean during the intermonsoons
lead to weakened equatorial westerlies. The weak easterlies in turn weaken the
Wyrtki Jets and, hence, the advection of warm water to the eastern Indian Ocean.
Furthermore, wind curl on the southern flank of the weak westerlies deepens the
thermocline in the southwestern Indian Ocean. The resulting changes in
temperature structure lead to near-equatorial sea surface temperature (SST)
anomalies that impact the monsoon in subsequent seasons, including erroneous dry
conditions over South Asia during boreal summer. (iii) Freshwater influx due to
precipitation and river run-off along with vertical mixing, coastal waves and
horizontal transport stratifies the upper ocean over the northern Bay of Bengal
and eastern Indian Ocean. In some instances, the salinity stratification is
intense enough to create a temperature inversion, which inhibits cooling of SSTs
during boreal winter and aids the maintenance of warm SSTs during the next
boreal summer that is conducive for deep convection.

Existing CFES simulations will be diagnosed and compared to observations. In
addition, systematic experiments designed to isolate key processes and to
explore the sensitivity of solutions to those processes, will be carried out.
Having identified such processes, their parameterization in Community Climate
System Model (CCSM4) will be examined. This effort will lead to insights that
have the potential to lead to model improvements.