* 1460652
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Program in High Performance Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Matthias Gobbert, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The REU Site: Interdisciplinary Program in High Performance Computing in the
Department of Mathematics and Statistics at the University of Maryland,
Baltimore County (UMBC) is an eight-week residential summer program for
undergraduate students majoring in mathematics, statistics, or computer science.
This REU Site uses activities that can be grouped into three principal
components to develop skills of the future workforce: (1) Structured training in
a certificate program teaches fundamental skills in high performance computing
through lectures and TA-supported computer labs, with specific tools of Linux,
C, MPI, MATLAB, and R. (2) The skills in scientific, statistical, and parallel
computing are applied to interdisciplinary research projects posed by scientists
from industry, government agencies, or departments outside of mathematics and
statistics. (3) The teaching and research are supported by a complete set of
highly integrated professional development activities, including team work
experience, presentation skills (poster, oral, project update, and 'elevator
pitch'), writing skills (abstracts, webpage, and technical report), discussion
of professional integrity in the sciences, topical field trips to local
employers or computing centers such as the NSA, NASA, or NIH, information on
graduate school application and a GRE preparation course, and opportunities for
informal contact with faculty, graduate students, and visitors to the program.
All aspects of the program are conducted by student teams, which is one of the
most important experiences participants take away from the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific, statistical, and parallel computing skills are
critical to the 21st century workforce. Equally crucial are skills in
interacting and communicating in teams, and working on interdisciplinary
projects. This REU Site will provide a comprehensive program integrating these
elements under the guidance of the faculty mentors and graduate assistants, many
of whom have extensive experience with client-focused interdisciplinary
consulting through the Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Consulting
(circ.umbc.edu). The high performance computing environment will be provided by
a state-of-the-art distributed-memory cluster in the NSF-supported UMBC High
Performance Computing Facility (hpcf.umbc.edu). Its current cluster maya has 240
nodes with modern multi-core CPUs and includes hybrid nodes with state-of-the-
art massively parallel GPUs designed for scientific computing as well as
cutting-edge 60-core Intel Phi accelerators. The REU Site participants will
benefit from a complete professional development experience involving
scientific, statistical, and parallel computing, interdisciplinary research
projects, and integrated development of professional skills. These skills are of
vital importance to the workforce of tomorrow and for the national
competitiveness of the United States. The site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.