* 1460385
* Collaborative Research: Isotopic Signatures of Social Transformations in the US Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Karen Schollmeyer, Archaeology Southwest
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2019
* USD 21,341.00

As human populations grow and settle in formerly remote regions, questions about
how hunting can be managed to provide long-term access to animals for local
people without loss of biodiversity are becoming increasingly urgent. This
project is an opportunity for archaeology to contribute to this important
current issue. The project will investigate how human populations in the US
Southwest (AD 750-1280) adapted their hunting and raising of animals in response
to changes in population density and the environment. The investigators will
chemically analyze animal bones from a number of archaeological sites in the
Mesa Verde area to see where the animals that people ate came from and to
understand what people were feeding those animals. This will allow the
investigators to examine whether farmers traded domesticated turkeys with other
villages or raised their own birds for meat, whether the amount of domesticated
maize (corn) people fed their turkey flocks changed as villages grew and as food
became harder to produce in the face of documented climate fluctuations, and
whether people responded to local declines in large game abundance by getting
animals from more distant places. Understanding the balance between human
demands and animal populations in this study will provide valuable information
about how different patterns of hunting and raising animals are sustainable at
different spatial and temporal scales. These patterns therefore have important
implications for modern-day wildlife management and conservation of species. The
project will also include support and training of a graduate student in stable
isotope analysis and significant public science education and outreach efforts.

In the Mesa Verde region of the US Southwest, increasing human population
aggregation and shifting settlement locations from AD 750 through 1280 were
accompanied by growing pressure on local food resources that are thought to have
led to heightened social tensions, episodes of violence, and subsequent regional
depopulation. This project uses strontium, carbon, and oxygen isotope analysis
to examine the extent to which transport of fauna took place and whether animal
source areas changed over time. The analysis of local rodents, plants, and water
samples will establish spatially diagnostic isotopic signatures for a large
region that will allow archaeological faunal samples to be linked with likely
procurement regions and assessment of whether source-sink dynamics (an important
component of hunting sustainability in some modern cases) operated
archaeologically, allowing sustainable long-term access to large game despite
centuries of localized human impacts on these animals. Understanding these
processes will provide valuable insights into the sustainability of certain
patterns of hunting, animal provisioning, and transport.