* 1460898
* REU Site: Biosecurity Research Experience for Undergraduates in Chemistry at Kansas State University
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Christopher Culbertson, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 345,000.00

This project funded by the Division of Chemistry supports a Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) site led by Professors Christopher T. Culbertson and
Stefan H. Bossmann at Kansas State University (KSU). Each summer ten students
from primarily undergraduate institutions and community colleges are brought to
the KSU campus for ten weeks to work on a research project. The majority of
research projects supported at this site are in areas of chemistry with broader
impacts on national biosecurity. The object of the program is to expose the
participants to scientific research and prepare them for graduate studies in
Chemistry. In addition to conducting research during the summer, the students in
this program participate in a number of professional development activities that
prepare them for graduate school. The program culminates in both poster and oral
presentations at the end of the summer. The broader impacts of this project are
to increase the number and diversity of students pursuing Ph.D. studies. A goal
is to recruit three students from community colleges, four students from
underrepresented groups, and five women students each year of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the scientific research projects that students
will work on include single cell analysis on microfluidic devices, the
development of a dependable, sensitive, and cost-effective detection system for
airborne pathogens and toxins, and the development of a theoretical
understanding of the chemical and physical properties of gold and silver
nanoparticles and clusters. Others will synthesize small inorganic clusters
using conventional and microwave-assisted synthesis, while others fabricate,
functionalize, and evaluate nanoscale biosensing devices.