* 1460754
* REU Site: Summer Research in Physics at the University of Arkansas
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Surendra Singh, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL PART: Physics REU (research experience for undergraduates) at the
University of Arkansas will be focused on experimental and theoretical projects
in nano-materials and condensed matter, soft matter and biophysics, photonics,
lasers and quantum optics. It builds upon the department's educational
environment, which is highly supportive of undergraduate research as evidenced
by the success of its majors in nationally competitive research-based awards and
highly ranked graduate programs. REU participants, selected from diverse groups
including women and minorities, will experience some of the basic concepts
central to undergraduate physics education come alive, discover their own
creativity, and acquire skills and practices essential to scientific problem
solving. They will also participate in a variety of professional development
activities, including: weekly lectures and seminars, training on library usage,
communications and scientific writing skills, a one-hour scientific ethics
course, and social/cultural activities with other REU groups and the Carver
program for minorities at the University. These will help them improve their
communication skills, develop skills for working in a collaborative environment,
and recognize the value of different points of
view.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART: REU participants will work on
carefully chosen research projects on topics of current interest such as
properties of nano-materials, STM of twisted bilayer graphene, solid-state nano-
pore fabrication for detection of DNA, light driven photon pumps, light-matter
interaction, plasmonic nanostructures, lasers and quantum optics, and
statistical and nonlinear physics of extremophiles and the brain. The department
has strong research activities in each of these areas and infrastructure to
support graduate and undergraduate research and education. Through engagement
with their research projects for ten weeks, the participants will leave having
experienced the creative process involved in scientific research starting from
the formulation of a problem to its solution, the ups and downs, and the
eventual thrill of a new discovery. This experience will ignite a spark of
creativity and enthusiasm for pursuing graduate education and/or careers in
science and technology.