* 1460867
* REU Site: Nanoscale Science Undergraduate Research Experience (NanoSURE) at UNC Charlotte
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Banita Brown, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 306,476.00

This award by the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation and
the Department of Defense's Award to Stimulate and Support Undergraduate
Research (ASSURE) Program supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site at the University of North Carolina - Charlotte for the summers of
2015-2017. Ten undergraduates are selected for the NanoSURE REU program each
year. Participants join interdisciplinary research teams which focus on ongoing
collaborative projects with faculty members from the Interdisciplinary Ph.D.
Program in Nanoscale Science. Targeted student participants range from rising
freshmen through rising seniors and include students who belong to undergraduate
populations where research opportunities are limited, or who are from
underrepresented groups. Activities include a 10-week undergraduate research
experience, workshops and seminars, outreach training and activity, and various
social/cultural activities.

The primary broader impact of the NanoSURE program is the advancement of
nanoscale science research opportunities at the undergraduate level and the
development of a diverse workforce able to meet the multi-disciplinary
challenges of the nanotechnology field. The REU site provides a mentor-guided
research experience to students from underrepresented groups (women and
minorities) and students from institutions in which access to research training
is limited [HBCUs (Historically Black Colleges and Universities), PUIs
(Primarily Undergraduate Institutions), and community colleges]. The direct
involvement of rising freshmen in the research experience stimulates this group
of students to pursue college degrees in STEM disciplines. The NanoSURE REU site
also partners with the Discovery Place of Charlotte, NC to provide training in
scientific outreach and an opportunity for REU students to disseminate science
to the general public.