* 1460392
* REU-Site: Regional Initiative to Promote Undergraduate Participation in Experimental and Computational Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 287,124.00

NON-TECHNICAL PART: The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) will host a
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in experimental and
computational materials research. This REU Site project involves a Historically
Black College and University (HBCU) partner institution and two regional
universities to recruit students from academic institutions where research
opportunities are limited. UAB will offer a broad range of interdisciplinary
materials research experiences to undergraduate students with a diversity of
backgrounds in physics, chemistry, applied mathematics, and engineering. The
undergraduate students will gain experience in materials synthesis, materials
characterization, and computer modeling and simulations during their ten-week
research stay at the UAB campus The scientific research projects have been
specifically developed for undergraduates by an interdisciplinary team
consisting of science and engineering faculty at UAB. They focus on emerging
areas in materials research. UAB will offer a lecture series on scientific
communications, responsible conduct of research, finding graduate school and
funding graduate education, and commercialization of research ideas to all
undergraduate participants. REU participants will publish their findings in
peer-reviewed journals and/or present at professional meetings leading to a
broad dissemination of new knowledge created in the undergraduate research
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART: UAB will offer undergraduate
research projects in materials under extreme conditions, thin film growth and
characterization, microelectronic materials, laser materials, nanostructured
biomaterials and composites, stimuli responsive polymers, electronic structure
calculations of materials, and molecular dynamics simulations. Some research
projects will also involve the use of national X-ray synchrotron and neutron
diffraction facilities in materials research. The undergraduate students will
carry out independent research while at the same time will be a part of an
interdisciplinary research team. The undergraduate student projects will have
short-term achievable milestones, while simultaneously contributing to longer-
term scientific goals and technological applications. Teaming of REU
participants with faculty and graduate students, giving poster and oral
presentations, writing a research style paper, and attending training seminars
in scientific communications and ethics will enable the REU students to
understand what is required to become a research scientist with the critical
skills needed for analyzing, interpreting, and presenting scientific data.