* 1460909
* Contextual Influences on Fear Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Kevin LaBar, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 550,070.00

This research program investigates why memories for fearful events are hard to
forget and what can be done to help individuals who are susceptible to
developing debilitating fear memories. When people experience threatening
situations, the memories for the events can haunt them long after the event has
passed, causing prolonged and sometimes traumatic stress. Returning to the
context in which the trauma occurred, or being exposed to cues that remind
people of their trauma, can cause a potent return of fear, even several years
later. It is not well known how the brain lays down long-term memory traces of
fearful events, or how trauma reminders activate brain pathways that lead to the
return of fear. It is also not known why some people are particularly prone to
developing long-term distress after a threatening experience, whereas others are
more resilient. Finally, it is not known how best to help individuals overcome
their fears in a way that makes them less likely to being re-experienced over
time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will tackle these important
and challenging problems by conducting experiments in healthy adults who are
exposed to fearful events and are trained to extinguish their fear memories.
People will be placed into a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner while they
encounter fearful or threatening stimuli viewed through virtual reality
simulators. Bodily and brain responses that are activated by fear will be
recorded. The use of virtual reality is an innovative approach that allows
researchers an ethical way to better model how fears are learned, suppressed,
and recovered in complex environments. The researchers will manipulate several
factors to determine how they promote or hinder the recovery of fear. These
include varying the distance between the research participant and the fearful
stimulus in the virtual world, and determining the effectiveness of having
people extinguish their fears in multiple virtual environments. Differences in
people's cognitive abilities and emotional reactions will be linked to the brain
data to determine why some individuals are more likely to exhibit the recovery
of fear memories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has important societal
implications for helping people who suffer from traumatic memories. The research
can also assist in efforts to identify individuals for certain professions who
may be more resilient to developing debilitating fear memories, including
emergency health care workers, police forces, and military personnel, who are
routinely exposed to potentially traumatic experiences. The research will
advance scientific knowledge in identifying the brain mechanisms that contribute
to fear memory and will highlight how virtual reality technology can be
integrated into neuroscience-based applications.