* 1460912
* REU Site: Back to the Future III
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* William Cross, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL PART: The National Science Foundation "Back to the Future"
Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site at the South Dakota School of Mines
and Technology provides research experiences focused in metallurgical
engineering for a diverse group of students from all over the nation including
students from two-year and tribal colleges with limited research opportunities.
Students conduct research on projects that improve the responsible and efficient
use of domestic metal resources and improve the materials and manufacturing
methods used in the transportation, medical, and energy sectors. Students are
engaged in an innovative series of workshops and seminars on the importance of
metals throughout history (the Back to the Future theme) that enhance the
student understanding of the impact of research on society. In addition,
students participate in an integrated professional development and technical
communications program that will give them the capabilities to become the next
generation of young professionals and researchers in science and engineering.
This Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site is supported by the National
Science Foundation, Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART: The REU Site: Back to the Future
III at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology is a 10-week summer
program that provides research opportunities in metallurgical engineering that
enhance the global competitiveness of the nation in the areas of advanced
materials and manufacturing, mineral beneficiation and resource recovery,
strategic metals, and energy-efficient materials. The program addresses the
challenges faced by future engineers by providing a research experience within a
unique cultural and holistic framework. This framework is provided by projects
that have historical significance and innovative programmatic activities led by
faculty from engineering, science, and the humanities that explore the interface
between engineering, history, and art (the Back to the Future theme). Students
participate in an integrated supplemental training program that nurtures their
research skills and career development. This program includes advanced technical
communications training, workshops to give historical context for current trends
in research, as well as activities that connect students to each other and the
community. Data suggest that the diverse nature of program activities attracts
students of varied background and intellectual typology. The Site will provide
opportunities for underserved students in engineering with an emphasis on two-
year community and Tribal Colleges. The site will also strengthen ongoing Native
American initiatives in the region including the NSF All Nations Louis Stokes,
Tiospaye, and OSSPEEC programs. This Research Experiences for Undergraduates
Site is supported by the National Science Foundation, Division of Materials
Research.