* 1460720
* REU Site: Nanoscale Assembly of Molecules and Materials at Indiana University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Sara Skrabalak, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

In this project, funded by the Division of Chemistry, Indiana University will
host a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site with an emphasis in
materials chemistry and assembly. Research training and mentorship will be
provided for eight students for ten weeks during the summers of 2016, 2017, and
2018. The overall goal is to give REU students a unique educational experience
that facilitates learning about how materials assemble from smaller entities
over different length scales (i.e., nanometers to micrometers) and the function
of assembled forms. Broader impacts are addressed in that as students are
exposed to cutting-edge research in materials chemistry and assembly this will
promote the idea of pursuing a career in the sciences while refining students'
skills to ensure their succeed in STEM programs and careers. Each student is
expected to produce and disseminate high-impact research. Students who do not
have the opportunity to participate in interdisciplinary research at their home
institutions, and those whose research experiences could be augmented through
participation in a program at a research-intensive institution are targeted for
recruitment. In particular, students from Primarily Undergraduate Institutions,
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), and 2-year colleges are
especially encouraged to participate through new and existing partnerships. The
participation of women and first generation college students is emphasized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects for REU students include both synthesis and
characterization of assembled materials and their building blocks. The
scientific and training objectives of the program are to enable students to: (1)
identify interdisciplinary research and the unique skill sets that must be
developed to approach this type of research; (2)learn chemical concepts that
drive their research and specific skills to execute experiments; (3) conduct
literature searches relevant to research and evaluate papers for key findings
and tested hypotheses; (4) learn key aspects of effective scientific
communication through interactions with subject-matter experts, knowledgeable
peer groups, and the general public; (5) expand their understanding of
opportunities within STEM disciplines through roundtables with faculty,
question-and-answer sessions with current graduate students, and an introduction
to entrepreneurship; and (6) conduct research in an ethical and safe manner
through classroom and hands-on training.