* 1460461
* REU site: Offshore wind energy: Solving the Engineering, Environmental &amp; Socio-Economic Challenges.
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Erin Baker, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2018
* USD 367,920.00

REU Site: Offshore wind energy - Solving the Engineering, Environmental &amp;
Socio-Economic Challenges&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE
OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This REU site will introduce the next
generation of researchers to the engineering, environmental and social sciences
needed to take on the challenges of offshore wind energy. The undergraduate
students will be mentored by graduate students who are themselves working in an
interdisciplinary program in offshore wind energy engineering, environmental
impacts, and policy. The goal of this REU is to develop well-rounded researchers
at multiple levels of education and expertise, who will have the background
needed to design wind energy systems that better address not only the
considerable engineering challenges, but also the environmental, social,
economic, and regulatory challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects
will span these wind energy challenges, and will include investigating how
mooring lines work for floating offshore wind turbines, designing very large
turbine blades out of biodegradable materials such as wood, investigating the
offshore movements of birds and bats to carefully plan the location and
operation of offshore wind farms, and understanding what drives public
acceptance and rejection of offshore wind energy in Massachusetts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage a diverse community of
undergraduate students to work on sustainable energy systems, an important
global issue, and will encourage students to pursue graduate research in wind
energy. The activities will include mentored research and leadership
opportunities; technical and professional seminar series; working lunches;
fieldwork and REU field trips; and an end-of-program poster session in which
students present the results of their research projects. Students will be
recruited from local women's colleges, local community colleges, North Carolina
A&amp;T (an Historically Black University), and UMass diversity organization
such as the Society of Women Engineers, The National Society of Black Engineers,
and The Center for Multicultural Advancement and Student
Success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
REU site will introduce the next generation of researchers to the engineering,
environmental and social sciences needed to take on the challenges of offshore
wind energy. The integration of the ongoing IGERT program in Offshore Wind
Energy with this REU will develop well-rounded researchers at multiple levels of
education and expertise, who will have the background needed to design wind
energy systems that better address the environmental and
social/economic/regulatory challenges; to design policies and regulations that
enable wind energy technology and development while addressing stakeholder
concerns; and to help bridge communication gaps between industry, various
stakeholder groups and the academy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects will
span the wind energy challenges mentioned above, and will include investigating
fluid-structure interaction of mooring systems; bio-based materials for offshore
wind turbine blades; offshore wind farm siting as a robust portfolio problem;
habitat use of breeding bald eagles; spatial ecology of marine birds; tracking
offshore movements of songbirds, bats and seabirds; cumulative adverse effects
of offshore wind energy development on wildlife; and understanding public
acceptance and rejection of offshore wind energy in Massachusetts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intended impact is to prepare and motivate diverse
undergraduate students to pursue graduate education in fields related to the
interdisciplinary topic of offshore wind energy. The objectives are to: (1)
engage a diverse community of undergraduate students in a global issue, (2) to
introduce undergraduate students to cutting edge interdisciplinary
collaborations, and (3) to encourage students to pursue graduate research in
wind energy. The activities will include mentored research and leadership
opportunities; technical and professional seminar series; working lunches;
fieldwork and working REU field trips; and an end of program poster session.
Students will be recruited from local women's colleges, local community
colleges, North Carolina A&amp;T State (an HBCU), and UMass diversity
organization such as the Society of Women Engineers, The National Society of
Black Engineers, and The Center for Multicultural Advancement and Student
Success.