* 1460170
* SHINE: Connecting the Solar Wind From the Corona to the Heliosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Enrico Landi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 05/31/2020
* USD 357,000.00

This 3-year SHINE project aims to quantitatively study the solar wind from end
to end, for the first time, by linking two completely different types of data
and using a novel, powerful diagnostic technique, the Michigan Ionization Code
(MIC). The results of this project will lead to a whole new level of
quantitative understanding of the thermal and environmental conditions in the
source regions of the solar wind, and in an empirical description of the wind
physical parameters, thermal history and acceleration. Furthermore, the project
will provide the community with a new, powerful tool to predict the evolution of
ion charge states in the solar wind, as well as a powerful methodology to study
the solar wind matching two completely different types of observations: high-
resolution spectral and in-situ ion composition measurements. The project is
primarily intended to fund and develop the skills of a graduate student, and the
methodology and results coming from the research investigations will be
incorporated into the graduate students thesis. The peculiar nature of the
project, which connects two entirely different types of observations and of data
analysis techniques, will uniquely position the graduate student at the
crossroads of two communities the in-situ and remote sensing communities and
will provide her/him the expertise to contribute to both of them. Additionally,
undergraduates will be involved through programs like the REU at the University
of Michigan. The research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic
Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main science objectives of
this SHINE project are: (1) investigate the heating and acceleration of both
slow and fast solar wind; and, (2) uniquely identify the solar wind source
regions. To accomplish these objectives, the project team will: (1) utilize the
MIC, which predicts the evolution of the solar wind ion abundances as they leave
the Sun from the source region to the freeze-in point and beyond to Earth; and,
(2) directly and quantitatively link in-situ observations from SWICS on board
Ulysses with high-resolution measurements of the inner corona from SUMER
(onboard SOHO) and EIS (onboard Hinode) of the same parcel of solar wind
observed during SOHO/Ulysses and SOHO/Hinode/Ulysses quadrature. The team will
determine the temperature, density and wind velocity profiles that
simultaneously fit both types in-situ and remote observations. During this
project, the team will: (1) identify charge state ratios to be used for wind
source region diagnostics; (2) develop an empirical model of solar wind plasma,
which includes electron density, electron temperature, velocity, and element and
ion composition as a function of distance; and, (3) determine the source regions
of both fast and slow solar wind.