* 1460366
* Collaborative Research - Development and Application of Cryptotephra Studies to Resolve Debates over Chronology in Modern Human Origins Research in South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Eugene Smith, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 183,064.00

Dr. Eugene Smith of the University of Nevada Las Vegas and Dr. Curtis Marean of
Arizona State University along with an international team of scientists will
apply a new dating method to determine when a suite of uniquely human features
first appeared in evolutionary history and thus help to understand when, where
and why the human lineage evolved. South African Middle Stone Age (MSA) sites
have figured prominently in this work, revolutionizing knowledge of modern human
origins by pushing back and enriching knowledge of the timing of key features
science considers definitive of humans. Modern dating techniques and their
application to archaeological sites provide the basis for determining when key
events in early human history occurred. These techniques use complex models that
produce age estimates and not absolute dates. In the past, different
laboratories have used different models that may result in different ages for
the same geologic unit. This has created a dating controversy that reduces
confidence in the timing of key events in early human prehistory. There is
general agreement that the best way of producing robust age estimates is to use
several independent dating techniques. Recently, the research team identified
volcanic ash in a rock shelter occupied by early humans at Pinnacle Point, South
Africa, and the best fit of the chemistry of this ash is to the 75,000 year old
eruption of the Toba volcano in Indonesia. This discovery provides an
independent dating tool that can be used along with traditional dating methods
to resolve the dating controversy and tie the record of human origins preserved
at Pinnacle Point and other areas of southern Africa to the global record of
modern human origins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Smith and Marean and their
research team will collect and process samples from four archaeological sites in
southern Africa to identify and determine the distribution of ash from the Toba
eruption. This work will, for the first time, tie early human history recorded
at each of these sites to a single dating model and remove any debate about the
timing of key events in early human development. Correlation of volcanic ash to
source volcanoes will be done using the chemistry of the ash. The ash is in the
form of very small (micron sized) glass grains known as shards. These grains are
analyzed by instruments that focus a small-diameter electron or laser beam on
the shard to determine their chemical makeup. The chemistry is then compared to
a database of known chemistry to identify the source and age of the ash. This
project will not only provide a new independent dating tool for archaeological
sites, but also help train students and early career scientists in the
techniques of archaeology and geology.