* 1460943
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experience for undergraduates interested in Materials Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Ranji Vaidyanathan, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2018
* USD 405,208.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the Helmerich Research
Center at Oklahoma State University (OSU) offers research experiences in
materials science and engineering research to a diverse group of talented
students over a period of three years. The student research projects focus on
materials processing, testing and characterization for interdisciplinary
applications in energy storage, energy generation, biomaterials, combustion, and
aerospace. In addition, students are introduced to entrepreneurship and
commercialization to transition research from the lab-scale to the real world,
thus enhancing U.S. competitiveness. Students are recruited from Oklahoma
colleges and universities that have limited STEM research facilities and large
populations of students underrepresented in STEM. The program is leveraging
existing OSU's partnerships with Tulsa Community College, which is a feeder
program for Native American students transferring to undergraduate engineering
programs at OSU and the Oklahoma Louis Stoke Alliance for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) to identify a diverse pool of student applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site offers opportunities to undergraduate
students to engage in in-depth research experiences in several areas of advanced
manufacturing in aerospace, energy and biomaterials. During the 9-week
experience, students are mentored by experienced faculty to conduct materials
engineering and science research projects in: 3-D printing and direct digital
manufacturing, materials processing, and materials testing and characterization.
The students are also: learning about cutting-edge materials characterization
methods (through web-based participation in the two-day national workshop on
Advanced Materials Characterization offered by the Materials Research Laboratory
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign); exposed to entrepreneurial
routes to commercializing research (in collaboration with the Riata Center of
Entrepreneurship); participating in a professional development program that
includes training in communications skills and graduate school preparation and
career information sessions; presenting their research results at a research
symposium at the end of the summer; and being provided with opportunities to
interact with local industry partners (in Tulsa, OK) that are engaged in
materials research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site is supported by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.