* 1460806
* A Research Incubator REU Site in Chemistry at Furman University
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Karen Buchmueller, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 01/31/2019
* USD 337,911.00

At this REU Sites called "A Research Incubator REU Site in Chemistry at Furman
University" funded by the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation,
Professors Karen L. Buchmueller and colleagues at Furman University will provide
research opportunities for ten students for ten weeks. The Site will involve
three visiting teams, each consisting of a faculty mentor and two students who
will come to Furman each summer to conduct research. Four Furman teams, each
consisting of a faculty mentor and one student, will join them. Research topics
may be developed independently by the visiting teams, or in collaboration with
one of the Furman teams. Early in the summer, a customizable workshop schedule
will provide safety and ethics training, career advising and hands-on experience
with key analytical instrumentation. Social and outreach activities will
complement focused laboratory research to encourage the intellectual development
of young scientists. Additional mentor-focused development activities will help
to advance long-term sustainable research programs at the partner
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site will serve as a "research
incubator", resulting in beneficial impacts well beyond the host institution's
summer program and the participation of the immediate undergraduate. This will
be accomplished by hosting faculty/student teams from partner institutions or
schools where internal research activities are limited or non-existent.
Potential partners will include 2-year institutions and institutions with
diverse student populations. The approach will encourage continued
faculty/student research activity after the formal summer program, while
simultaneously providing an outstanding experience for those students directly
involved in the program.