* 1460937
* REU Site: Inverse Problems for Electrical Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* James Morrow, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 03/31/2018
* USD 245,453.00

The REU program on Inverse Problems for Electrical Networks will bring eight
undergraduates to the University of Washington in each of the summers of
2015-2017 to work on inverse problems for electrical networks and related
problems on graphs. The students will also investigate problems in combinatorics
and special topics in number theory. The simplest inverse problem for an
electrical network is to determine the conductance of each of the conductors in
an electrical network when the boundary current response of the network to
boundary voltages is known, but no interior knowledge is available. Imagine a
box in which there is an unknown electric circuit with leads protruding from the
box at which current and voltage can be measured. The solution of the problem
can be interpreted as providing an electrical version of an x-ray. A simplified
version of the inverse problem is the problem of mine detection with an
electrical field. The intent of the program is to guide students into
independent research projects which can be completed in the eight week period.
The students will be given reading material before the program starts and
introduce them to research problems in the first week. Students will learn how
to formulate and attack research problems in a supportive, collaborative
atmosphere. An emphasis will be placed on communicating results. Prior students
will work as TAs and mentor current students. Alumni of the program will be
frequent visitors and provide additional help.

There are difficult technical questions that students have asked and answered.
In recent years students have discovered exotic electrical networks that cannot
be recovered by boundary data but are almost uniquely determined. In other words
there are only a finite number of possibilities for networks compatible with the
given boundary measurements. These are called networks n-to-1 networks. Students
in the program invented these networks and discovered their properties. New
examples are constructed by gluing certain "four-star" graphs in a pattern that
looks something like a cactus or shoelace graph. There are now many different
families of such graphs, which will be investigated. Another topic is properties
of permutations, especially peak points of permutations. Students have recently
found interesting properties of peak polynomials, for instance that all peaks in
a peak set are zeros of its corresponding peak polynomial. These and other
topics will be the building blocks of this program.