* 1460394
* CAREER: Particle Phenomenology at the LHC Era
* MPS,PHY
* 08/27/2014,09/30/2018
* Luis Anchordoqui, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 09/30/2018
* USD 180,438.00

This CAREER award funds the research activities of Professor Luis Anchordoqui at
the University of Wisconsin Milwaukee.

After nearly twenty years of planning and construction, the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) is now the highest-energy particle collider in the world. Data
from the LHC is likely to lead to nothing less than a new Standard Model for the
next generation of particle physicists, describing the fundamental building
blocks of matter and their interactions at an even higher energy scale. In his
research, Professor Anchordoqui aims to develop methods by which a certain class
of new theories beyond the Standard Model might be tested at the LHC. This class
of new theories includes those in which the myriad of particle types in the
Standard Model is replaced by a single fundamental building block: a "string."
One critical component of Anchordoqui's work is to explore the various
properties of string resonances related to experimental searches for new physics
at the LHC. He is also involved in complementary cosmological and astrophysical
observations, which aid his search for string theory's smoking gun and help
unravel the mysteries of the Universe's unseen dimensions.

This project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts. Professor
Anchordoqui will involve graduate students and postdocs in his research, and
thereby provide critical training to junior physicists beginning research in
this field. He also intends to give public lectures on his research results and
develop new course curricula based on results from the LHC.