* 1460012
* The Local-level Social Life of Global Ideologies
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Sharika Thiranagama, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 144,952.00

How do global political ideologies, such as communism, become locally rooted and
perpetuated over generations? Stanford University anthropologist, Dr. Sharika
Thiranagama, will address this question through an investigation into the micro-
processes through which ideological affiliations are perpetuated in everyday
sociality. The research will be conducted in the southern Indian state of
Kerala. This is an appropriate site for the research because in 1957, Kerala saw
the installation of the first ever democratically elected communist government
and communist parties have been part of the ruling coalition ever since.
Communism in Kerala has survived the collapse of the Soviet Union and the waning
of the organized left in most of the world. This project addresses the question
of why and how this has come about. While much research in the social sciences
evaluates and measures political affiliation through the examination of
electoral votes and formal institutions, Dr. Thiranagama will instead examine
the percolating and pervasive effects of political ideologies through how they
are manifested in everyday practices in the family and in public spaces. This
project will both contribute to an understanding of how political ideology might
persist by shaping non-political realms of people's lives and also to an
understanding of the long afterlife of the communist movement outside of the
Soviet, Chinese, and Eastern Europe Bloc.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
will be carried out in Kerala in the districts of Palakkad and Kannur, both of
which have long been communist strongholds. Dr. Thiranagama will focus on
exemplary institutions: the public library system and the private "communist
family." Both have been deeply implicated in the public and private promulgation
of communism in Kerala. Kerala's unique library movement introduced reading
rooms, mass literacy, deliberative political discussion and communism into
everyday life. The "communist family" sought to reconfigure ethics and the
practice of intimate life. Data will be gathered in two neighborhoods and with
library users and staff using a mixed methods approach, including interviews,
participant observation, household surveys, and life history interviews. In
addition, archival research will be undertaken to construct longitudinal social
histories of the library and the family. Findings from this research will help
to understand one of the enduring questions of modern times: how global
ideologies are taken up and made to persist in ordinary people's daily lives.