* 1460906
* REU Site: Achieving Heightened Goals: Undergraduate Research in Ecology at the Mountain Research Station
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Michael Breed, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2018
* USD 301,951.00

This REU Site award to the Mountain Research Station, University of Colorado,
located in Nederland, CO, will support the training of 9 students for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2015-2017. Student projects will focus on aspects of
mountain ecology, including biodiversity, ecosystem function, mammal foraging,
and animal behavior, taking advantage of numerous sponsored long-term research
programs at field sites on Niwot Ridge and the surrounding Front Range of the
Colorado Rockies. Mentors are faculty from the Universities of Colorado and
Wisconsin, who will select the student applicants who will work with them.
During the program students participate in weekly meetings providing training in
science communication and ethics in science, and information on the merits of
graduate school and how students can find and facilitate acceptance into
specific graduate programs. Several formal presentations will be given by
students describing their projects during the program. Students will participate
in mentoring talented high school students on research projects near the end of
the program. Recruitment will focus on students from groups underrepresented in
academic ecology and on schools with limited research opportunities.

It is anticipated that a total of 27 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences. Students will also help instill their enthusiasm for
research in high school students participating in a course at the field station.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are
required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email
sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://www.colorado.edu/eeb/EEBprojects/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Bill
Bowman at william.bowman@colorado.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Michael Breed at
michael.breed@colorado.edu).