* 1460428
* REU/RET Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) and Teachers (RET) in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Gregory Fuchs, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL PART: This project will provide 10 undergraduate students each
summer with an introduction to materials research while encouraging interested
students to pursue a graduate degree in a materials-related field. During the
10-week program, students will participate in independent research projects
under the guidance of Cornell faculty. A stimulating cohort experience will be
created through a leadership workshop, weekly seminars, field trips, a
presentation workshop, a concluding symposium, and a variety of informal
activities. In addition, a teacher-training program that specifically targets
teachers in schools that serve large underrepresented minority and low
socioeconomic status populations will increase student achievement in science by
providing professional development activities for 5 middle school and high
school teachers per year. The two-summer progressive program will include both a
six-week team-research experience that introduces teachers to materials research
as well as a six-week independent research experience to enable in-depth
exploration. Both programs will include curriculum development
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART: An exceedingly wide
variety of scientific and engineering research will be accomplished under this
program, exploring materials-related topics in biomaterials, energy, soft
materials, and hard materials. Individual projects will range from the
development of new materials for high performance batteries to studies of
mechanical properties degradation in injured cartilage to the computational
design of materials for next-generation microelectronics. With the guidance of
top researchers and their groups, participating undergraduates and teachers will
construct scientific apparatus, perform experiments, model material properties,
analyze data, and contribute to the general materials knowledge base and to
their own education and training.