* 1460325
* CAREER: Analysis and Automation of Systematic Software Modifications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Miryung Kim, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 437,285.00

Software systems evolve. Developers must add features, fix bugs, and rewrite
software systems to provide better functionality and higher performance.
Existing systems also need to migrate to new hardware, computing environments,
programming models, and libraries. There exist redundancies, inefficiencies, and
error-proneness in the way that we evolve software systems today. In particular,
recent empirical studies indicate that developers often apply similar but not
identical changes to similar contexts. Making such systematic, repetitive
program modifications is a tedious, manual, error-prone process.

This project will investigate the extent and nature of repetitive program
modifications and will design, build, and evaluate a novel approach, called
SYDIT, which improves developer productivity in applying systematic changes. In
this approach, developers no longer apply similar changes manually. Instead,
developers provide the old and new version of selected code as an example
change, and SYDIT will generalize a reusable, abstract, context-aware program
transformation from it. (1) SYDIT will compute program differences between the
old and new version of selected code and create a reusable edit script by
identifying relevant data and control flow context and by abstracting the edits'
content and position. (2) SYDIT will then automatically identify related
candidate change locations and produce concrete, customized edits to each
candidate. Incorporation with testing and change impact analysis will help
developers validate suggested changes. SYDIT's new differential delta analysis
will help developers understand the effect of ported changes in each target
context. (3) Using a large corpus of project histories, this project will
investigate the frequency and types of repetitive changes. The resulting data
set will be used to evaluate SYDIT's accuracy and capability and to assess a
productivity gain that can be achieved by SYDIT. The impact of this research
will be substantially improved developer productivity in evolving large software
systems. By helping developers apply changes to similar contexts exhaustively
and inspect the effect of suggested changes, SYDIT will reduce errors of
omission and relieve developers from tedious, error-prone hand editing. The
empirical studies will expand our understanding of repetitive program changes
during software evolution.