* 1460900
* REU Site: EXERCISE - Explore Emerging Computing in Science and Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Enyue Lu, Salisbury University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2019
* USD 359,984.00

This award renews the EXERCISE Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at Salisbury University, Maryland. The intellectual focus of the site is
research on emerging paradigms in parallel computing. The Principal
Investigator, together with mentors, will supervise a 10-week REU program that
gives a diverse cohort of students a taste of computational thinking in the
domain of parallel computing and also an understanding of the graduate school
experience. The projects cover a breadth of areas in parallel computing and the
students will gain experience in all aspects of research. The emphasis on
parallel computing is important particularly at a time when multicore and
multiprocessor architectures are becoming ubiquitous and more and more
applications are utilizing parallelism. To ensure diversity, students will be
selected from within Salisbury University as well as from regional community
colleges, University of Maryland Eastern Shore and other Historically Black
Colleges and Universities.

Because of the ubiquity of multicore and multiprocessor architectures, parallel
computing has become an important area of research in computing science.
However, parallel computing brings with it several challenges. There are
fundamental difficulties in program semantics related to process interleaving: a
parallel program can yield inconsistent answers, or even crash, due to
unpredictable interactions between simultaneous tasks. Secondly, communication,
memory access, and I/O overhead may result in run-time delays. Finally, it is
difficult to ensure that programs consume resources in a manner that
simultaneously achieves efficiency and meets performance goals. Based on the
above challenges, the REU Site will focus on four aspects of parallel computing,
namely, algorithms, software, architecture and applications. Students will work
with faculty mentors in completing cutting-edge research projects to tackle data
and compute intensive applications that emphasize the above four aspects. By the
end of program, students will acquire valuable skills, gain a broader and deeper
understanding of research, and develop greater confidence in their abilities. In
particular, they will be exposed to emerging paradigms in parallel computing
such as MapReduce and GPU computing, and will have opportunities to explore
concurrent software and multiprocessor architectures, and design efficient
parallel algorithms, and to tackle data and compute intensive problems in
computer and social networks, image and signal processing, and geographic
information systems.