* 1460653
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Advanced Chemical Sensing and Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Marcin Ptaszek, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 357,305.00

In this project funded by the Division of Chemistry Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Program, Professor Zeev Rosenzweig of the University of
Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) directs a summer undergraduate research program
in the area of chemical sensing and imaging. A diverse group of ten
undergraduate students are recruited nationwide for a ten week program. The
selected students engage in research under the direction of UMBC faculty who are
leading efforts towards the development of next generation chemical sensing and
imaging techniques for a wide range of applications. Broader impacts are
evidenced by the potential impact on areas of chemical sensing and imaging in
chemistry, biology, physics and various engineering disciplines. This work may
lead to the development of new chemical sensing and imaging technologies.
Building on the strength of providing high quality education to students from
underrepresented groups in STEM, this REU program partners with the Leadership
Alliance and the Interdisciplinary Consortium for Research and Educational
Access in Science and Engineering (INCREASE) to pursue a nationwide plan to
recruit and provides this research and education training opportunity to highly
qualified students from underrepresented groups and disadvantaged populations.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Examples of REU research projects include the development
of single molecule techniques to understand protein-protein interactions, the
development of nanometric barcodes based on luminescent semiconductor quantum
dots for multiplexed bioassays; the development of novel optochemical and
electrochemical sensors and sensor arrays for the analysis of neurotransmitters
and volatile organic compounds; the development of near infrared molecular
probes for in-vivo imaging; and the development of standoff remote detection
methods for the analysis of explosives. In addition, the individual research
experiences are augmented by an extensive program of integrative activities,
that include weekly technical and professional development workshops.