* 1460426
* SYMPOSIUM:  Support for U.S. Participants for the Symposium on "Statics and Dynamics of Dense Granular Matter," July 6 - 10, 2015, Madrid, Spain
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Corey OHern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

CBET-1460426&lt;br/&gt;PI: O'Hern, Corey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support the participation of US scientists and engineers in a symposium titled
Statics and Dynamics of Dense Granular Matter, which will be held during the
European Solid Mechanics Conference in Madrid, Spain from July 6 - 10, 2015. The
symposium will focus on dry granular materials, which are suspensions in which
the only interaction between particles occurs when they contact each other. The
symposium will provide a way for leading research groups in the U.S. to interact
with their European counterparts and other researchers from around the world.
Participation by junior researchers will be encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dry
granular materials appear in a variety of important industrial and natural
processes. These materials pose special problems when they are processed in the
dense state, because they can undergo a transition between a flowing and jammed
state. The characteristics of jamming depend not only on the granular material
but also on the process that leads to jamming. This symposium will cover a range
of topics for such materials including packings of frictionless and frictional
particles, granular suspensions, constitutive laws for dense flows, shear-
induced jamming and shear thickening, and geophysical applications involving
granular materials.