* 1460885
* Collaborative Research: Brain mechanisms of rhythm perception: Testing the impact of the motor system on auditory perception
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Scott Makeig, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 370,424.00

The perception of rhythmic patterns of events in time is central to our ability
to find meaning in the sounds of language and music: the basis for much of human
culture and communication. We do not passively receive temporal patterns, but
actively engage with them by using a repeating 'pulse' or 'beat' to form an
essential scaffold for our perception of time. This ability might be most
obvious when expressed through dance, or simply tapping a foot to music, but it
has deeper importance for how we comprehend sound even in the absence of
movement. The scaffold provided by the beat cycle enables listeners to predict
upcoming events, allowing more efficient encoding and learning of sensory
patterns. How does this important perceptual mechanism work? New evidence
suggests that perceiving patterns in sound doesn't depend only on the auditory
system, but also involves activation of the motor system, even when the listener
is not moving. This proposal tests the provocative and potentially
transformative idea that motor planning activity is not only to help us move,
but is also necessary for perception of patterns in the sounds we hear. This
research has many potential societal benefits in both education and medicine. An
understanding of the auditory-motor interactions underlying rhythm perception
could explain a growing number of findings suggesting an important link between
beat perception and language, including the development of reading in children,
the perception of speech in noise, and attention, and may help drive improved
educational interventions. The results could also provide a brain-based
explanation for the growing use of rhythmic music in the treatment of movement
disorders such as Parkinson's disease and possibly guide development of enhanced
therapies and diagnostic tests.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses a
critical, and difficult, open question within auditory cognitive neuroscience:
Does motor activity play a causal role in beat perception and if so, what is
that role? Establishing this would be a transformative breakthrough in our
understanding of the perception of time. While there is strong existing evidence
that motor regions are active during beat perception, the dynamic functioning
and interaction among parts of the cortical network supporting beat perception
is not fully understood. In particular, a causal role of motor activity on
auditory processing has not yet been demonstrated directly. This program of
research directly examines whether motor planning regions influence processing
in auditory cortex and whether a dynamic network is activated during beat
perception. To achieve these objectives the investigators use two interlocking
approaches: 1) Advanced quantitative methods of cortical source-resolved
electroencephalographic (EEG) brain dynamics during beat perception tasks to
identify regions in the brain whose activity patterns mirrors the endogenously
perceived beat and to examine the directional flow of influence between these
beat perception areas and other auditory processing areas; 2) Non-invasive
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to transiently suppress and/or
facilitate activity in beat perception areas.