* 1460917
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Smart Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Lawrence Holder, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 335,000.00

The goal of this Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site renewal is
to offer a unique training opportunity for undergraduates to conduct research in
the multidisciplinary area of smart environments, such as homes that are
enhanced by information technology to meet residents' needs in a sophisticated
and helpful manner. The American population is aging; therefore research is
needed to understand the effects of aging and to find ways of allowing older
adults and individuals with disabilities to lead independent lives at home. This
REU project facilitates research and training in the complementary disciplines
of computer science, electrical engineering, psychology, and health care.
Because some of the students will be living in apartments that also serve as
test sites, they will be fully immersed in the project. It will also make a
contribution to a generation whose workforce is trained in multiple,
complementary disciplines. The planned recruitment effort and strong mentoring
component will spread knowledge of the benefits of the REU program among the
targeted populations, resulting in broadening participation in engineering and
related disciplines for many years to come. This REU project will continue a
tradition of specifically targeting involvement with women and students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable high
quality interdisciplinary research that links design of technology with health-
based applications and creates new opportunities for undergraduates to study
health and human behavior using the technology. Students will not only be
exposed to research environments and techniques, but they will also learn to
work with students and faculty in other fields as well. Knowledge from computer
science, electrical engineering, psychology, health care, and from other REU
programs, is needed to create a smart environment, because an effective smart
environment cannot be adequately designed without researching these topics in
fully interactive ways, and because a creative smart environment design in turn
opens the door to new avenues of health and science research. This
interdisciplinary effort is valuable for undergraduate students to research
ideas that will have a significant impact on their community. Results of this
program, including descriptions of student projects, lessons learned, and
quantitative and qualitative feedback, will be disseminated via the program
website (reu.eecs.wsu.edu).