* 1460628
* REU Site:  Biological Inquiry: From Molecules to Organisms
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Wendy Smith, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 346,153.00

This REU Site award to Northeastern University, located in Boston, MA, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2015-2017. The REU program is open to all undergraduate students who are
citizens, nationals, or permanent residents of the United States. Students from
underrepresented groups, from schools with limited opportunities for research,
and with military backgrounds including cadets, reservists, and returning
veterans, are encouraged to apply. The focus of the REU site is
interdisciplinary research across biological levels. Pairs of participating
students will work in interdisciplinary research teams and explore related
research questions from different perspectives. Example projects include
extracellular matrix-guided differentiation of adult stem cells, microbial
biofilm assembly and DNA damage response, behavioral and molecular aspects of
social immunity, organismal survival under extreme conditions, links between
circadian rhythms and regeneration, and mitochondrial DNA inheritance in
developing oocytes. Students will participate in joint workshops on ethics and
responsible conduct of research, proposal writing, presentation of talks and
posters, applying to graduate school, and career opportunities in science. At
the end of the program, students will present their research in a summer
research symposium. Students will be housed in new dorms on campus in the heart
of Boston. The effectiveness of the training program will be assessed with a
common web-based tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities, will be trained. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. Students will use techniques at the cutting edge of
biological research to answer new questions, and will enhance their abilities to
lead and perform in research teams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are required
to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://www.northeastern.edu/cos/biology/undergraduate/reu-site/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Wendy Smith at w.smith@neu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Rebeca
Rosengaus at r.rosengaus@neu.edu).