* 1460257
* MAGIC MT - Uplift of the Appalachians
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Robert Evans, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 05/31/2018
* USD 266,015.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eastern edge of the North
American continent is located far from currently active boundaries of tectonic
plates, and is thus often considered relatively "quiet" in plate tectonic terms.
However, the eastern margin of North America has experienced a long and rich
plate tectonic history, most recently being involved in the break-up of North
America and Europe and the formation of the Atlantic Ocean. That break-up
involved multiple important geologic processes, including magmatism, stretching
of the continent, and uplift that is responsible for the formation of the
Appalachian Mountains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although most of this activity
finished long ago, there is evidence to suggest the Appalachians are even now
being partially supported by flow of the mantle beneath the mountains. We are
using electric and magnetic fields of the earth recorded at the surface to image
the structure of the continent and the properties of the underlying convecting
mantle, in order to better understand the processes that control modern day
topography and those involved in continental break-up, or rifting. The project
partly supports the education of a PhD student as well as training of highly
skilled technical staff, and the experiment uses equipment manufactured by Cape
Abilities, a non-profit company on Cape Cod that finds work for people with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are
carrying out fieldwork to collect magnetotelluric (MT) data in a profile of
about 28 stations across the Appalachians, from Ohio to Virginia. The MT method
measures naturally occurring electric and magnetic fields at the surface of the
earth, and uses this information to image structure to depths of several hundred
km below the surface. The method measures the ability of the earth to conduct
electrical current, a property that is sensitive to temperature as well as to
the presence of fluids such as water or magma. We can construct a cross
sectional image of the deep structure along the entire length of the profile.
The survey is coincident with an ongoing seismic experiment, and we are working
with the principal investigators of that project to carry out a coordinated
joint interpretation of results constraining lithospheric thickness, hydration
state of the mantle, and the presence of any partial melt associated with mantle
upwelling.