* 1460110
* IRES: Call Me Glober-Under-represented Undergraduate Bioengineering Research in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Julie Martin, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2020
* USD 210,459.00

Non-Technical Abstract: As future bioengineers, the participating students will
appreciate the impact of international differences in regulation, culture and
ethics, and engineering approaches. The purpose of the program is to teach,
train, and mentor under-represented undergraduates (minorities and women-U.S.
citizens or permanent residents) each year via cross-cultural immersion at
Nanyang Technological University (NTU)in Singapore. The project themes entail
research related to transformative biomedical applications. This IRES project
will enhance 1) student learning abilities; 2) intercultural competencies; and
3) retention and enrollment in graduate studies. The program will provide
international educational opportunities to enable participants to effectively
compete as global leaders in this field.

Technical Abstract: Efforts to engage U.S. students in biomedical research
abroad, particularly those from under-represented groups are essential for
training the next generation of STEM professionals who can work in a global
environment. In this three year program, under-represented students will be
participating in a biomedical-focused international research experience (IRES)
at Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in Singapore. The participants, all
from the EPSCoR state of South Carolina, include Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs). Program objectives will be assessed by measuring how well
the IRES program trains participants in 1) research skills (e.g. learning to
conduct research, data analysis, formulating research hypotheses); 2)
intercultural competencies; and 3) retention and enrollment in graduate studies.
The IRES research project is in biomedical sciences with specific importance in
developing new technologies. During this three year project (2015-17), qualified
undergraduates from different institutions will spend eight summer weeks at NTU
in Singapore performing research with dedicated mentors.The intellectual merit
of the program involves: 1) Creating specific biomedical science projects; 2)
Creating well-developed research and outreach activities; and 3) Developing a
specific and appropriate plan to measure the PI's goals to train all GMG fellows
in the skills of STEM research and learning while living abroad. Broader impacts
involve: 1) Providing summer research experiences for under-represented
undergraduates designed to encourage pursuit of graduate study; 2) Providing US
students from an EPSCoR state the opportunity to conduct research in a Southeast
Asian research laboratory and learn intercultural competencies; 3) Leveraging
the previous experience and skills of students trained in other programs; 4)
Providing designed professional and cultural development activities for the
students; 5) Training participants to disseminate their research to biomedical
science peers; and 6) Enhancing existing collaborations between Clemson and NTU.