* 1460036
* IRES: U.S. - Belgium Bioengineering Collaboration with International Research Experience for Students
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Peter Searson, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2020
* USD 230,808.00

Johns Hopkins University (JHU) will team with the Belgian Interuniversity Micro-
Electronics Centre (IMEC) to provide a three-year program of international
research experience for U.S. undergraduate and graduate students through
projects at the interface of nanoscience and medical science. During ten-week
internships abroad, students will work on cooperative research projects,
mentored by JHU researchers and counterparts at IMEC. Prior to their internships
in Belgium, student participants will prepare by spending the academic year
working with a research group at Johns Hopkins University or in a laboratory
where they can develop essential technical skills that are relevant to an
ongoing JHU-IMEC project. Through this well balanced, collaborative research
program with intensive, early career student engagement, the principal
investigator and his Belgian counterparts intend to pursue results that lead to
bioengineering advances in therapeutic polymer-nanoparticle drug delivery and
medical diagnostics, with the long-term goal of improving future healthcare
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US-Belgian International Research
Experience for Students (IRES) focuses on bioengineering and combines the
complementary strengths of JHU in biomedical sciences and complementary IMEC
expertise in nanotechnology and microfabrication. As the international partner,
IMEC offers: (1) state-of-the-art microfabrication facilities and staffing, (2)
a well-established life sciences research group dedicated to finding ways to
apply nano-electronics to healthcare, and (3) a diverse, international and
multicultural R&amp;D environment. The U.S. students, recruited from diverse
backgrounds, who are involved in this program will be exposed to teamwork in the
global economy and will be trained in a research field that has significant
potential societal impact.