* 1460728
* REU Site: Give Research Opportunity to Underrepresented Minority STEM Students (GRO URMSS)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Thao Yang, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This project funded by the Chemistry Division supports a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site at that is designed to provide hands-on research
opportunities to talented underrepresented minority (URM) students from two-year
colleges throughout the United States where research opportunities are limited.
The project is to bring in two-year college students to the University of
Wisconsin-Eau Claire during the summer for ten weeks to work on research
projects with faculty in the departments of Chemistry, Biology and Materials
Science. The project aims to enrich and empower URM students' learning through
hands-on research, develops students' interest and competence in the STEM
fields, and enables them to bridge from two-year colleges to four-year colleges,
thereby enhancing their professional opportunities. This project will increase
the number of URM undergraduate students conducting research at the University
of Wisconsin-Eau Claire. This increased diversity in the research environment in
turn will strengthen the programs in Chemistry, Materials Science and Biology.
Students will gain practical, hands-on research experience using modern
instrumentation, and become immersed in a student-centered research environment
at a four year institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific research
projects that students are to work on include synthesis of new cyclic mucin
peptides and of new "smart" biphenyl and terphenyl derivatives, development of
reversible self-assembled "smart" copolymers, the study of microstructures of
superconducting wires and the study of nitrile-Group IV Lewis acids complexes.
Other topics to be investigated include electron and hydride transfer mechanisms
of quinone reductases, long range molecular communication and dynamics within
the Pro-tRNA synthetases, the synthesis and study of the properties of new
metal-mathanobactin nanoparticles and, finally, the distribution of atmospheric
ozone and CO over and along Lake Michigan,