* 1460645
* REU Site: Climate Change Across The Various Scales of System Organization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Debbie Tahmassebi, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 270,000.00

The Division Of Chemistry (CHE) and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
in the Mathematics and Physical Sciences Directorate at NSF supports a Research
Experience For Undergraduates (REU) site led by Debbie Tahmassebi and Sonia
Zarate at the University of San Diego. Each summer, the REU Program supports ten
students for 10 weeks of summer research. The program focuses on recruiting
community college students (currently enrolled and recent transfers to USD) with
special consideration for students that are veterans of the armed forces, are
underrepresented in STEM, and have had limited opportunities to engage in
research. Participants are mentored in modern research, and are trained to take
an integrative approach to understand, and propose strategies to address complex
climate change issues. Specifically, participants gain an understanding of how
new knowledge is generated, learn how to synthesize scientific information, and
learn to design experiments taking various disciplines into consideration.
Through this integrative approach students develop into innovative scientists
that are able to interpret data, form conclusions, and better understand the
impact of climate change on the environment and other organisms. The USD NSF REU
seeks to better prepare students from underrepresented populations and veterans
for matriculation into STEM Academics and the 21st century STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF REU Site at USD engages students in
collaborative, interdisciplinary research alongside faculty in Biology,
Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry, Engineering, Environmental &amp; Ocean Sciences,
Mathematics &amp; Computer Science and Physics. The research projects involve
students in studies centered on climate change across the various scales of
system organization. Students will have a range of research opportunities from
studying formation of aerosol particles, coral reef sedimentation, organism
metabolism, predator and prey interactions, and coastal wetland community
structure. More applied projects include efforts to develop a catalyst to
convert a greenhouse gas into a fuel source, approaches to the collection and
storage of solar energy and the development of alternative biodegradable
composites to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.