* 1460802
* REU Site: Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of Changing Environments: Integrating from Genomes to Biomes
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Theodore Morgan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2020
* USD 312,001.00

This REU Site award to Kansas State University, located in Manhattan, KS, will
support the training of 9 students in a 10-week program during the summers of
2015-2017. The program is hosted by the Division of Biology, Konza Prairie
Biological Station, and the Ecological Genomics Institute (EGI). The program
focuses on mechanistic and integrative research in ecology and evolutionary
biology, with a theme of ecology and evolutionary biology in changing
environments. Program activities include: i) independent research projects that
will train students in experimental techniques and design, ii) a seminar on
integrative analysis in ecology and evolutionary biology, iii) comprehensive
ethics training, iv) professional development and research skills workshops, v)
field trips to field sites, biological collections, and genomic facilities, and
vi) training in oral communication of students' research results. Participants
will have access to an extensive range of facilities and equipment for
ecological, evolutionary, and genomic research. Faculty mentors are world
leaders in integrative ecological and evolutionary research. Synergy among the
REU, EGI, and Konza will provide participants exposure to new and ongoing
experiments at Kansas State University. Recruitment and participant selection
will focus on the identification of students with outstanding research
potential. The program will target students attending institutions without
significant undergraduate research opportunities (e.g., primarily undergraduate
institutions, community colleges, and tribal colleges). However, all students
with outstanding research potential should apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 27 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how
research is conducted, analyzed, and communicated. Many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences, and some will publish the results in
peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of program. Students are required to be tracked after the program
and must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information is available by visiting www.ksu.edu/reu, or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Morgan) or co-PI (Dr. Snyder) at biologyreu@ksu.edu.