* 1460017
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Kids in Adult Jails: The Short, Medium and Long Run Impacts of Prosecuting Juveniles as Adults
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Jeremy Magruder, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2019
* USD 19,782.00

The age at which an adolescent is viewed as an adult in the eyes of the criminal
justice system varies widely both across and within different states. If tried
as an adult, the adolescent faces dramatically different consequences: higher
probabilities of incarceration, longer sentences, less rehabilitative
programming, an adult criminal record, and increased exposure to adult
criminals. The PI proposes to estimate the causal impact of prosecuting an
adolescent as an adult, using an instrumental variables research design. Using
data from the state of Florida the PI will study crime, high school graduation,
post-secondary education, wages, and unemployment.

A variety of theories offer competing predictions as to how these two justice
systems affect future outcomes. On the one hand, the `specific deterrence'
theory predicts that the greater unpleasantness of adult incarceration will
deter the youth from future crime simply by increasing his expected cost of re-
incarceration. On the other hand, theories of peer influence predict that
exposure to older, more criminally experienced peers will increase the
likelihood of crime after release due to either criminal skill transfer,
persistent network formation, or social contagion of attitudes and preferences.
Theories which view crime and legal employment as substitutes would also expect
worse outcomes from adult prosecution due to the decreased access to education
and vocational training as well the burdens of an adult criminal record.
Finally, those that emphasize the role that noncognitive traits have in crime
would predict that the rehabilitative programming available in juvenile
facilities would be beneficial for future outcomes. While all of these theories
offer plausible arguments, empirical research is necessary to determine which
effect dominates in practice. Previous research examining this question has
largely used matched comparisons; while they find detrimental effects of adult
incarceration, it is unclear whether the research strategies have been
successful in eliminating all selection bias. This work will contribute to the
literature by estimating the causal impact of prosecuting an adolescent as an
adult, using a research design in which selection bias is not a concern. There
are currently more than 7 million Americans under correctional supervision, with
minorities disproportionately represented. While adult incarceration is
expensive, juvenile incarceration is even more so, averaging $80,000 per person
per year. At the same time, research in psychology and neurosciences suggests
that adolescents are still very much in a formative stage, implying that
improvements to correctional policies which affect teenagers may have wide
reaching benefit.