* 1460051
* Fostering Community in the STEM Talent Enhancement Program: Annual Meetings, a Community Website, and On-Line Activities
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Daniel Udovic, Association of American Colleges and Universities
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2018
* USD 708,012.00

The NSF Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Talent Enhancement
Program (STEP) aims to address a recognized need for substantially increasing
the nation's workforce capacity in STEM fields by increasing the number of
students graduating in STEM disciplines from the nation's universities, colleges
and community colleges. The primary vehicle for achieving this goal is through
the provision of merit-based multiyear grants to individual institutions or
teams of institutions to support the implementation of strategies to improve
recruitment and retention of STEM students. The overall success of STEP depends
on the development and implementation of "best practices," which in turn depends
on the development of a community of PIs (practitioners) who share ideas,
resources, and data, and who can build on each other's successes and
experiences. The goal of this project is to facilitate the building of a
"community of practice" among the scientists, administrators, student support
specialists and evaluators involved in funded STEP projects. The project builds
on an award that supported: (1) planning and organizing annual STEP grantees
meetings in 2010, 2011 and the upcoming meeting in 2012, and (2) the development
of a pilot website to support the STEP community. Project activities include:
(1) continuing to plan and organize annual meetings of the STEP community (in
2013 and 2014), building on lessons learned from previous STEP Grantees'
meetings; and (2) continuing to develop and expand the STEP online community by
(a) increasing the usability and usefulness of the community's new website, STEP
Central, (b) offering opportunities for on-line training sessions and
conferencing on topics of interest to the community, and (c) encouraging the
involvement of the STEP community in these online activities. The intent is to
seamlessly integrate these components in the development of a community of
practice. Formative evaluation of these activities supports their development,
and summative evaluation will measure the increases in networking and the impact
of collaboration on improvement in the implementation, dissemination and
innovation of individual STEP projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. The intellectual merit of this project lies in enhancing the opportunity
to share the lessons learned from STEP projects using diverse strategies. The
resulting community of investigators is able to make significantly more progress
than they would if they remained isolated. This is particularly true for
investigators in programs such as STEP. Because STEP PIs and their project teams
represent a diverse array of disciplines, project participants belong to an
equally diverse set of professional societies. Consequently, they do not attend
the same meetings or publish in the same journals. Furthermore, there is no
professional society or journal that focuses on issues related to STEP. Hence,
this project's activities, all focused on developing a strong community of
practice among those involved in STEP projects, provides important opportunities
for members of the STEP community to network and share ideas with their peers.
Additionally, the project provides lessons in the development and use of on-line
professional social networking sites for relatively small communities of
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The broader impact of the
project mirrors the potential impact of the STEM Talent Enhancement Program:
increasing the number of undergraduate students completing two-year and four-
year degree programs in STEM disciplines. By providing opportunities for STEP
investigators to share their ideas and resources, and their successes and
failures, the project assists the community in developing a collection of proven
best practices that can be adopted or adapted by other institutions. Since
individual STEP projects typically influence hundreds of students, this project
indirectly influences thousands of students at a diverse array of institutions
throughout the United States.