* 1460354
* REU Site: Social Disparities in Health, Health Behavior, and Access to Care
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Jane Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2018
* USD 349,788.00

This project is supported under the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program, which is an NSF-wide program although each Directorate
administers its own REU Site competition. This program supports active research
participation by undergraduate students in an effort to introduce them to
scientific research so as to encourage their continued engagement in the
nation's scientific research and development enterprise. REU projects involve
students in meaningful ways in ongoing research programs or in research projects
designed especially for the purpose. The REU program is a major contributor to
the NSF's goal of developing a diverse, internationally competitive, and
globally-engaged science and engineering workforce. The Social, Behavioral and
Economic (SBE) sciences Directorate awarded this REU Site grant to Rutgers
University New Brunswick which aims to prepare undergraduate students to conduct
research on socioeconomic and behavioral disparities in health by enhancing
their human, social, and cultural capital. Reducing disparities in health
according to socioeconomic status, race, gender, and other demographic and
cultural factors is a major objective of Healthy People 2020, which is used to
set national priorities for health initiatives. The program prepares interns to
integrate their perspectives into interdisciplinary research teams, so they can
help advance knowledge about socioeconomic and behavioral causes and
consequences of health disparities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site recruits
8 undergraduate students per year targeting students from first-generation, low-
income, and racial/ethnic groups that have historically been underrepresented in
research careers. During the summer, interns receive extensive training in
social science research methods, statistics, writing workshops, and lectures on
health disparities to provide the foundation for individual research projects
undertaken with faculty mentors. Interns complete the full deductive research
process, and present their projects as research papers, posters, and speeches.
During the academic year, they continue working with a mentor, revising their
paper for submission to a conference or journal, and participating as a member
of the mentor's research team. The Directors teach advising workshops on
selecting graduate programs, writing graduate school application essays, and
requesting letters of recommendation. (1) The training program prepares
undergraduates to fill a crucial niche in addressing critical issues in health
disparities by providing their insights into socioeconomic and cultural
attributes of communities that disproportionately experience poor health. (2)
The program expands and diversifies the racial/ethnic, gender, and socioeconomic
composition of the social and behavioral science research workforce to more
closely mirror the composition of the overall US population. (3) The program
improves learning for all students and researchers in social and behavioral
science fields by facilitating discussion of diverse points of view in classes,
seminars, and in their mentors' collaborative research teams.