* 1460537
* REU Site: Seattle University Mathematics Early Research (SUMmER)
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Steven Klee, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 02/28/2019
* USD 279,997.00

The Department of Mathematics at Seattle University will host the Seattle
University Mathematics Early Research (SUMmER) REU site. Ten students will
participate in an eight-week summer research program each year. The students
will work in groups of five on one of two major research projects each summer.
Each research group will be led by a pair of mentors who will meet regularly
with the students to provide guidance and feedback. The SUMmER program will
encourage non-traditional, early career students to consider majors and careers
in STEM fields. The research projects will not require significant course
experience so that research opportunities are made available to students from
community colleges and primarily undergraduate institutions. The diverse body of
student participants will be reflected in the faculty leadership as well. In
addition to having experienced faculty researchers from Seattle University and
Pacific Lutheran University, groups will be led by instructors from local
community colleges and high schools. Each project will be led by two mentors in
a team consisting of a less experienced research mentor and a more experienced
mentor. As such, this program will have the added benefit of training less
experienced mentors to lead research groups at their home institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this REU is to empower student
researchers who do not have access to research at their home institutions by
providing a community of support that will stretch beyond the eight-week
duration of the summer program. Students will investigate original research
problems in the areas of Combinatorics, Graph Theory, Knot Theory, or Geometry.
In addition to developing their technical mathematical skills, students will
gain experience in presenting their work through both oral and written
communication. They will give regular presentations to the group to share their
research progress, and the research mentors will support students as they
prepare to present their work at conferences or at their home institutions after
the REU program has ended. Both research and communication skills will be
invaluable to the participants as they become part of the mathematical
community.