* 1460723
* REU Site:  Research in Optics (RIO) at the University of Arizona
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Richard Koshel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in Optics
(RiO) is a Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) program at the College of
Optical Sciences, The University of Arizona supported by the Division of
Engineering Education and Centers at the National Science Foundation. Optics
involves the study of light and the year 2015 has been recognized as the
International Year of Light. The goal for the three years of support is to
educate and conduct research with ten undergraduates per year in the field of
optics. The field is a burgeoning area of industry and consumer product
development, academic research, and energy generation. In the commercial sector,
optical products are integral to everyday lives through smartphone displays,
LEDs for lighting, and imaging systems used in the medical field. In the energy
sector, optical concentrators are being used in solar power facilities to
improve the efficiency of electricity generation. In the academic sector,
researchers and students are developing novel technologies, exploring the
fundamental limits of the world, and developing the telescopes imaging distant
stars and their planets. These topics and others are the areas of research for
the undergraduates selected for the RiO program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of RiO is to develop an interest in optics within the student
participants and encourage them to pursue graduate studies in a STEM field. A
metric of 50% female and 60% minority representation has been set for this
program. The participants additionally will have workshops in introductory
optics, ethics training, presentation skills, and lab and laser safety and at
the end of each summer will hone their presentation skills through both oral and
poster events. Thus, RiO will educate future researchers and engineers in this
recognized and important field for the United States in the 21st century. The
participants will serve as role models for future generations by encouraging
others to pursue STEM research, especially in
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RiO
participants will engage in experimental, theoretical, and modeling research
over the breadth of the optics field, including optical engineering, imaging
systems, photonics, and optical physics. A project on bio-inspired optical
design based on models of animal eyes has the potential to improve upon the
designs of lens systems currently in use. Research on a better understanding of
the optical properties of semiconductors can lead to a multitude of benefits
including improved lasers and future optical technologies. Research on improved
internal building illumination using daylighting means less dependency on fossil
fuel electricity generation. Development of a platform independent toolbox for
quantum control and measurement can lead to improved quantum information
security and cryptography along with error correction. A project in the optical
detection and classification of special nuclear material can determine if the
matter is benign or threatening. Specific research will develop endoscopes with
both forward and backward optics that can see tumors that are hidden from view
for solely front-viewing systems. Research on the effect of mid-spatial
frequency optical surface error will allow control of such during the
manufacture of multi-meter telescope mirrors, such as the Giant Magellan
Telescope. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These and other projects will expand our
knowledge in and use of optics to solve challenges and develop new technology.
The student participants will also have workshops in introductory optics, ethics
training, presentation and writing skills, and lab and laser safety. Thus, the
student participants will not only be conducting research at the forefront of
optics, but they will be trained to succeed as researchers if they pursue
graduate studies or enter the workforce after graduation.