* 1460381
* RAPID:  Salvage and Processing of Samples from Utqiagvik, Barrow, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2014,11/30/2015
* Anne Jensen, Bryn Mawr College
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 11/30/2015
* USD 14,721.00

The site of Utqia&amp;#289;vik is the source from which the modern community of
Barrow developed. It has been subject to archaeological investigations at
several periods (Ford 1959:67-73, Hall 1990:8-30), culminating in the multi-year
Utkiavik Project (Dekin 1990, Hall and Fullerton 1990. Despite this extensive
excavation history, there are only nine C14 dates from the entire site. A number
of archaeological samples that had been retained at Binghamton University,
Dekin's home institution, when the main collection was returned to the North
Slope Borough have recently been rediscovered. Binghamton wishes to return these
samples to NSB or dispose of them. Currently, the Inupiat Heritage Center (IHC)
Artifact Storage Facility in Barrow, where the original artifacts are stored and
the natural repository of this previously unknown sample collection, does not
have enough storage space to accept and properly store the discovered samples.
This RAPID project will provide the funds to purchase a freezer for segregated
storage of the samples that need to remain frozen until processed. The samples
include organic items, bulk samples of indeterminate nature that may contain
artifacts, and items retained as C14 samples, included logs and grass. In
addition, the project will include the processing and analysis of organic
samples and the preparation and proper curation of any artifacts that may be
found in the bulk samples.