* 1460665
* REU Site: Ifugao Archaeological Project
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Stephen Acabado, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2017
* USD 159,123.00

This project is supported under the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program, which is an NSF-wide program although each Directorate
administers its own REU Site competition. This program supports active research
participation by undergraduate students in an effort to introduce them to
scientific research so as to encourage their continued engagement in the
nation's scientific research and development enterprise. REU projects involve
students in meaningful ways in ongoing research programs or in research projects
designed especially for the purpose. The REU program is a major contributor to
the NSF's goal of developing a diverse, internationally competitive, and
globally-engaged science and engineering workforce. The Social, Behavioral and
Economic (SBE) sciences Directorate awarded this REU Site grant to the
University of California-Los Angeles in order to enhance undergraduate
experience in scientific methods and analyses in a long-term research project at
the UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Ifugao, Philippines. Students in this REU
program are actively involved in investigating highland economic and political
responses to the arrival of the Spanish in the northern Philippines. As an REU
Site, the project recruits junior- and senior-level undergraduates from a wide-
range of backgrounds, home institutions, ages, gender, and ethnicity, with
emphasis on under-represented and female students. The PI-team strives to focus
the recruitment on minority-serving institutions, including community colleges,
by utilizing the institutional connections of the UCLA Academic Advancement
Program-Center for Community College Partnerships. Students participating in the
project are actively involved in the research design, data collection, and
laboratory analysis of archaeologically retrieved materials. Students receive
intensive training in archaeological field methods, faunal and botanical
analyses, human osteology, and, artifact identification and cataloguing. Through
the collaboration between UCLA (lead institution), University of Washington,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, University of Philippines, the National Museum
of the Philippines, and the Save the Ifugao Terraces Movement, Inc., students in
this REU Site program receive intensive mentorship during and after the program.

Although the Spanish failed to colonize the northern Philippine highlands,
preliminary analysis of the archaeological record from Ifugao suggests drastic
landscape and social transformations ensued after c. AD 1600. To determine the
impacts of Spanish colonialism in highland Philippines, this research program
conducts subsurface excavations, spatial modeling, and analyses of faunal and
paleobotanical samples, artifacts, and human osteolical remains. The research
program investigates the political and economic impacts of Spanish colonialism
in highland Philippines, particularly, in the UNESCO World Heritage Sites in
Ifugao, Philippines, where the most extensive rice terraces in the world are
located. Previous models suggest that the rice terraces are at least 2,000 years
old. Recent archaeological information, however, indicates that the agricultural
marvels were constructed after the arrival of the Spanish in the northern
Philippines at c. AD 1600. In addition, rapid social and environmental change
occurred in the region shortly after AD 1600. This research provides another
perspective to our understanding of Spanish colonialism, which has largely
focused on the Americas. The Ifugao rice terraces are rapidly deteriorating and
the Ifugao people are losing both their tangible and intangible heritage to
changes brought about by economic and political transformations. The rice
terraces are examples of landesque and the assimilation of Ifugao social
organization to that of the state together with the low status given to farmers
and the rapid disappearance of traditional knowledge could further spell
degradation of the terraces. One of the overarching goals of this study is to
contribute to heritage conservation programs in Ifugao, in both tangible and
intangible heritage. As such, this REU Site engages the community by promoting
direct and active participation of descendant communities. The project also
helps with the establishment of a community museum and on-site museum to
complement the development of indigenous culture and history curriculum. In
addition, this program aims to encourage undergraduate students to pursue STEM-
related and anthropology graduate studies. The NSF International Science and
Engineering (ISE) program co-funds this REU Site project.