* 1460221
* Role Of A Lys63-Specific E2 Ubiquitin-Conjugating Enzyme/Variant In Plant Innate Immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Lirong Zeng, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2016
* USD 247,719.00

Ubiquitination is a major eukaryotic protein modification process that attaches
ubiquitin, a highly conserved small protein, to substrates. The ubiquitination
process involves three consecutive enzymatic reactions that are catalyzed by
ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1), ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2) and
ubiquitin ligase (E3), respectively. In recent years, ubiquitination has emerged
as a key regulatory mechanism of plant immunity against many pathogens. Several
plant E3 ligases have been shown to act as either positive or negative
regulators of host immunity and immunity-associated cell death. In contrast,
roles of E2 enzymes in plant immunity, particularly those that direct non-
classical lysine 63-specific ubiquitination, are virtually unknown. Opening a
new perspective on plant immunity, the investigators have implicated in tomato
defense against a bacterial pathogen an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme that
directs lysine 63-specific ubiquitination. In this project the investigators
will characterize key components of lysine 63-linked ubiquitination in plant
immunity, which is of fundamental importance to the understanding of the
regulation of plant immunity by the ubiquitination system. Additionally, this
work will assist in efforts to unravel biological processes and proteins that
are controlled by lysine 63-linked ubiquitination, knowledge of which is very
limited at present. Integral to this project is training of post-doctoral,
graduate and undergraduate students from minority groups that are
underrepresented in science; incorporation of findings from this project to a
dual-listed undergraduate-/graduate-level laboratory course taught at the PI's
institution, where minority students currently make up over 30% of the student
population; and partnering of the investigators with the Arkansas Cooperative
Extension Service to distribute findings from this project to the general public
and stakeholders.