* 1460620
* REU Site: Computational Methods for Discovery Driven by Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Daniel Boley, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 04/30/2019
* USD 359,973.00

As participants in the University of Minnesota (UMN) REU Site program, students
will engage in research that develops computational methods for scientific
discovery across disciplines that are driven by big data. In this 10-week summer
program, in addition to immersion in research, students will receive technical
training and professional development that encourages and prepares them for a
sustained career in the sciences. This includes Big Data Colloquia,
Communicating Science workshops, career mentoring, and public dissemination of
research findings. Towards an objective of increased participation and broader
impacts, this program will bring together nationally recruited students and
those from UMN and local institutions to establish a cohort with diverse
academic and cultural backgrounds. A Big 10 University situated in a large urban
environment, UMN has a strong research community that encourages
transdisciplinary research within and outside the boundaries of the
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Closely mentored by a member of the Computer
Science and Engineering (CS&amp;E) faculty, each student will contribute to
active research that addresses open questions in computational complexity,
machine learning, parallel and distributed computing, mobile and cloud
computing, or graphics and visualization. A UMN REU participant might use
observation data to simulate crowd behavior, analyze genomic sequence data to
better understand microbial communities, develop tools to analyze chemical-
genetic interaction networks, improve spatial perception in a virtual
environment, develop visualization techniques to better understand massive data
sets, enhance parallel distributed processing through algorithm development or
by harnessing the computational power of a network of mobile devices, or use
graph-based approaches to better understand climate change. The diverse research
of CS&amp;E faculty represents collaboration across the University with faculty
in genetics, chemistry, climate science, neuroscience, architecture, medicine,
and biomedical engineering to propel all of these disciplines and computer
science towards previously unattainable insights and discoveries. The web site
http://www-users.cs.umn.edu/~boley/big-data-reu/index.html has more information
on this project.