* 1460913
* REU Site: Molecular and Biochemical Analysis of Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* James Forney, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 260,778.00

This REU Site award to Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana, will
provide research training for eight students for ten weeks during the summers of
2015- 2017. The program provides advanced training in the manipulation and
analysis of proteins. The program provides students with a better understanding
of laboratory research, insights into protein biochemistry, and an appreciation
for the broader context of research. Students work on projects under the
guidance of faculty in the Department of Biochemistry. Students can select from
a variety of projects including the elucidation of enzyme mechanisms, post-
translational protein modifications, proteomics, protein-nucleic acid
interactions, epigenetic gene regulation, plant development, and renewable
energy research. The first three days of the program introduce key concepts in
protein biochemistry and experimental design. The remainder of the program
emphasizes full-time research supplemented with weekly sessions on ethical
conduct in research, professional communication, GRE preparation, and the
graduate school application process. Students present their results at a
departmental symposium and a university-wide poster session. Assessment of the
program will include pre- and post-surveys, poster presentation evaluations, and
the BIO REU common assessment tool (SALG URSSA). The program will recruit life
science and chemistry undergraduates with at least four semesters of college who
have an interest in research and are members of underrepresented groups in STEM
fields or attend institutions with limited research opportunities. Applications
should be submitted online by early February for full consideration (see
website) but will be accepted until all positions are filled. Selection of
participants will be based on academic performance, demonstrated interest in
research, and the potential for outstanding research careers in the life
sciences.

It is anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, improve their scientific communication skills,
and have the opportunity to present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://www.ag.purdue.edu/biochem/Pages/REU.aspx, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. James Forney at forney@purdue.edu).