* 1460502
* Collaborative Research: Filling in a temporal gap in hominin evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2015,12/31/2018
* David Braun, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2018
* USD 53,072.00

The Ledi-Geraru Research Project (LRGP) promotes the science of human origins by
exploring a region in the Afar of Ethiopia, which contains rare fossiliferous
sediments ranging in time from 3.0-2.4 million years ago. The evidence for both
behavioral and biological evolution in the hominin lineage is limited during
this time period. However, these sediments contain some of the earliest
archaeological sites in the world, as well as fossils of human ancestors. New
archeological and paleontological data will be collected that provide a better
understanding of hominin behavioral evolution, the extinction of
Australopithecus afarensis, the origin of material culture in the form of stone
tool technology, and the biogeography of ancient mammal species. The
investigators will examine the various factors that are driving evolution, such
as climate change, to understand the conditions under which biological and
behavioral changes occurred in human evolutionary history. The project will
engage both K-12 students and the public at large; the immediate field findings
will be delivered in a real-time atmosphere through interactive blogs from the
field in which each scientist interacts with students from U.S. classrooms. The
project is also instrumental in training students from both the U.S. and
Ethiopia in a STEM science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this three-year
project, the investigators will collect archaeological, paleontological, and
paleoenvironmental data to address behavioral and biological evolution in the
hominin lineage in the time period from 2.95-2.5 Ma. In the lower Awash valley
of Ethiopia, the last appearance date of A. afarensis at ~2.95 Ma (Hadar),
followed by the appearance of stone tools at ~2.58 Ma (Gona) and Homo cf. H.
habilis (Hadar) at ~2.35 Ma, have been described as a drastic niche shift for
the hominin lineage. This project is examining strata from a period heretofore
undocumented in the lower Awash valley. Archaeological excavations are being
expanded in locations where artifacts have been previously recovered. Past
habitats in which hominins existed will be reconstructed with multiple methods
including mammal community structure, utilizing mesowear and stable isotopes for
mammalian diets, ecomorphology to retrodict mammal locomotor patterns, and
analyses of botanical remains. Data recovered will be compared to hominin,
faunal, and botanical information from localities near the LGRP that encompass
time before and after this interval to develop a regional, representation of the
paleoenvironment and species turnover across time and space. Subsequently, these
data will be compared to sites beyond the lower Awash region to better
understand East African evolutionary and biogeographical patterns.