* 1460894
* REU SITE: Accessible Multimodal Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Stephanie Ludi, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 385,433.00

The Accessible Multimedia Interfaces REU site program provides students with
research experiences on projects that enhance multimedia content accessibility
through browser or mobile application interfaces for consumers who have sensory
disabilities (deaf, hard of hearing, blind or low vision). They will collaborate
with peers and mentors who have sensory disabilities. The diverse teams provide
students with the experience and knowledge to recognize the range and complexity
of accessibility challenges in accessing multimedia and to evaluate the efficacy
of proposed solutions in a unique research environment. Students with sensory
disabilities are extremely underrepresented in academics at the graduate level
especially in STEM. The REU site creates a critically needed pipeline of these
students for graduate school and encourages them to participate in undergraduate
and graduate programs in accessible computing and computer science
generally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The REU student teams learn to identify,
analyze and address unsolved accessibility challenges to multimedia content
interfaces. They also learn how to collaborate with diverse peers in an
inclusive research environment. They will gain experience in designing and
producing practical solutions that increase accessibility and usability of
multimodal information, especially for consumers with sensory disabilities
everywhere. They will learn to create and disseminate their research outcomes
through seminar training and participation in college and institutional
conferences. The AMI REU Site website (http://avd.rit.edu/REU) provides
additional information.