* 1460380
* Collaborative Research:  An Experimental/Theoretical Program on Reconfigured Polycationic Architectures for Improved Gene Therapy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Arthi Jayaraman, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 07/31/2015
* USD 79,435.00

This collaborative research award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research, made to the University of Massachusetts and University of
Colorado, is to carry out experiments and simulations to understand polycation-
DNA complexation towards improved non-viral gene therapy using synthetic
polymers. This award cofounded by the Polymer program in the Division of
Materials Research seeks to understand DNA complexation with tailored
macromolecular cationic architectures, and the impact of different modes of
complexation on DNA delivery. The proposed experiments focus on synthetic
polycations, in which cationic oligomers are grafted pendent to a polymer
backbone at precise inter-graft spacing. This architecture platform will be
augmented by insertion of nuclear localization sequences into the backbone in
preferred orientations. Polyplex stability and DNA delivery efficiency will be
determined in cell culture under a variety of conditions, aiming to combine high
cell viability with excellent transfection efficiency. The computational
approach, carried out in conjunction with experiments, will involve: 1)
atomistic simulations to explain the effects of systematically varying
architectural and chemical features of the polycation on free energy of DNA-
polycation binding, and in turn connect to experimental trends in polyplex
stability; and 2) coarse-grained simulations that focus on polyplex structure
(relative size, shape and charge) as a function of polycation architecture and
composition, which directly relate to experiments on polyplex structure, and
carries key implications for serum stability and transfection efficiency. In
addition to transforming the understanding and practice of polymer-based gene
therapy, the project will open a unique opportunity to train graduate students
in an integrated multidisciplinary experimental/theoretical project through
regular inter-group interactions via SkypeTM sessions, and by devoting time and
resources for the researchers to visit their collaborator's institution. The PIs
will maintain a commitment to participation of undergraduates in this research
project, utilizing the Undergraduate Research Opportunity and Research
Experience for Undergraduates programs at University of Colorado and University
of Massachusetts. Planned workshop activities would connect U.S. and worldwide
leaders in both experiment and computation of polyelectrolytes and complexation,
and would involve young scientists at the outset of their careers, through the
organization of meetings at the Telluride Science Research Conference, a highly
interactive setting for research presentations and discussions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design and implementation of effective polymer based
gene delivery will advance genomic research and open new avenues to deliver DNA
for treating many diseases, such as muscular dystrophy. There is a pressing need
for improved DNA delivery, since currently used delivery methods, based on
viruses, have their own health and safety risks. In this collaborative project,
computer simulations will help experimentalists decide which polymers to prepare
for complexing DNA, and how to modify those polymers for most effective
therapeutic action. Outcomes of this project include both the development of
novel and more efficient DNA delivery agents, and a more thorough fundamental
understanding of charged polymers and their interactions with key therapeutic
biomolecules such as DNA and RNA. The multidisciplinary nature of this
experimental/theoretical project will allow for a well-rounded training of
students in Massachusetts and Colorado, at the high school, undergraduate, and
graduate levels, in areas of molecular simulation, polymer synthesis, and gene
delivery.