* 1460942
* REU Site: Advancing Psychological Research with Technology
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Jenni Redifer, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 01/31/2019
* USD 287,551.00

This project is supported under the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program, which is an NSF-wide program although each Directorate
administers its own REU Site competition. This program supports active research
participation by undergraduate students in an effort to introduce them to
scientific research so as to encourage their continued engagement in the
nation's scientific research and development enterprise. REU projects involve
students in meaningful ways in ongoing research programs or in research projects
designed especially for the purpose. The REU program is a major contributor to
the NSF's goal of developing a diverse, internationally competitive, and
globally-engaged science and engineering workforce. The Social, Behavioral and
Economic (SBE) sciences Directorate awarded this REU Site grant to Western
Kentucky University Research Foundation which aims to provide undergraduate
students with hands-on research experience examining technology as a means of
advancing our understanding of human behavior and cognition. This project is
likely to advance knowledge of the field of psychology by training future
scholars in advanced research methods and utilizing cutting-edge technology to
conduct high-quality psychological research. This project has the potential to
impact society by a) advancing the field of psychology by conducting cutting-
edge research that will be translated into national and/or international
presentations and publications, b) providing valuable research training to the
next generation of psychological scientists, and c) recruiting students from
underrepresented STEM groups in order to increase their familiarity with
scientific research methods in the field of psychology and spark their interest
in STEM-related careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the REU project is
to provide a unique opportunity to gain hands-on experience in psychological
research to undergraduate students enrolled in colleges and universities where
there are limited research opportunities. Utilizing a targeted recruitment
method, at least 50% of program participants will be qualified, first-generation
college students, racial minorities, or students with disabilities, with an
emphasis on those from rural or disadvantaged socio-economic backgrounds in the
Appalachia region. Students spend 10 weeks working closely with a faculty mentor
on research utilizing technological advances in the various subspecialties of
psychology. Students participate in developmental workshops and activities
related to topics such as ethics, research methods, statistics, computer
software, and presentation skills. At the conclusion of the program, students
present their findings at a mini research conference in front of university
faculty and staff. To broaden the project's impact, all students are expected to
disseminate their research findings at a national or international conference
and students are strongly encouraged to submit their research findings for
publication. The goal is to have participants develop strong skills as
psychological researchers, thereby increasing the likelihood that a majority of
program participants will pursue graduate degrees and/or careers in the
psychological sciences or closely related fields.