* 1460129
* IRES: U.S.-Czech Student Research Experience on Understanding Water and Chemical Transport in the Earth's Vadose Zone
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Chittaranjan Ray, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,970.00

This U.S.-Czech international research experience for students (IRES) project
supports a partnership between scientists from the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln (UNL) and the Czech Technical University-Prague (CTU) that is designed
to prepare U.S. students for STEM graduate-level study through an early career
cooperative research experience focused on the earth's vadose zone, known as the
geologic "skin of the earth." For each of the three years of this IRES project,
cohorts of four U.S. science and engineering students will expand their global
competence through a well-integrated, eight-week international research and
educational experience in the Czech Republic. Principal Investigator
Chittaranjan Ray (UNL), along with lead counterparts Michal Sn√¨hota and Martin
Sanda (CTU), will serve as mentors. In their collaboration with CTU scientists
and students, U.S. participants will jointly conduct hypothesis-driven
laboratory experiments and field investigations designed to characterize water
and chemical movement in unsaturated soils with macro pores (large pores due to
wormholes, cracks etc.) at site-to-watershed scale in the Czech Republic. The
U.S. students will learn about creative, original, and potentially
transformative methods the Czechs are using to study the fate and transport of
water and contaminants through the unsaturated zone, particularly in terms of
preferential flow. New research results and knowledge of novel technologies
being used in Europe will be shared in the U.S. through this project, thereby
contributing to the development of a more globally engaged science workforce as
well as to the sustainability of valuable water resources which affect economic
competitiveness both domestically and internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S.
IRES participants will collaborate with the Czech researchers to evaluate the
utility and accuracy of these new methods, which promise to significantly expand
scientific understanding of vadose zone processes. These are considered critical
to protecting and preserving ground water resources. As the "skin" of the earth,
the vadose zone, or the unsaturated zone, regulates various functions like water
percolation and contaminant attenuation, among others. Over the course of their
IRES research abroad, U.S. students will learn about and use new technologies
and methods developed in Europe. Understanding flow and transport processes in
the vadose zone is a key to identifying ground water pollution potential and to
developing mitigation strategies. IRES participants also will work with Czech
partners to evaluate the utility and accuracy of innovative Czech technologies
used to study water flow at different scales. Their findings are expected to
materially contribute data about the correlation of small-scale measurements of
soil properties to watershed processes. Overall, the IRES experience is intended
to encourage a diverse group of undergraduate participants to pursue graduate
education in STEM fields. The U.S. students will be encouraged to publish and to
share their experiences via the UNL-maintained IRES website and through
presentations at appropriate professional meetings, such as meetings of the
American Society of Engineering Education.