* 1460697
* REU Site: Research and Training Experience for Undergraduates in the Area of Secure Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Sanjay Madria, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 02/28/2019
* USD 360,000.00

This award funds a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at
Missouri University of Science and Technology. Each summer a cohort of
undergraduate students will work with faculty in small groups to design,
implement, and evaluate research projects involving secure cloud computing, an
emerging research area that is current and important to our national interests.
The research projects involve security, trust, and privacy in cloud computing.
The use of secure cloud technology offers an effective means for establishing
secure cyberinfrastructures to develop a wide variety of applications that are
used by citizens and that support our technology-based society. Thus the
students and researchers have the opportunity to explore problems that are
important and timely and relevant to all our citizens. This project builds human
capacity in computing and communications research and knowledge. The program
will provide experiences to undergraduate students that may influence their
choices about further education and future careers and continue to give them
confidence to pursue these choices and thus increase the size and diversity of
the scientific workforce.

The site will focus on recruiting females and students from groups under-
represented in computing fields as well as students from 2 and 4 year
institutions. The students will participate in professional development
activities that make them more aware of graduate school and professional aspects
of a computing career. The students will be able to use the state-of-the-art
facilities available at the university and interact with faculty mentors to
conduct challenging and timely research on emerging technologies fundamental to
developing trustworthy systems for the future.