* 1460682
* Neural mechanisms of age-related changes in perceptual and memory decisions
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Mark Wheeler, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 02/28/2019
* USD 571,099.00

Decision-making abilities change as we age. While some changes are beneficial,
such as improvements arising from accumulated experience, others are not. For
example, older people are typically more cautious than is optimal in their
decision-making, and are less apt to altar their decision strategies even when
it would be advantageous. These changes can affect our health and quality of
life. Despite the importance of decision making to healthy living, the neural
mechanisms of the decision-making process, from perception to action, and how
those mechanisms change in aging, are poorly understood. With the support of the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Mark Wheeler and his research team at the
Georgia Institute of Technology will use functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to identify how age-related differences in decisions about what we
perceive and remember correspond with changes in brain function. Dr. Wheeler's
research strategy is to investigate decision making as a multi-stage process in
which incoming information is analyzed, evidence relevant to choices are
extracted from that information and accumulated over time, and a decision is
reached when there is enough evidence. Different stages of the decision process
have been found to have different fMRI activation profiles, making it possible
to identify whether specific stages change in healthy aging. It is predicted
that, as we age, certain aspects of this multi-stage process change while others
do not, and that these changes will be related to functional changes in the
brain. For example, the increased caution found in many older individuals should
be associated with a greater accumulation of fMRI activation prior to a
decision, while a decrease in the fidelity of information processing in memory
and perception should be associated with slower rates of accumulating fMRI
activation. The research will also use machine learning approaches to test the
degree to which the timing and amount of fMRI activity predict decision outcome.
By investigating changes in neural activity as decisions develop in time, this
project will identify which neural processes are most important in reaching a
decision, and which change the most as we age. Such knowledge will be useful in
the development of strategies or methods to improve decision-making abilities in
later years.

This project will have broader impacts on health, science training, and
outreach. The research will address issues related to human health and well-
being, such as how decision-making abilities in people who are in good health
differ from people with Alzheimer's disease. The research program emphasizes
mentoring of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in learning the
scientific process, including hands-on training in hypothesis generation,
experimental design, data collection, processing, analysis, and interpretation,
and public speaking/presentation. Undergraduate researchers with advanced
projects are encouraged to present their findings at local and international
conferences. Research findings are presented in scientific and public formats,
including scientific meetings and publications, web sites, classes, and
community seminars and forums.