* 1460006
* IRES: US-Germany Collaborative Research on Novel Fabrication Techniques for Enhanced Properties of Nanostructured Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Michael Kassner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2020
* USD 241,639.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;This IRES: US-Germany Collaborative Research program at the
University of Southern California (USC) prepares both graduate and undergraduate
students, particularly underrepresented students, for global research with a
focus on the relationship between materials processing and properties at the
nanoscale. Overall, fifteen (6 PhD and 9 undergraduate) students will
participate in the program over a 3-year period. The students will also
participate in the dissemination of the program, which is expected to reach a
wide number of US and German students. This IRES: US-Germany Collaborative
Research program will enhance the skills of current graduate students who are
already working in a materials related field and will give them access to the
latest tools and technologies available in the world. For the undergraduate
students, this program will be one of their first exposures to materials science
and will enhance their skills as engineering students. Furthermore, it will
allow them to develop critical problem-solving skills in their respective fields
since almost all engineering problems involve materials-related issues. Overall,
the participating students will have the opportunity to experience first-hand an
elite international research center with a strong connection to industrial
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Part 2&lt;br/&gt;The search for advanced
engineering materials with excellent mechanical properties and mechanical and
thermal stability, remains a goal of current materials research. Nanostructured
metals are a particularly promising example, as these materials exhibit
extremely high strength even though stability and ductility have hindered their
potential. The program's research theme is novel fabrication techniques for
enhanced properties of nanostructured materials. This theme is strengthened by
collaboration with two elite nanostructure scientists, Profs. Horst Hahn and
Oliver Kraft at Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), who will serve as hosts
and technical mentors to the participating students.