* 1460291
* Collaborative Research: Fate and Consequences of Yakutat Terrane Subduction Beneath Eastern Alaska and the Wrangell Volcanic Field
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Geoffrey Abers, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 04/30/2021
* USD 290,810.00

Non-Technical Summary

The Wrangell Volcanic Field is one of the largest outpourings of volcanic rocks
on the planet in the past 2.6 million years, but its relationship to processes
of plate tectonics remains enigmatic. Locations of earthquakes underneath Alaska
indicate that the Pacific plate is sliding beneath Alaska in a process of
subduction. These earthquakes stop abruptly west of the Wrangell mountains, but
somehow the plates continue to converge for several hundred kilometers eastward
through the Wrangell region. Because of the close connections between subduction
and mountain building, the south Alaska region provides an exceptional testing
ground to test theories of how the mantle behaves when slabs end, and how
convergence makes earthquakes in subduction zones.

The centerpiece of this study is a temporary network of 37 broadband seismic
stations deployed across southern Alaska to complement the EarthScope
Transportable Array network along critical transects. It is providing data to
tell whether or not subduction occurs under the Wrangells, and how the Alaska-
Aleutian subduction zone ends. The research is being performed by a team with a
well-established collaborative track record in advancing our understanding of
subduction zones by deploying seismic arrays and integrating their results with
other observations and models. Ongoing collaborations with petrologists and
geodynamicists are helping spread the results to a broader geoscience audience.
The project supports the training and professional development of two graduate
students and provides excellent field-based opportunities to engage
undergraduates in research. Outreach programs at the University of Alaska
Fairbanks provide structured links to schools and science education centers in
the region, reaching native populations with cutting-edge research. It supports
an interdisciplinary collaboration with ample opportunity for the continued
cross-disciplinary education among researchers and students. The Wrangell
Volcanic Field represents a significant contributor to the total eruptive record
in North America, and this study will provide critical framework for
understanding this hazard as well.

Technical Description

The proposed research is aiding significantly in improving our understanding of
the dynamics of subduction zones, the response of lithosphere to subduction of
buoyant crust, mass conservation in slab contortions, and the drivers of arc
volcanism. Results from the temporary deployment of 37 broadband seismic
stations focus on determining slab surface and wedge geometry from receiver
functions in addition to ambient noise tomography, velocity and attenuation
imaging, tremor and seismicity studies, and measuring anisotropy from shear wave
splitting. It addresses the following questions: 1) Where is the eastern end of
the Alaska-Aleutian slab, and what is its configuration? Does it end as a tear,
or is it continuously warped? 2) What is the relationship between Yakutat crust
subduction, transtension, and volcanism in the Wrangell mountains? Does regular
subduction drive Wrangell volcanism, or flow and high temperatures at a tear or
edge? Does thick Yakutat terrane crust subduct continuously beneath the Wrangell
mountains? 3) What is the flow around the end of the Aleutian slab and how much
is it driven by subduction versus larger plate-scale flow? Results are being
used to understand the fate of subducted material beneath Alaska and its role in
driving volcanism&#8232; and tectonics.