* 1460241
* Hyperbolic Geometry and Minimal Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Jeffrey Brock, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 01/31/2017
* USD 29,700.00

The conference Hyperbolic Geometry and Minimal Surfaces will be held at the
Instituto Nacional de Matemática Pura e Aplicada (IMPA), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
January 4-10, 2015 and will consist of a five-day lecture series given by
experts in the fields of hyperbolic geometry and minimal surfaces. The goal of
the conference is to educate participants in current research topics and to
provide a forum for collaboration on problems at the intersection of the two
fields. Through this interaction, the conference seeks to produce new directions
of research in geometry related to hyperbolic geometry and minimal surfaces, and
provide research development for junior researchers and graduate students
through interaction with leading experts in the fields. The conference will also
provide a venue for mathematicians from North, Central and South America to
gather to collaborate and share ideas. By helping develop and broaden the
research program of attendees, both junior and senior, this will further
strengthen and broaden the development of mathematics education in their home
institutions and countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the workshop is
to investigate problems at the intersection of hyperbolic geometry and minimal
surfaces. Hyperbolic geometry has seen great advances inrecent years on major
problems in the field. In particular for hyperbolic three-manifolds, the
geometrization conjecture, ending lamination conjecture, tameness, virtual Haken
conjecture, and virtual fibering conjecture, have all been proved.
Incompressible surfaces and minimal surfaces played an important role in this
work. By focusing the conference on hyperbolic geometry an minimal surfaces, the
expectation is to continue the development of this interaction between the two
areas. Topics will include, Minimal surfaces in hyperbolic manifolds, Min-max
techniques in hyperbolic geometry, and Systoles in expanding families of
hyperbolic manifolds. The workshop website is located at
http://www.impa.br/opencms/en/eventos/store/evento_1501