* 1460829
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemical Assembly at the University of Nebraska
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Mark Griep, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 270,000.00

In this project funded by the Research Experiences for Undergraduates program of
the Chemistry Division of NSF, Professor Mark Griep and colleagues at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln will support ten students in a ten week summer
research program each year for three years. The overall goals of this training
program are two-fold: (1) teach and nurture interest in science by engaging
undergraduate students in analyzing and solving complex problems, and (2)
significantly impacting the career decisions of students in the program. This
program provides research opportunities for undergraduates from under-
represented groups as a critical step on the path to increasing the diversity
and number of talented students entering the nation's chemical research
programs. At least 60% of the REU students are female and/or from under-
represented groups. Each student is paired with a graduate mentor, who gains
experience in teaching others to do research. Upward Bound Math Science (UBMS)
high school students from economically disadvantaged households learn to
summarize REU students' projects and give oral presentations attended by the REU
students.

The research opportunities in this program in are in the area of chemical
assembly. This covers a range of projects extending from the controlled assembly
of colloids onto surfaces, to the synthesis of assembled nanoscale catalysts,
and to the directed modification of biomolecules. Students are involved in
innovations in the areas of information technology, targeted medicines, energy
storage, and others. Chemical assembly is also strongly aligned with
environment-friendly technologies because fewer atoms are wasted during the
manufacturing process.