* 1460037
* Collaborative Research: SHINE: Observational and Theoretical Investigation of Solar Flare Ribbon Elongation
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Paul Cassak, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 04/30/2019
* USD 174,287.00

This 3-year collaborative SHINE project will provide new physical insights into
the energy release in solar flares, which is an important component of space
weather research and is of high importance to society at large. The project will
explore the physical processes of magnetic reconnection spreading and particle
energization, which have applications beyond the SHINE program. Thus, the
expected outcome of this project should be of use for applications in the
Earth's magnetosphere, and potentially laboratory and fusion experiments. The
project activities will promote training and learning through the funding of two
graduate students. The lead PI will continue to supervise undergraduate
students' research through an NSF-sponsored REU program at the MSU. Thus far,
the lead PI has supervised 13 REU students, with six of them being female
students. The non-lead PI will continue his productive partnership with the
Children's Discovery Museum of West Virginia as part of this project. The
research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS
Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative SHINE project will explore a
novel and independent technique to estimate magnetic fields at reconnection
sites high in the solar corona. This region of the solar atmosphere is currently
inaccessible to direct observations, and therefore of great interest to the
SHINE community. The project team will determine observationally and numerically
whether there is a correlation between the guide magnetic field strength and
particle acceleration; a link between the two would provide a novel way to
estimate particle acceleration from observations of solar-flare ribbon
spreading. The problem of magnetic reconnection spreading is of broad interest
to the SHINE community for a number of applications, including prominence
eruptions, and greatly expanding the region of reconnection in the turbulent
solar wind.