* 1460864
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Cyber Identity
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Albert Esterline, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 299,559.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at North Carolina A&amp;T University. Undergraduate students from across
the nation will participate in summer research focused on cyber identity. The
digitization of our everyday lives has increased the need to establish safer and
more secure ways to provide accurate identification for online transactions and
to protect personal information. The students will participate in research
projects that investigate methods to help users control the security of their
digital identity. Cyber identity research and its applications hold great
promise for establishing trusted online identity, reducing identity theft, and
ensuring privacy. The challenges of cyber identity research provide an exciting
opportunity to bring together faculty researchers and students to investigate
fundamental principles and design strategies in computing systems to develop
real-world, secure systems that we can all trust. This project is co-funded by
the Cyber Corps (R): Scholarship for Service Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research projects explored in this site focus on open research challenges in the
areas of computational frameworks, attacks on cyber identity, and mitigation
strategies. Impacts of the research include an advanced computational framework
for numerical and conceptual identities, extended webIDs for online identity and
login, new approaches to alleviate replay attacks in Biometric based Access
Control Systems, improved analytics for authorship analysis of code associated
with malware, and enhanced cyber attack detection and attribution to attackers.
The students will use of state-of-the art facilities and devices and work with
faculty mentors with significant expertise in cyber identity research. The site
will focus on recruiting under-represented minorities, particularly drawing on a
large network of colleges in the region around the host institution. The
students will participate in professional development activities that make them
more aware of graduate school and professional aspects of a computing career.
The project should contribute to the development of a diverse scientific
workforce with expertise in areas critical to national security in the evolving
global society of the future.