* 1460712
* REU site: Advancing polymer materials by integrating chemistry and chemical engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Stephen Boyes, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 11/30/2018
* USD 384,208.00

This renewal Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Colorado
School of Mines (CSM) offers unique interdisciplinary research experiences
especially related to cutting edge technologies like fuel cells, solar
materials, sustainability, and health care to highly qualified chemistry and
chemical engineering students from diverse backgrounds. Polymer materials
improve the daily lives of nearly every person in the United States. At the end
of the 20th century, many mass-produced items, like car bumpers, started to be
made with polymers due to combining good mechanical properties with being
lightweight and cost effective. Technological innovation in the 21st century
will also leverage polymer materials in the areas of renewable energy,
sustainability, and medicine. Introducing undergraduate research experiences
such as this will train our future human resources and help drive the plastic
and polymer industry toward more advanced technology, innovative products, and
efficient processes.

The REU Site offers opportunities for undergraduate students to engage in a
10-week summer research experience on cutting-edge projects integrating polymer
science and engineering, using state-of-the-art methods, which reinforce and
strengthen their classroom knowledge and encourage pursuit of graduate
education. This will be achieved through integration of chemistry and chemical
engineering. Unique aspects of this program include the exchanges between
chemistry and chemical engineering students, as well as the range of application
areas to be addressed - from renewable energy to sustainability to health care.
Summer research activities are also supplemented with technical lectures as well
as collaborations with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) and the
Children's Hospital Colorado. Another unique aspect of this program is the
proposed workshop on the challenges inherent in commercializing new
technologies, as innovations move from lab to market. This approach complements
the strong professional development program that will prepare students to
consider advanced studies in the field.