* 1460637
* REU Site: Summer MAterials Research @ Tulane (SMART)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Scott Grayson, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 02/29/2020
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL PART: The Summer MAterials Research @ Tulane (SMART) Research
Experiences for Undergraduates Site will engage ten students for ten weeks each
summer in leading-edge materials science research focused in the areas of
health, energy, and the environment. The projects sponsored by this project are
interdisciplinary with faculty advisors and co-advisors across the departments
of Biomedical Engineering, Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Chemistry, and
Physics and Engineering Physics within Tulane University's School of Science and
Engineering. The SMART Site will engage students in research experiences guided
by faculty and graduate mentors and will provide professional development
workshops on topics covering graduate school preparation, research ethics,
technical communication, data analysis, and technology transfer. Additional
activities will include seminars by participating faculty, visits to local
companies, and a closing student symposium on the research projects performed
each summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART: Experimental and modeling-
based research projects offered by faculty mentors participating within the
SMART Site will involve materials for bioimaging and cell culture (health),
solar energy capture and storage (energy), and environmental remediation
(environment). These fields address some of the most critical global challenges
requiring innovation in materials science. Sample projects include: porphyrinic
nanospheres for biological imaging, biocompatible polymeric materials for cell
culture, two-dimensional ultra-high power density photovoltaics, photochemical
generation of hydrogen from water, polymer functionalized carbon materials for
hydrocarbon remediation, and simulations of micellar assemblies under extreme
conditions for oil spill clean-up. Faculty mentors will maintain relationships
with student participants after their summer experiences to offer advice and
support letters to pursue advanced degrees. The long-term payoff of this site is
promotion of advanced STEM field study to a broader base of students with ties
to Louisiana and the Gulf region who can support future tech sector economic
development.