* 1460853
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Astrophysics, Nuclear, and Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* David Cinabro, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2019
* USD 291,232.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program hosted at Wayne State University. The program consists of a
preparation phase involving a one-hour course given over the winter to student
participants, followed by ten weeks of summer research at either Wayne State
University, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL), or the Stanford Linear
Accelerator Center (SLAC) in topics including Astrophysics, Nuclear Physics, or
Particle Physics. The one-hour course introduces the students to the physical,
mathematical and computational concepts relevant for the summer experience. It
includes a computer training homework and an ethics component. The participants
then merge with other existing REU programs at each site for social activities
and lectures on various scientific topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are
mentored by PhD researchers working on leading edge physics topics and/or
technologies chosen for good mentorship qualities as well as their leadership in
their respective scientific fields. Students are given an opportunity to choose
to participate in one of two domains of activities hosted at Wayne State
University and FNAL or SLAC (the choice of the away site depends on the
availability of projects in a given year). The program features many research
avenues and activities, including: studies of the properties of supernovae
observed photometrically, development of new detection instruments for particle
physics or astrophysics, development of systems to manage a large number of
computers, designing and coding advanced software for data analysis, research
and development of the design of an optical all sky survey focused on measuring
cosmology, data analysis in experimental nuclear and particle physics,
development of science education and outreach projects, and theoretical studies
of properties of strong interactions. Students are required to submit a report
in the form of a paper at the end of their experience and deliver oral
presentations.