* 1460183
* REU Site in Additive Manufacturing- Advances and Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Subha Kumpaty, Milwaukee School of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2018
* USD 368,405.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:

This REU site renewal site advances applications of additive manufacturing has
the powerful advantage of providing opportunities for interdisciplinary projects
that culminate in excellent applied engineering research activities. The
activities will help participants develop a passion for lifelong learning and
will encourage entrepreneurship and global impact involving the useful
"sometimes patentable" devices that will be created. The MSOE-REU Site will
continue to be a research incubator for several first-generation and
traditionally underrepresented students from all across the nation, especially
from second tier/ non Ph.D. granting schools. To date, this program has provided
161 students with research opportunities. Of the 148 students who have completed
their baccalaureate, 59% have completed or are pursuing advanced degrees, with
several in faculty positions. The most recent award has served 21 students, of
whom 67% are from other institutions, 38% minorities and others (14% African
American), and 52% women. Of the 8 who have completed a baccalaureate, 75% are
in graduate school.

The commitment to diversity, strong mentoring environment, interdisciplinary
nature of the program, and an established record of impact on participants'
decisions to pursue graduate studies will continue to be major markers of the
MSOE-REU. A new feature in the proposed site is to broaden the participants'
role in diversity through 1) creation of five K-12 learning modules amidst
interaction with teachers and students on campus during summer and 2) enablement
of a global perspective among all participants and advisors while two students
engage in laser-based materials research at the Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research and the University of Johannesburg, South Africa during the
middle six weeks of the 10-week REU program.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:

This three-year summer REU renewal site at MSOE, funded by the National Science
Foundation's Division of Engineering Education and Centers, will offer seven
undergraduates annually opportunities to conduct research in advances (micro-,
hybrid, laser-based metal) and applications (bio-nano) of additive manufacturing
(AM). The range of new and functional AM applications and materials is growing
rapidly and unprecedented technological advances in this field are affecting our
daily lives. Also, the AM application, in addition to its unique features of
accuracy, reduction in development and delivery time, and reliability, is
becoming cost-effective because of the advancement of materials. The
international component, with two participants conducting materials science
research in a global setting during the middle six weeks of the program provides
a new dynamic to all participants enriching their experience and bringing a
global perspective besides the collaborative research accomplishments. These two
participants will be typically MSOE juniors who have had exposure to AM on
campus and have completed materials science course(s) with an adequate
preparation to participate in advanced materials research at the Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research, South Africa and the University of
Johannesburg.

The five participants conducting AM applications research on campus will be
chosen among applicants from other institutions; they will create learning
modules for K-12 outreach from their own research projects and will interact
with Project Lead the Way teachers and students on the premises. Bi-weekly
virtual meetings will be arranged for interaction among all participants. This
ten-week program is geared to attract a broad mix of students, typically 50%
women, 25% underrepresented minorities and more than 60% from other
institutions. Participants will conduct research in a strongly mentored
environment. Students will receive a career-enriching experience from a well-
established and well-run program culminating in a final paper, a national
conference presentation and a strong desire to pursue a graduate degree. Two
additional participants under NSF Center for Compact and Efficient Fluid Power
work alongside these students each year, making the team a rich cohort with
excellent collaborative research interactions.