* 1460169
* SHINE: Plasma Instabilities in Post-Eruption Solar Corona, Formation of Plasmoids and Supra-Arcade Downflows
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Yi-Min Huang, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 04/30/2018
* USD 357,000.00

This 3-year SHINE project is aimed at studying plasma instabilities in the solar
corona during coronal mass ejections by means to 3-D numerical simulations in
realistic coronal configurations. Although the emphasis of this project is on
solar physics, the research outcome has broader implications for the Earth's
magnetotail, dayside magnetopause, fusion plasmas, and astrophysics. The
research will be carried out at the newly established Princeton Center for
Heliospheric Physics, which promotes interdisciplinary and international
collaborations between basic plasma physicists and solar observers. These
collaborations are pursued in synergy with the Max-Planck/Princeton Center for
Plasma Physics, which is funded jointly by the NSF, DoE, Max Planck Institute,
and Princeton University. This research project will involve a graduate student
and a female postdoctoral fellow, and it will contribute to the training of
scientists with backgrounds in both solar observations and numerical modeling.
Some aspects of the research program are tightly coupled to the academic program
in plasma physics at Princeton University, and there will be a new course in
space and astrophysical plasma physics to be taught at the Department of
Astrophysical Sciences by the Co-PI. The research and EPO agenda of this project
supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main goal of this SHINE project is to investigate the cause of current sheet
broadening and the physical origin of supra-arcade downflows (SADs) during a
coronal mass ejection (CME). The three major tasks of this project are to
investigate: (1) the role of plasmoid instabilities in producing turbulent
reconnection in line-tied coronal current sheets, and the role such turbulence
plays in the observed broadening of current sheets; (2) the role of secondary
Rayleigh-Taylor type instabilities in reconnection exhaust regions in producing
the observed characteristics of SADs; and, (3) the formation of plasmoids and
SADs during a CME. One important aspect of this project is to foster cross-
comparison, verification, and validation between simulations and solar
observations. One of the major goals is to establish the capability of capturing
coronal eruption, plasmoid formation, and SADs within a single simulation. The
results of this project are expected to further advance our understanding in how
the magnetic energy is stored and released in large-scale systems such as the
solar corona.