* 1460895
* REU site: Undergraduate Research in Biological Sciences: From Genomes to Phenomes--exploring function across scales
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Christina Wells, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 10/31/2019
* USD 335,187.00

This REU Site award to Clemson University, located in Clemson, SC, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2016-2018. The
program aims to inspire and empower REU students to pursue research careers by
providing them the opportunity to do the things that scientists like to do best:
Ask questions, design and carry out experiments, interpret results, and
communicate findings. The program offers a collegial, multi-disciplinary
environment with a focus on questions concerning an emerging challenge in
biology -- the need to construct organismal phenotypes by linking genetic
information and the environment. Meeting this challenge requires expertise
across cellular, organismal, and ecological scales. Students will be paired with
faculty members and lab groups from a range of disciplines in the Departments of
Biological Sciences and Genetics &amp; Biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. The program includes professional development activities
designed to build the students' research skills, written and oral communication
skills, self-confidence, and appreciation of the scientific endeavor. Students
who have completed one or two years of college will be recruited through the
program's website, through visits to their colleges, and faculty-to-faculty
communication. Students will be selected based on their research interests,
academic record, and potential to carry out outstanding research in ecological
genetics and related fields. A selection committee together with program faculty
will select applicants for the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of the
training program will be measured in various ways, including the REU common
assessment tool. Students are required to be tracked after the program and must
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information is available by visiting www.clemson.edu/culsoc/reu or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Victoria Corbin at vcorbin@clemson.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Mike Sears
at sears3@g.clemson.edu).