* 1460674
* Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site for Computational Sensing and Medical Robotics (CS&MR)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Ralph Etienne-Cummings, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2019
* USD 431,151.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT: This project will provide undergraduates
STEM research experience at the interface of engineering and medicine, aiming to
help medical diagnosis and procedures, development of prosthetics, and
contribute to technologies that are likely to become a part of the "future of
medicine." This program addresses a vital national need to improve the delivery
of healthcare by developing new tests and medical devices that enhance the
ability of doctors to plan and perform procedures. By recruiting from and
partnering with minority student societies and programs, minority-serving
institutions and community colleges, the investigators will help develop a
pipeline of qualified, diverse individuals who will contribute to the STEM
workforce, particularly in the multi- and interdisciplinary subjects encountered
in biomedical research, healthcare delivery, and basic biological and life
sciences. The participants will be well trained in communications and research
ethics, which are essential for success in today's biotechnology and bioscience
work and market place.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:

During a ten-week summer session, undergraduate participants from institutions
nationwide will engage in exciting and challenging research projects in a wide
range of engineering disciplines, e.g. electrical, mechanical and biomedical,
computer science, and physics. Each participant will be matched with a current
research project in the Laboratory for Computational Sensing and Robotics (LCSR)
and will be a part of a collegial research team, including a faculty project
supervisor and a graduate student mentor. These research projects relate to
medical image registration and fusion, image enhancement and segmentation or the
development of new robotic devices to support surgeons in the operating room or
to aid patients with disabilities. Participants will receive instruction on
technical communication, oral presentation skills, and research ethics and will
deliver a final research report and presentation. Additional activities will
include tours and trips to other labs at JHU Hospital (JHU/H) and the Applied
Physics Laboratory, the opportunity to perform laparoscopic procedures at the
JHU/H Minimally Invasive Surgical Training Center, and industry tours of local
robotics, biotechnology and engineering companies.

The program is multidisciplinary and offers each participant the ability to
conduct research in a variety of fields and develop strong teamwork
collaboration skills. Each faculty mentor provides a project description for
projects that may be created specifically for the program or designed to carry
out a facet of an on-going research. Because the Laboratory for Computational
Sensing and Robotics has close ties with the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions,
participants can experience the cutting-edge research that is designed to aid
medical diagnosis, interventions, and prosthesis, and contribute to technologies
that are likely to become a part of the "future of medicine." The investigators
plan to leverage on-going research activities and training and mentoring
experience, and aim this REU in CS&MR program at broader topics that include
more biological inspired and biologically targeted computational sensing,
imaging, and robotics systems. An external assessment expert will conduct annual
formative and summative evaluations.