* 1460696
* REU Site: Molecular and Organismal Evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Douglas Cole, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2018
* USD 359,797.00

This REU Site award to the University of Idaho, located in Moscow, ID, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2015 -
2017. This program, housed within the Department of Biological Sciences, is
designed to actively engage undergraduates in faculty-mentored research in the
areas of molecular and organismal evolution. Research interests in evolutionary
processes form a unifying theme and are a particular strength of this
department. These interests range from molecular processes of evolutionary
change to the adaptation of organisms on the landscape level. Students will have
the opportunity to work on a diverse range of projects that address current
questions with cutting-edge approaches in state-of-the-art facilities. The
program is structured to involve students in all aspects of scientific
investigation and to excite and inspire them through direct exposure to current
research in evolutionary biology. Weekly research seminars, a series of career
development workshops, an ethics/responsible conduct of research component, and
a variety of social activities will facilitate student learning and development.
The program will conclude with a student research symposium. Students from
institutions with limited opportunities for research as well as students from
underrepresented minority groups and first generation college students will be
targeted during recruiting efforts. An on-line application process will be
utilized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students
will be trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted
and will be mentored toward increased independence as the program progresses.
Many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate
for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students are required to be tracked after the program and must
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information is available by visiting
http://www.uidaho.edu/sci/biology/about/summer-reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
David Pfeiffer at dpfeiffer@uidaho.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Doug Cole at
dcole@uidaho.edu).