* 1460872
* REU Site:  Weak chemical bonds yield strong research experiences in Materials Chemistry at the University of South Dakota
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Dmitri Kilin, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 265,022.00

This project funded by the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation
(NSF) creates a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the
University of South Dakota (USD), led by Professor Andrew G. Sykes. The REU Site
program is specifically designed to serve the research needs of students at
regional tribal colleges, local primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs), and
USD. Eight students will be hosted at USD each summer for three years. This REU
site includes four major project elements: 1) onsite hosting of undergraduate
students from regional tribal colleges, PUIs and USD conducting intensive
research for ten weeks during the summer; 2) a two week computational chemistry
workshop involving all participants; 3) communication of research results during
and following the research experience; and 4) select social activities
characteristic of the region. The research opportunities offered at USD fall
under the theme of materials chemistry that involves non-covalent interactions
to control structure and function. Non-covalent interactions (hydrogen bonds,
van de Waals forces, halogen bonds, coordinate-covalent bonding, dipole-dipole
interactions, to name a few) are linked to a variety of material applications
that are associated with all the research projects conducted by participating
chemistry faculty at USD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing, understanding and
controlling weak intermolecular forces is critical to modern chemical and
materials research. In addition, students will learn about the use of single-
crystal and powder XRD; NMR spectroscopy; fluorescence and optical techniques;
SEM and TEM imaging; and other chemical characterization methods during their
research experience. Computational chemistry is also of growing importance,
where almost every communication in the literature offers some computational
component. Students will benefit from an immersive learning experience in
computational methods as linked to their individual research projects. The
broader impact of this REU program includes increased access to the chemical
sciences for students attending Tribal colleges and PUI institutions in the
area. The University of South Dakota (USD) is ideally situated geographically to
serve both Native American and small PUI student populations in the region.