* 1460820
* REU Site: The Bronze Age Koros Off-Tell Archaeological (BAKOTA) Field School: Undergraduate Training in Fieldwork and Independent Research Reporting in European Archaeology
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Paul Duffy, Quinnipiac University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 03/31/2020
* USD 358,558.00

This project is supported under the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program, which is an NSF-wide program although each Directorate
administers its own REU Site competition. This program supports active research
participation by undergraduate students in an effort to introduce them to
scientific research so as to encourage their continued engagement in the
nation's scientific research and development enterprise. REU projects involve
students in meaningful ways in ongoing research programs or in research projects
designed especially for the purpose. The REU program is a major contributor to
the NSF's goal of developing a diverse, internationally competitive, and
globally-engaged science and engineering workforce. The Social, Behavioral and
Economic (SBE) sciences Directorate awarded this REU Site grant to Quinnipiac
University for the BAKOTA REU Site field-school to offer a multicultural and
multidisciplinary environment for students from underrepresented groups and
under-resourced institutions to receive training in scientific research and
publication. Working with Hungarian students and colleagues, American students
receive the theoretical background, hands-on experience and the careful
attention of individual mentors required for mastering the increasingly
specialized STEM methods leading archaeological research. Each summer, ten
undergraduate students are engaged in 1) working next to Hungarian students
while they receive instruction in survey and excavation techniques, record
keeping and data management, and artifact analysis, 2) participating in seminars
and workshops taught by experts on archaeological method and theory and the
cultural history of Eastern Europe, 3) visiting museums and archaeological
sites, 4) planning and completing an independent research project with a faculty
mentor, and 5) living in the small town of Vésztõ and learning about life in
Hungary from the villagers, Hungarian students, and visiting project
participants. Students are guided (via formal instruction and informal
mentoring) from dependent to independent thinkers who have the skill sets to
make their own unique contributions to the research team. Students present their
work at a national conference, in academic journals, and on the project website
(http://bakota.net). By engaging students who would not otherwise participate in
high-level research, the BAKOTA field-school opens the door to further student
inquiry in science, and supports collaborations that will impact the students
throughout their academic and professional careers. The international experience
of the project requires a culturally sensitive atmosphere and results in
participants who promote a more tolerant, educated, and collaborative society.

In this REU Site project, undergraduate students become contributing members of
an archaeological project centered on understanding the rise of social
inequality in European prehistory. A number of significant social
transformations occur in the Bronze Age, including agricultural intensification,
population increases, and an explosion in trade. The location of the field-
school in eastern Hungary has evidence for many forms of social complexity, but
unlike neighboring areas, it did not undergo massive changes in social
stratification. Despite an increasing population and intensified agricultural
production, no hierarchy or monopoly over bronze manufacturing emerged. This
makes eastern Hungary a fascinating place to study social change. By comparing
the trajectory of Bronze Age peoples of the Carpathian Basin to those of
stratified societies elsewhere in the world, we engage the large anthropological
debates focused on understanding the foundations and development of social
inequality. The Bronze Age Körös Off-Tell Archaeological (BAKOTA) REU Site
field-school has three years of funding for a summer field school at the Middle
Bronze Age (ca. 2000-1500 BC) cemetery and settlement of Békés 103, located in
southeastern Hungary. Professional development mentoring takes place before the
program starts, throughout the research season, and post-project. Participants
also receive training in ethical and equitable fieldwork codes of conduct,
including Responsible Conduct in Research (RCR) and sexual harassment awareness.
NSF's International Science and Engineering (ISE) program has co-funded this
project.