* 1460897
* REU Site: Undergraduate Computer Research (UnCoRe) In Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Huirong Fu, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 03/31/2021
* USD 359,988.00

This CISE Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award funds a REU
site at Oakland University. Each summer, undergraduate students from across the
nation will work on challenging research problems related to cybersecurity, an
area of national priority for our nation. Students will work with faculty
mentors to use tools and techniques to solve problems that are timely and
important. This site should help develop computing professionals who can build
future computing systems and applications that are secure and trustworthy and
that we can all use with confidence. This REU experience provides students with
the foundations and inspiration to pursue computing careers and research in
areas that are rapidly evolving and impacting all of our citizens.

The site will focus on recruiting women and students from institutions where
there are limited research opportunities. The team will use successful
strategies employed in past REU Sites to recruit undergraduate students from
groups traditionally under-represented in computer science. The site includes a
significant research component combined with professional development
opportunities for the participating undergraduate students. The students are
immersed into a research environment with all of its facets: participating
actively in shaping a research project and in defining the solution;
communicating to peers and other audiences about the research and their
findings; visiting research laboratories and attending scientific and technical
presentations; and forming collegial relationships with research teams that
include faculty, graduate students, and other scientific researchers. The
resulting research is often presented at professional conferences and included
in technical publications thus contributing to the body of research related to
sustaining secure and trustworthy cyberspace. The ultimate goal is to contribute
to the development of a diverse scientific workforce with expertise in areas
critical to national security in the evolving global society of the future.