* 1460498
* Non-volcanic Tremor in the Northern San Andreas Fault System
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Douglas Dreger, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 06/30/2019
* USD 432,066.00

This project seeks to provide a clearer understanding of the relationship
between non-volcanic tremor (a recently discovered seismic phenomenon) and
earthquakes within the San Andreas Fault System. Along the San Andreas Fault,
tremor has been studied in only a few locations near Parkfield, California and
for a limited time period. This has effectively limited the association of
tremor to only one larger earthquake--the 2004 Parkfield magnitude 6 event.
Notable changes in the rate and migration pattern of tremor leading up to this
earthquake were observed, however, this single example is insufficient for
establishing precursory tremor as a general phenomena leading up to larger
events. This project will significantly expand the geographic and temporal base
of tremor observations and will allow for a greater number of associations
between tremor and larger earthquakes to be studied. Included in the project are
detailed analyses of these associations with the aim of establishing a more
robust understanding of the relationship between tremor and earthquakes. The
project will also search for and characterize tremor on a greater diversity of
faults within the San Andreas fault system, which will provide additional
constraints on ?transform system? tremor for comparisons with subduction zone
tremor. The project?s analyses of the special properties of tremor (i.e.,
greater depths, sensitivity to small stress change, correlation with deformation
rates, and associations with deep fault fluids and stressing from earth-tides
and distant large earthquakes) will also impact other fields of study by
providing information on the genesis of tremor, the relationship of tremor with
deep faulting, on earth-structure, deep earth properties, and on active tectonic
processes. The project includes significant student participation (both graduate
and undergraduate) that will support their training and research experience in
science and technology, and it increases partnerships with international
institutions and participation of early-career and underrepresented groups
through collaboration with female early-career geophysicist Aurelie Guilhem
(CEA/DAM/DIF, France) and early-career professor Haijiang Zhang (University of
Science and Technology, China).

Detections of ambient tremor events in northern California have relied primarily
on sensitive borehole recordings of continuous seismic observations from the
local-scale High Resolution Seismic Network (HRSN) at Parkfield, CA. This has
resulted in a parochial view of tremor on California faults. Additional
observations of tremor on a broader array of fault-systems and in association
with a greater number of larger earthquakes are needed to accurately
characterize the process of tremor in California, to accurately compare
transform fault and subduction zone tremor, and to more clearly understand the
relationship of tremor to larger earthquakes. The objective of this project is
to expand the geographic and temporal scope of tremor observation and to analyze
the expanded dataset in terms of tremors? relationships to a greater number of
fault systems and their structures, process, inferred composition, and stress-
change through time. This will be done through a comprehensive and systematic
search for ambient and triggered tremor throughout much of northern California
going back to the mid-1990s using, primarily, a recently available dataset of
continuous seismic records from the regional USGS Northern California Seismic
Network (NCSN). Continuous records from other networks in the region will also
be analyzed. Envelope cross-correlation and percentile stacking methods will be
used to deal with the lower sensitivity of the surface NCSN stations.
Corresponding high-resolution LFE catalogs will also be developed when possible
using waveform stacking and pattern match scanning techniques. Proven methods
for inferring mechanics and process in the tremor-genic fault zones will be
employed, and velocity and attenuation tomography using tremor sources and
station-pair double-differencing methods will be performed to improve tremor
locations and to enhance understanding of deep fault properties and structure.