* 1460518
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site: Ecology in Human-Dominated Lanscapes
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2022
* David Berg, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2022
* USD 488,571.00

This REU Site award to Miami University, located in Oxford, Ohio, will support
the training of 9 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2015-2019.
Participants will conduct individual research projects that emphasize ecological
questions presented by human activity and global climate change. Research
mentors will be from diverse disciplines including biology, geology, chemistry,
microbiology, and geography. The program is collaborative and interdisciplinary,
so that participants can come to recognize that understanding ecology
necessarily incorporates diverse views and approaches. Students participate in
the workshop "A People and Their Homeland: the Miami Tribe" led by tribal
educators, which provides a historical perspective on the relationship between
humans and the regional landscape. The program includes a second workshop
focusing on the scientific profession, discussion sessions, field trips, and
visits by world-renowned scientists from other institutions. Selection of
student participants is based on student qualities and the match between their
interests and projects proposed by mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 45 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences and in peer-reviewed journals. In addition to expanding
knowledge of climate change and environmental problems, students will come to
appreciate traditional ecological knowledge and the history of human-landscape
interactions. In this way, the program will prepare participants to become
ecoliterate citizens in an ever-changing global society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division
of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) helps to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. In addition, participants
will be asked to provide feedback throughout the summer and beyond. Together
this information will be used to improve the activities and experiences.
Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://www.miamioh.edu/ecoreu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. David J.
Berg at BergDJ@miamioh.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Ann L. Rypstra at
Rypstral@miamioh.edu).