* 1460984
* REU Site: A National REU Site in Wind Energy Science, Engineering and Policy
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* John Jackman, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2019
* USD 365,845.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective
of the Wind Energy Science, Engineering and Policy (WESEP) REU Site at Iowa
State University is to engage undergraduate students in high quality research
experiences through an intellectually stimulating 10-week summer research
program that focuses on WESEP research issues. Recognizing the vital importance
of renewable energy to the long term sustainability of the US energy portfolio
and the substantial role that wind energy plays in new power generation
capacity, this program provides a unique research experience for undergraduate
students to play a role in shaping the US energy future. Research projects are
designed to motivate and prepare students for graduate research in science and
engineering. Participants will leave with a greater understanding and
appreciation of the importance that wind energy plays in meeting national
renewable goals and the rewarding research career opportunities available. The
program builds on existing relationships with HBCUs and universities in Puerto
Rico as well as Iowa State University programs for broadening participation of
traditionally underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2012, for the first time, wind energy
accounted for the largest portion of new generating capacity in the US,
exceeding new natural gas generation capacity. However, when compared with other
nations that are increasing their wind energy portion of energy production, the
US ranked 12th with less than 6% of total electric generating capacity. The
project addresses a critical, long-term national need to increase the
availability of cost-effective renewable energy that will help reduce our carbon
footprint, water usage, and meet future energy demands. The WESEP research
program includes five research areas: (1) Wind energy resource characterization
and aerodynamic loads; (2) Wind energy conversion systems and grid operations;
(3) Manufacturing, construction, and supply chain; (4) Reliability and turbine
health monitoring; and (5) Politics and policy for wind energy. Individual
projects will typically be tied to one or more ongoing ISU research team
projects which are funded by a variety of agencies including NSF, DOE, Iowa
Department of Economic Development, ISU, and industry partners. Because of its
location, strength in wind energy related disciplines, and ongoing partnerships
with industry, Iowa State University provides an intellectually challenging
environment for interdisciplinary educational programs in WESEP. Participants in
the WESEP REU program will learn: (1) how to conduct research as part of a
collaborative research team; (2) how to present and publish their findings; (3)
the role of ethics in research; (4) the technical and policy challenges in wind
energy; and (5) that research can be a rewarding career
path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acknowledgement: This project is supported
by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers at the National Science
Foundation.