* 1460986
* REU Site: Investigating the Behaviors of Middle Stone Age Humans in the Horn of Africa
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2015,09/30/2021
* John Kappelman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 09/30/2021
* USD 372,998.00

This project is supported under the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program, which is an NSF-wide program although each Directorate
administers its own REU Site competition. This program supports active research
participation by undergraduate students in an effort to introduce them to
scientific research so as to encourage their continued engagement in the
nation's scientific research and development enterprise. REU projects involve
students in meaningful ways in ongoing research programs or in research projects
designed especially for the purpose. The REU program is a major contributor to
the NSF's goal of developing a diverse, internationally competitive, and
globally-engaged science and engineering workforce. The Social, Behavioral and
Economic (SBE) sciences Directorate awarded this REU Site grant to the
University of Texas at Austin which aims to train students in the multi-
disciplinary investigation of behaviors and ecology of Middle Stone Age (MSA)
humans in the Horn of Africa. Students design original research projects that
integrate field, laboratory, and museum studies. They present their projects at
national scientific meetings and prepare their results for publication in peer-
reviewed journals, helping them to develop into independent scientists. This REU
site offers participants an unparalleled educational opportunity along with a
unique cultural experience that will enable today's students to become
tomorrow's leading researchers and teachers. The results of this study will aid
our understanding of the early history of ancient modern
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of modern human origins and evolution is
a multidisciplinary endeavor that closely integrates data from the fields of
archaeology, biological anthropology, geochemistry, geochronology, geology, and
paleontology. This study proposed to establish an REU Site in NW Ethiopia in
order to engage undergraduate students in investigating the time period from
40,000-90,000 years ago when modern humans left Africa to populate the rest of
the world. The region contains numerous MSA archaeological sites from this time
interval that preserve the stone tools made and used by these ancient humans,
the remains of the animals that they hunted, and a record of past climates. The
foraging behaviors practiced by these ancient humans facilitated our species'
migration out of Africa. Students are recruited from a mix of two- and four-year
colleges and participate in web-based seminars and conferences that provides
multi-disciplinary training before they begin their field, museum, and
laboratory studies. Twenty-four students are selected from groups
underrepresented in the sciences. They are trained in several disciplines which
in turn will enhance partnerships among the students and the participating labs
and they will learn how to design research projects that emphasize data
collection and analysis. This project is co-funded by the NSF International
Science and Engineering (ISE) program.