* 1460368
* Hybrid Adaptive Numerical Methods and Computational Software for Biological Fluid-Structure Interaction
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Boyce Griffith, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 54,819.00

Building upon his earlier work in developing parallel and adaptive immersed
boundary (IB) methods for simulating fluid-structure interaction (FSI), in this
project, the investigator aims to construct a new hybrid FSI methodology which
incorporates features of both the IB method and the immersed interface (II)
method. The IB method is a broadly-useful approach to FSI which has been applied
to diverse problems in biological fluid dynamics. Although the IB method has
been demonstrated to be a useful approach to such problems, it is generally only
first-order accurate, and fine spatial grids are therefore required to obtain
resolved numerical simulations. The II method is an IB-like approach to FSI
which yields second-order accuracy for certain problems, but which is currently
limited to thin elastic interfaces which are closed (i.e., which do not have
free edges). The hybrid FSI methodology of this project will incorporate
features of both the IB and II methods to obtain high-order accuracy for both
"thick" and "thin" elastic bodies, including thin elastic interfaces with free
edges. We believe that the basic version of the methodology will be the first
IB-like method to achieve full second-order accuracy for thick elastic bodies
such as the muscular walls of the heart, and that the extended version of the
methodology will be the first II-like method to treat interfaces with free
edges, such as the thin leaflets of the cardiac valves. These new methods will
be used to simulate cardiovascular flows, especially the fluid dynamics of the
aortic heart valve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problems in which a fluid flow
interacts with an elastic structure, such as the writhing and coiling of DNA or,
as addressed within this project, blood flow in the heart and vessels, are
ubiquitous in engineering, biology, and medicine. The immersed boundary (IB)
method is a broadly-useful approach to such problems which was introduced to
enable the computer simulation of the fluid dynamics of the heart and its
valves. Indeed, cardiovascular applications have motivated much work to develop
mathematical and computational methods for FSI, and the large and growing number
of patients suffering from cardiovascular diseases (80 million people in the
United States, approximately 30% of the population), such as coronary heart
disease (16.8 million people) or heart failure (5.7 million people), make such
applications increasingly important. This project aims to develop an improved
version of the IB method which will improve the accuracy of the methodology,
possibly leading to significantly more realistic simulations of cardiovascular
dynamics. Because the IB approach is widely useful, and because the software
implementing the methods of this project will be freely distributed, the
potential impact of this work is quite broad, possibly affecting studies which
aim to address basic scientific questions (e.g., the fluid-structure
interactions which result in the beating of cilia within the oviduct or
respiratory tract) to studies which aim to improve the design of medical
therapies and devices (e.g., prosthetic cardiac valves or treatments for heart
failure).