* 1460479
* Collaborative Research: Shear-wave Splitting and Mantle Dynamics of the North American Plate
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Thorsten Becker, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 01/31/2017
* USD 150,485.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous geological features and
phenomena observed on the surface of the Earth -- such as giant mountain belts,
deep ocean basins, earthquakes, and volcanoes -- are the results of dynamic
processes operating in the Earth's crust, mantle, and core. Therefore, an
improved understanding of these processes are essential for the understanding of
the origin and development of the Earth and for mitigation of natural hazards.
At the present time, however, only the shallowest part of the Earth can be
observed directly using cores from drill holes; consequently, an array of
computing-intensive geophysical techniques are applied to image the active
planet. Those techniques are similar to those used in the hospital to image the
human body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shear-wave splitting is a fundamental
geophysical observation that uniquely indicates the presence of azimuthal
anisotropy along the ray path. Such anisotropy is the result of dynamic
processes in the Earth's asthenosphere and lithosphere. However, dynamic
interpretation of shear-wave splitting requires homogeneous, high quality
measurements, and quantitative forward models. This project will measure shear-
wave splitting parameters at all of the USArray Transportable Array and other
broadband seismic stations in the eastern U.S. and update measurements
throughout the North American plate. The data product includes ~10,000 shear-
wave splitting measurements that we are merging with ~16,000 measurements that
we produced for the western and central U.S. with NSF prior funding via
EarthScope. We are utilizing a set of procedures for reliably measuring and
ranking the splitting parameters for producing a uniform database, quantifying
shear-wave splitting complexity and likely depth of anisotropy along the way. To
complement this reference shear-wave splitting database, we are computing a
large number of geodynamic forward models of synthetic shear-wave splitting and
anisotropic structure for surface wave studies by computing fabrics from mantle
flow and simplified tectonic models. This way, we can test which hypotheses for
the origin of anisotropy can be reliably discerned, which tectonic scenarios
best reflect observations, and how to guide regional refinement of our
understanding of continental and upper mantle structure and dynamics. Using this
joint approach, we are addressing a number of significant questions regarding
the origin of seismic anisotropy, including lithospheric inheritance and recent
asthenospheric flow, and the nature of mantle convection underneath the North
American plate. In addition, all our measurements, as well as synthetic
waveforms, are being openly shared so as to allow others to refine their
resulting reference models; this ensures our data product will have a
significant impact on a broad range of Earth science questions.