* 1460058
* IRES: Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Microbiology and Biogeosciences of Siberian Deep Subsurface Permafrost
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Karen Lloyd, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2019
* USD 249,987.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;This NSF IRES grant will provide undergraduate students with a
rich international research opportunity in both microbiology and biogeosciences
through their examination of unique 5,000-3,000,000 year-old permafrost sediment
samples previously collected in the Northeast Siberian Arctic. Twelve students
over the course of three summers will spend a total of six weeks at the Soil
Cryology Laboratory of the Institute of Physicochemical and Biological Problems
of Soil Sciences (IPBPSS) within the Russian Academy of Sciences and complete
their research projects under the supervision of academic mentors from both
IPBPSS and University of Tennessee Knoxville. The project will give these
students an integrated research experience including educational guidance and
cultural enlightenment, while strengthening research collaboration between U.S.
and Russian scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;Permafrost
occupies approximately 25% (23 million kmÂ²) of the Earth's continental surface
in the Northern Hemisphere, yet its microbiota remains largely unexplored. The
microbial communities embedded within permafrost for millions of years represent
a ?gold mine? of genes encoding for low-temperature biocatalysts involved in
biosynthetic and biodegradative pathways. Research projects of the students
participating in this IRES program will be devoted to studying the biodiversity,
as well as the interactions between microbial diversity, functional activity and
physicochemical properties, within deep subsurface permafrost sediments. The
proposed research will apply various state-of-the-art techniques such as qPCR,
DNA hybridization, geochemical analyses, and metagenomics, in addition to
traditional microbiological and analytical approaches. This research will fill
in gaps regarding the taxonomic and functional diversity of the Siberian
permafrost and contribute to the international knowledge about permafrost
ecosystems. The broad dissemination and availability of metagenomic data from
different permafrost strata will supply considerable knowledge to our
understanding of the microbial ecology of polar regions with respect to both
permafrost degradation and its impact on global warming.