* 1460125
* The Effect Of Crop Failure On Small Scale Village Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Timothy Kohler, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2020
* USD 26,130.00

Dr. Lisa Nagaoka and colleagues, of the University of North Texas, and Dr.
Timothy Kohler, of Washington State University, will undertake research to study
the impact of climate change, particularly drought, on societies reliant on
dryland agriculture. Non-irrigated or dryland agriculture is a cultivation
process in arid areas where water for crops comes from precipitation and from
stored soil moisture. Many societies today rely on dryland agriculture; the key
to long-term success is dealing with fluctuations in the availability of water,
and thus crop yield, across time. During wet and productive years, environmental
carrying capacity can greatly increase, resulting in good crop years and
increased human population growth. But dry years can lead to significant crop
failure and famine. Much of the current research on contemporary dryland
agriculture focuses on increasing crop yield through genetically modified crop
varieties and better soil and water management. Archaeology is well placed to
understand the societal impacts of a failure to deal with fluctuations in water
availability because it provides numerous past "experiments" using a variety of
management techniques to study. Some societies developed management practices
that led to long-term success, while others adopted approaches that resulted in
societal collapse. Understanding the conditions under which some societies
reliant on dryland agriculture succeed while others fail can provide insight
into which variables matter most in terms of sustainable dryland farming over
long periods of time.

Drs. Nagaoka and Kohler and their research team will study the relationship
between climate change, water availability, and dryland agricultural
productivity. Previous archaeological research on this topic has focused on
modeling crop yield at the regional scale, which requires numerous assumptions
about variables such as soil quality that are difficult to measure in a
prehistoric context. In this study, the research team will focus on the effects
of soil moisture on the potential for crop failure at the local scale of
farmland around large pueblo villages by documenting the wilting point of
dryland soils, a known level of soil moisture at which no water can be extracted
by plants. The research will be conducted in the Mesa Verde region of
southwestern Colorado, where prehistoric culture change is often used as a
cautionary tale of societal collapse. The numerous large multi-storied pueblos
speak to the large population that once lived in the region. Yet, by the late AD
1200s, these communities were all abandoned. A prolonged and severe drought is
often cited as a cause for the collapse. However, there were several periods of
drought during the previous thousand years that did not lead to collapse
indicating that there is more to learn about what factors lead to failure or
sustainability of dryland farming over the long term. The team of researchers
has backgrounds in archaeology, environmental science, hydrology, remote
sensing, and geographic information systems, which they will use to understand
how the likelihood of crop failure varied at large pueblo villages depending on
soil type, topographic features, and vegetation, and how these varied across
time during periods of higher precipitation and during drought. The team will
generate new methods for studying agricultural productivity that can be applied
in other areas of the world where dryland farming is important, and the
interdisciplinary emphasis of the project will also provide unique educational
and training opportunities for students.