* 1460757
* REU Site: Dare to BE FIRST - Biomechanical Engineering  Foundations in Impactful Research, Science &amp; Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Jill Higginson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 10/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for
Biomechanical Engineering Research (CBER) at the University of Delaware offers a
comprehensive Research Experience for Undergraduates who "Dare to BE FIRST"
which will establish Biomechanical Engineering Foundations in Impactful
Research, Science and Technology (BE FIRST). The program will take advantage of
faculty expertise in osteoarthritis research to train qualified minority
undergraduate students in essential research skills for biomedical engineering.
A total of 20 students will spend 10 weeks in a biomechanics research lab and
benefit from state-of-the-art facilities, mentorship, and workshops to conduct
an independent research project. Students will be recruited from minority
institutions and historically black colleges and universities around the U.S.
and other institutions with limited research resources. The goal is to improve
their engineering and research skills which will influence the academic pursuits
of this group of talented and diverse young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Center for Biomechanical Engineering Research (CBER) at the University of
Delaware offers a comprehensive Research Experience for Undergraduates who "Dare
to BE FIRST" which will establish Biomechanical Engineering Foundations in
Impactful Research, Science and Technology (BE FIRST). The mission leverages
CBER's strengths in cutting edge osteoarthritis research in order to improve the
quantitative analysis capabilities of minority undergraduate students with
emphasis on theory, modeling and simulation in molecular, cellular, tissue and
joint-level biomechanics. The activities designed to meet this objective include
10 weeks of hands-on experience in an osteoarthritis research laboratory,
scientific and professional development workshops, research lab and clinical
site visits, opportunities for networking and interdisciplinary communication
with scientists from graduate students to orthopaedic surgeons, and culminating
in a university-wide research symposium. Beyond the intellectual merit of the
individual projects, the program will evaluate and compare student productivity
and program effectiveness with systematically administered surveys and
professional evaluations. The program plans to recruit a total of 20
undergraduate students who are interested in both quantitative technologies and
bioengineering research each year for three years. Through the alliance with
institutions which may not have access to similar research resources, it is
expected that this program will change the scientific perception, improve the
engineering skills, and impact the academic pursuits of participants. As a
result, it also expects to prepare this group of talented and diverse young
scientists for the quantitative research required by graduate programs and the
biomedical industry. Ultimately the program will strengthen undergraduate
education by enhancing student preparation in quantitative analysis and related
research skills needed by the next generation of biomedical
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Division of Engineering Education and Centers of the National Science
Foundation.