* 1460434
* Economic and Geopolitical Crises and Waves of Social Unrest
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Beverly Silver, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2018
* USD 254,554.00

This project will shed light on the post-2008 global upsurge of labor and social
unrest by comparing it to analogous historical periods from the mid-nineteenth
century to the present. How is social unrest linked to economic and geopolitical
crises? The project creates a new data base using digital newspapers of The New
York Times and The Guardian (London) from 1851 forward. Thus, it situates the
analysis of the current global wave of social protest in a much longer temporal
frame and broader geographical scope than is normally done. It will make it
possible to directly address and resolve debates about whether or not the
current wave of protest is historically significant and novel. The new database
will be collected and disseminated in a way that will be useful for researchers
and teachers. The project design includes a significant training component,
providing a team of students with the opportunity to gain professional level
research training and hands-on research experience.

Because of its intensity and global spread, scholarly debates on the causes and
significance of the recent protest wave have mushroomed, including debates about
the class composition of the participants and the causal mechanisms linking
unrest to economic crises and geopolitical transformations. Main hypotheses of
this project include examination of whether or not: (1) global waves of social
unrest, analogous to the present in terms of intensity and geographical spread,
have occurred only rarely, and only in periods of world hegemonic crisis and
transition--that is, periods of intense and intertwined economic and
geopolitical crises, such as inter-state and intra-state warfare); (2) the
post-2008 wave of global social protest has strong analogies with the wave of
unrest that took place during the late 19th and early 20th century crisis of
British world hegemony; and (3) labor unrest is an important component of both
waves of global social unrest. A particular feature of the current period is the
large role played by workers who are unable to find stable wage employment
(precariously employed, unemployed, underemployed, etc.) and who have no
significant alternative (non-wage) means of livelihood. &#8195;