* 1460045
* IRES: US-Germany collaboration to advance research and education in materials for extreme environments
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Seetha Raghavan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 12/31/2020
* USD 249,946.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Ceramics and Ceramic matrix composites have demonstrated
promise in the quest for performance under hypersonic conditions related to sub-
orbital and reusable space vehicles. This IRES will provide a 10-week summer
session every year for 3 years, to enable 4 US students annually, both at the
graduate and undergraduate levels, to acquire knowledge in manufacturing,
testing and simulation of advanced material systems exhibiting durability in
extreme environments. Through the program, students experience large-scale
facilities at DLR Aerospace in Cologne, Germany, including materials
manufacturing and testing systems to design and develop experimental samples.
This experience offers joint participation of US and German researchers in
synchrotron studies at the Argonne National Laboratory with mentorship from both
German and US-based scientists. Students will gain a rare insight into the full
cycle of emerging materials research. Research outcomes have long terms societal
benefits in creating a new class of materials for next generation energy,
propulsion and transportation needs. The educational broader impact of the
international collaborative research is achieved through i) an exchange of
knowledge of high resolution techniques in processing, experimentation and
simulation ii) opportunities for students at the graduate and undergraduate
levels to experience collaborative research in highly advanced facilities
focused on each expertise with mentoring from highly trained scientists as well
as peer mentoring between graduate and senior undergraduate students, iii) a
pre-trip German Engineering Exchange (GEEx) activity with local high school
students (taking German language) teaching basic German Language in exchange for
engineering activities organized by the participants. Research opportunities in
Germany will be shared with the rising freshmen through this activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project facilitates
international experiences for students, through collaborative research between
the German Aerospace Center (DLR) and the University of Central Florida (UCF),
in support of the search for materials that can sustain extreme physical and
mechanical environments applicable to hypersonic and reusable space vehicles.
DLR's expertise in advanced processing of high temperature ceramics and ceramic
matrix composites will complement UCF's unique capability to capture the
mechanics of these complex layered material systems directly, under operational
and real environments. The research enables investigation of the strain
evolution in these materials over thermal-mechanical or thermal gradient-
mechanical cycles, crack propagation under extreme environments and effects of
geometry on strain and damage propagation through in-situ synchrotron
measurements conducted by the UCF and DLR researchers in partnership with
Argonne National Laboratory. The results will enable fundamental knowledge on
the mechanical properties and behavior of these materials with outcomes that
have the potential to extend operational capacity and durability under high
temperature.