* 1460564
* REU Site: Research Experiences and Exploration in Materials Science (REEMS) for Houston Community College Science and Engineering Students
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Bartlett Sheinberg, Houston Community College
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 729,292.00

NON-TECHNICAL PART: This REU Site will provide an umbrella under which seventy-
five community college students will participate in a wide array of educational
activities that provide a broad view of science and engineering education and
career opportunities through materials science perspectives. These activities
will include: (1) an innovative lower division course that describes the
historical and societal impacts of materials, (2) tours of university materials
research labs, (3) identification of a STEM advisor over the duration of the
project who will work with each of the seventy-five student participants, (4)
meetings with materials scientists and engineers from academia, industry,
professional societies, and federal laboratories, (5) training of faculty on
mentoring practices, and (6) a competitive process to select thirty-six students
for summer research experiences in the laboratories of faculty at nearby
research universities. The project has significant potential to attract and
retain freshman and sophomore community college students in the STEM disciplines
and to facilitate their transfer to a four-year institution to continue their
STEM education. The inter-related advising, educational, and research activities
will be subject to ongoing evaluation designed to validate, or suggest changes
in, the project approach. Recruiting activities will focus on females, veterans,
and students from minority groups who are underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART: The students who are selected to
participate in pairs in a research opportunity in a university materials
research laboratory will begin communicating with their research mentors in the
spring term in preparation for a ten-week research project during the summer.
Research opportunities have been arranged with faculty at research universities
in the Houston area. Student projects will include such topics as: (1) polymer-
based organic photovoltaics (OPVs) where the student team will fabricate and
test polymer-based OPVs and analyze the effect of block copolymer additives on
active layer structure and performance, (2) high temperature superconductors
where the student team will determine the migration of ternary invariant liquids
and the change in composition of other components as the liquid migrates, (3)
new epoxy resins where the student team will develop new resins that incorporate
sustainable and biodegradable components while maintaining the desirable
properties of these epoxy resins, (4) study of fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP)
composites where the student team will examine FRP composite samples taken from
retired lifeboats and characterize the types of environmental damage suffered by
these lifeboats, (5) organic polymeric materials where the student team will
test the hypothesis that an n-type conjugated redox polymer can simultaneously
enable high doping level and high electrical conductivity, and (6) organic
compounds that mimic key reactions in photosynthesis where the student team will
examine computational methods, using basic concepts in quantum chemistry,
statistical physics, and molecular dynamics, to learn about a covalently linked
carotenoid-porphrin-C60 compound that has the ability to absorb light and
generate charge-separation states that convert solar energy into chemical
fuel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project fulfills the mutual objectives of the
Division of Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in
the NSF Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences and the Advanced
Technological Education program of the Division of Undergraduate Education in
the NSF Directorate for Education and Human Resources. Each of these units is
providing a significant fraction of the funding.