* 1460486
* REU Site:  A Multidisciplinary Research Experience in Engineered Bioactive Interfaces and Devices
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Kimberly Anderson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2019
* USD 376,672.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective
of this project is to provide a novel multidisciplinary research and education
experience for rising sophomore, junior and senior undergraduates in the area of
Engineered Bioactive Interfaces and Devices. Research in Engineered Bioactive
Interfaces and Devices focuses on the novel design of architectures that
interact with biological systems and promote a desired response. These advanced
architectures have numerous applications including tissue engineering, sensing
systems, and drug delivery. Students will be recruited from various
undergraduate disciplines including engineering, biology, chemistry, physics and
mathematics. Surrounding the University of Kentucky are numerous regional
colleges and universities that have no graduate programs in these areas.
Recruitment at these institutions will encourage students that may not otherwise
pursue an advanced degree. In addition, recruitment for the program will focus
on national institutions that do not have graduate programs. Special efforts
will be made to attract women and minorities to this program by recruiting at
minority institutions and publicizing the program at national meetings of
minority and women organizations such as the Society of Women Engineers and the
National Society of Black Engineers. Students accepted into the program will
work closely with faculty and graduate students who are currently engaged in
collaborative, cross-disciplinary research. The proposed REU program builds on
these successful collaborations and integrates them with other educational
components, such as seminars, workshops, and other technical and social
activities. The students will be exposed to the excitement of interdisciplinary
research and by the end of the program will have an excellent knowledge of what
is involved in graduate research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The area of Engineered Bioactive Interfaces
focuses on the novel design of architectures that interact with biological
systems and promote a desired response. The need for this cross-disciplinary
interaction between investigators working in biological systems and those
creating novel engineered synthetic architectures has long been recognized.
These advanced architectures have numerous applications ranging from tissue
engineering to sensing systems to drug delivery. Successful development of these
systems will depend on expertise not only in developing novel synthetic
architectures through nanotechnology, self-assembly and hybrid systems but also
on the interactions of these interfaces with biological systems such as cells
and proteins. As part of the REU program, the undergraduate students will have
the opportunity to learn about three cross-disciplinary research themes that
form the foundation of the research in this area. These areas include 1) "Novel
Bioactive Architectures", 2) "Cell/Protein Interactions at Interfaces", and 3)
"Integration into Devices". The students will work closely with faculty and
graduate students who are currently engaged in collaborative, cross-disciplinary
research across these three themes further supporting a highly multidisciplinary
team research approach. This REU Program will not only provide the students with
true interdisciplinary mentoring and research training but will also stimulate
the students' interests in Ph.D. careers in science and engineering through
seminars, field trips and interactions with both graduate students and faculty,
and will develop the students independence and confidence through participation
in research and presentations both in house and at scientific meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acknowledgements: Support for this Program is
provided by the National Science Foundation's Division of Engineering Education
and Centers.