* 1460334
* SI2-SSE: Parallel and Adaptive Simulation Infrastructure for Biological Fluid-Structure Interaction
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Boyce Griffith, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 12/31/2015
* USD 75,361.00

The immersed boundary (IB) method is both a mathematical formulation and a
numerical approach to problems of fluid-structure interaction, treating the
specific case in which an elastic structure is immersed in a viscous
incompressible fluid. The IB method was introduced to describe the fluid
dynamics of heart valves, but this methodology has also been applied to a wide
range of problems in biological and non-biological fluid dynamics. The IB method
typically requires high spatial resolution to resolve the viscous boundary
layers at fluid-structure interfaces and, at higher Reynolds numbers, to resolve
vortices shed from such interfaces. To improve the efficiency of the IB method,
the principal investigator has developed an adaptive version of the IB method
that employs block-structured adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) to deploy high
spatial resolution only where it is needed. IBAMR software is a distributed-
memory parallel implementation of this adaptive scheme. The key goal of this
project is to make IBAMR the unifying software framework for users of the IB
method, thereby establishing a community of researchers who employ a common
software infrastructure for biofluids model development and simulation. The
project aims to enhance IBAMR substantially by (1) developing and implementing
implicit IB schemes that will allow for the efficient use of large numerical
timesteps; (2) developing and implementing extensions of the basic IB
methodology, including a new variable-viscosity version of the IB method, and an
existing stochastic version for microscale and nanoscale problems in which
Brownian motion is important; (3) optimizing IBAMR for use with modern as well
as projected-future high performance computing systems comprised of multi-core
compute nodes interconnected by a high-speed network; and (4) developing front-
end tools for model construction, validation, and execution, thereby
facilitating the adoption and use of IBAMR, especially by students and
researchers with limited computational experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the
writhing and coiling of DNA, to the beating and pumping motions of cilia and
flagella, to the flow of blood in the heart and throughout the circulation,
coupled fluid-structure systems are ubiquitous in biology and physiology. This
project aims to enhance significantly the IBAMR software developed by the
principal investigator. IBAMR is a framework for performing computer simulations
of biological fluid mechanics, and this project seeks to establish IBAMR as a
unifying software infrastructure that will serve as a common "language" for
developing and exchanging such models. IBAMR is already being actively used
within several independent research projects that aim to model different aspects
of cardiovascular dynamics, such as platelet aggregation and the fluid dynamics
of natural and prosthetic heart valves. Such simulations promise ultimately to
improve the efficacy of devices and procedures for treating cardiovascular
disease. This software also is being used within projects that study other
problems in biofluid mechanics, including insect flight, aquatic locomotion, and
the dynamics of phytoplankton. By enhancing IBAMR, this project will also
enhance significantly the ability of these and other research groups to
construct detailed biofluids models without requiring those researchers to
develop the significant software infrastructure needed to perform such
simulations. This project will enhance the IBAMR software substantially,
extending the range of problems to which it may be applied, and improving the
methods implemented within the software as well as the efficiency of the
implementation. The work of this project will extend greatly the community of
students and researchers who are able to use IBAMR to model biological fluid-
structure interaction, in part by implementing graphical software tools for
building IB models and running IB simulations.