* 1460699
* REU Site at UW Bothell
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Casey Mann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 02/28/2018
* USD 246,941.00

The REU site at UW Bothell will bring nine undergraduate students per summer to
the University of Washington Bothell for a memorable research experience that
will encourage and prepare them to pursue graduate education and research-
oriented careers. Working closely with three faculty members on projects in knot
theory, tiling theory, optimization, and biomedical analysis that are carefully
chosen to be both accessible and significant, students will see firsthand that
mathematical research can be both fun and interesting. The research experience
will be complemented by professional development presentations, organized
outings, and social activities. The investigators believe that this program will
have a greater effect by recruiting students from underrepresented groups and
from universities where research opportunities are limited; in particular,
American Indians, women, and first generation college students from non-Ph.D.
granting universities will be targeted.

Each summer, the REU site will host three research groups consisting of three
students and one faculty member. The research focus of the three groups will be
from among the following four topics: Knot theory; interesting questions
concerning lattice knots, in the standard cubic lattice as well as other
lattices, such as the face-centered cubic lattice or the simple hexagonal
lattice, will be pursued, including questions involving the minimal sized sphere
that can contain a nontrivial knot (the sphere number of a lattice). Tiling
theory; the problem of finding all convex pentagons that admit tilings of the
plane is a long-standing unsolved problem. Students will develop an algorithm to
search for pentagons that admit i-block transitive tilings of the plane, which
could lead to the discovery of new convex pentagonal tiles that admit tilings of
the plane. Optimization; Students will work to improve numerical optimization
algorithms, including two variants of the modified spectral subgradient method.
This project will also help develop students' scientific computing skills using
MATLAB. Biomedical analysis; Students will develop methods for analyzing data
from ultrasound devices used to detect abnormalities in brain tissue, including
development of two-dimensional cross-correlation techniques to track ultrasound
induced shear-wave propagation (whose speed is proportional to the shear modulus
of tissue), development and testing of first principle models of that
propagation as a function of material properties, and comparison of direct
measures of brain-tissue stiffness.