* 1460932
* REU SITE: Interfacing Sustainable Energy and Materials
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Eric Furst, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2019
* USD 360,577.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
Delaware offers research experiences in multidisciplinary materials research
with energy and sustainability applications to diverse and talented cohorts of
students, including those from minority serving institutions and primarily
undergraduate institutions in the region. The students' research projects have
meaningful and positive impacts on society by developing sustainable energy
technologies, with topics spanning from energy generated from biomass to the
development of next-generation fuel cell membranes. The REU Site aims to enhance
U.S. competitiveness through the development of a diverse and engaged workforce
by enabling students to: acquire a practical and engaging research experience,
develop their interest in pursuing a graduate degree education, understand the
graduate school experience and admissions process, and develop long-term
professional and social connections with fellow participants, graduate students,
and faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site offers opportunities for
undergraduate students to engage in comprehensive research experiences on
cutting-edge topics, using state-of-the-art methods, which reinforce and
strengthen their classroom knowledge and encourage pursuit of graduate
education. During the 10-week experience, students perform materials engineering
and science research projects involving photovoltaic devices, catalytic
materials, or nanomaterials and nanocomposites. The students collaborate with a
faculty mentor in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering or Materials Science and
Engineering along with a trained graduate student and post-doc mentors. They
also participate in a professional development program that includes training in
communications and research methods skills, graduate school information
sessions, and workshops on research ethics and ethics of technologies. The
students are provided with opportunities to present their research results in a
research symposium held at the end of the summer and participate in field trips
to nearby research and development facilities (of chemical, materials, and
energy companies) to augment laboratory research activities with examples of the
translation of science and engineering advances to commercial practice. The
program is partnering with 11 colleges, universities and programs as part of
comprehensive recruitment plan to ensure a diverse and talented applicant pool
for the REU Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site is supported by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the NSF REU program.