* 1460331
* REU Site: Modern Optics in the City of Light, A Collaborative REU Site in Paris
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Herbert Winful, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2019
* USD 397,667.00

An international REU site, Modern Optics in the City of Light, will bring eight
undergraduates to Paris each summer to conduct research, collaboratively, with
faculty at the University of Michigan's Center for Ultrafast Optical Sciences
(CUOS) and several Parisian research institutions; Ecole Polytechnique, Ecole
Nationale de Techniques Avancées (ENSTA), the Institut d'Optique Graduate
School, Université Paris-Sud 11, and Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan. The
students will be put into research teams that include the student, a faculty
member at UM and a faculty member in one of the Parisian institutions. The
students will spend one week in Ann Arbor, followed by nine weeks in Paris. Each
student will keep weekly on-line research diaries to aid in communication with
each full group. A CUOS faculty member or research scientist will accompany the
students to Paris and stay for one week to ensure that the students get a good
start. The students will be housed in a local hotel in Ann Arbor and at the Cité
Universitaire in Paris.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research that will be conducted
will include both on-going collaborative projects between CUOS and the French
institutions and new collaborative projects. The research in all projects will
all involve the use of ultrafast lasers to discover very current, state-of-the
art phenomena in a wide range of fields including; relativistic optics, plasma
physics, materials spectroscopy, nano-machining, patterned biological cell
templating, high power fiber lasers, plasma x-ray sources, dynamics of nano-
magnetic materials, terahertz imaging, biomedical imaging with shaped pulses,
fatigue life studies of materials, as well as other topics.