* 1460507
* REU Site: Program in Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Pui Ho, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2019
* USD 316,925.00

This REU Site award to Colorado State University, located in Fort Collins, CO,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2015- 2017. Students will participate in a program that exposes them to a broad
range of research areas and approaches that constitute the modern discipline of
biochemistry and molecular biology. Students will be involved in their own
research project where they learn how to formulate and test hypotheses, design
and execute experiments, analyze results, and use state-of-the-art techniques
and instrumentation. Students receive a stipend, free housing in a university
residence hall or apartment building, a meal allowance, and an allowance to
defray travel to/from the site. At the end of the program, students will present
their research results orally and through a poster, and produce a final report
in manuscript form. In addition to research, students will engage in activities
that will enhance their knowledge of the environment such as an educational hike
in the Rocky Mountain National Park. Field trips to nearby government labs and
biotech companies as well as workshops on GRE preparation, ethical conduct of
research and scientific careers are also planned. The program will use the BIO
REU Sites common assessment tool to obtain feedback and assessment data for
improving our REU program and all REU programs. Students with limited
opportunities for research and those from groups under-represented in science
are especially encouraged to apply.

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://www.bmb.colostate.edu/undergraduates/reu/program-
description/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Paul Laybourn at
Paul.Laybourn@colostate.edu), the co-PI (Dr. P. Shing Ho at
Shing.Ho@colostate.edu), or Stasi Brazil-Engleman at 970-491-5602 or
reubiochem@colostate.edu.