* 1460938
* Inter-scalar Responses to International Supply Chain Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2021
* James Smith, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 09/30/2021
* USD 237,260.00

Most digital products, such as cell phones, microprocessors and video game
players, rely for their functioning on high charge-holding ores, which include
columbite-tantalite (coltan), cassiterite, gold, and wolframite. The production
and sale of these "digital minerals" has produced important economic
opportunities for people in the developing world, which is where most of the ore
is found. But digital minierals are also called "blood minerals" because illegal
profits from their sale and trade have fueled the rise and perpetuation of some
of the world's most deadly militarized conflicts. The international community
has responded to this problem with new laws, such as Section 1502 of the United
States' Dodd Frank Act, which require that corporations try to monitor mineral
sourcing. The laws are supported by certification schemes that try to assure
that the minerals purchased by international corporations are acquired through
legal supply chains and are conflict free. However, little is known about the
impact of these regulations on the actual workings of the mineral trade or how
they connect with the complexities of the lives, politics, and economies of
local people who, if negatively affected, may try to subvert and evade
regulation. This project seeks to fill this gap with ethnographic field research
in the most important center of digital mineral production, the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the course of a
year, University of California at Davis anthropologist, Dr. James H. Smith, will
conduct ethnographic research with artisanal miners, traders, state officials,
and others in key Congo mining towns in order to understand the effectiveness
and local impacts of these regulatory and certification processes. The
researcher is in an excellent position to carry out this research. He is fluent
in Swahili and has previously conducted significant research on the social
formations that have developed around coltan and cassiterite mining in the towns
where the certification system is now being implemented. The researcher will
collect data with a mix of social science research methods including participant
observation, focus groups, commodity chain analysis, and interviews. The
research will contribute significantly to social science theories of how
globalization processes simultaneously integrate and disconnect people and
nations at multiple scales. Findings from this research also will be important
for helping to improve the viability of mineral regulation programs.