* 1460402
* Collaborative Research: Aerosol Formation from Agricultural Volatile Organic Compounds
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Thomas Poon, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 142,537.00

This project is investigating the potential for agricultural emissions of
nitrogen and sulfur gases from sources such as dairy farms, piggeries, and other
animal production sources to lead to the formation of very small particles in
the atmosphere. Previous studies have shown that gas phase compounds related to
waste management practices from animal agriculture could influence the formation
of atmospheric particles. This project includes laboratory, field and modeling
studies to investigate the environmental fate of nitrogen and sulfur compounds
from these sources.

An environmental chamber will be used to quantify secondary aerosol formation
potentials at different relative humidities and temperatures for select amines
(diethylamine (DEA), trimethylamine (TMA), butylamine (BA), a diamine, or NH3)
oxidized in the presence of an organosulfur compound (methanethiol,
dimethylsulfide (DMS), or dimethyldisulfide (DMDS)) or hydrogen sulfide. The
investigators will perform field sampling of particulate matter and precursors
at agricultural operations in Kentucky at the USDA-Agricultural Research Station
(ARS) laboratory to determine the impact of elevated amine and sulfur
concentrations on atmospheric chemistry.

Kinetic modeling calculations will help clarify the sequence of chemical
reactions responsible for the data seen in laboratory experiments. This will, in
turn, help explain emission rates observed in field observations. The
investigators expect to elucidate the atmospheric oxidation routes for reduced
sulfur compounds and amines. Empirical estimates of the aerosol formation
potential of key agricultural emissions will be developed for use in predicting
local and regional air quality impacts and emissions inventories of the reduced
nitrogen and sulfur species will be developed as an additional input to air
quality models.