* 1460536
* Collaborative Research:  The Mackenzie Mountains--Deformation and Structure of Active Intraplate Orogenesis from Plate Boundary to Craton
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2022
* Michael West, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 03/31/2022
* USD 474,429.00

The seismically active Mackenzie Mountains are an enigmatic range in the
Canadian Subarctic spanning the Yukon and Northwest Territories. Unlike most
mountain ranges, the Mackenzies lie far away from the nearest (Pacific-North
American) plate boundary where mountain-building stresses originate. Somehow,
stress is being transferred for hundreds of miles across the relatively
undeformed Yukon Territory to cause this actively uplifting range to fold up
against the ancient and rigid heart of interior North America. This region is
one of the most geophysically unexplored in all of North America, and
understanding it is a key to a broader understanding of the whole
Alaskan/Canadian tectonic system and how it forms mountains (including the
highest in North America) and generates earthquakes. The Mackenzie Mountain
range is the only actively deforming range in of its type in North America
today, but its deep interior uplift style has similarities to important past
mountain building events that formed the Rocky Mountain Cordillera that runs
through much of the North American West, including major provinces of the U.S.
Rocky Mountains in Colorado, Wyoming, and Montana. The project will produce new
insight into the past and present mountain-building processes of the region by
imaging the deep geological and seismic structure and measuring the ongoing
surface deformation, and by interpreting these new data in a full geological
context. To do this, students and faculty from Colorado State University and the
University of Alaska?Fairbanks will deploy an array of forty broadband
seismometers, and 3 new continuous GPS instruments augmented with campaign
surveys at 25 more sites, transecting the wilderness heart of the Mackenzie
Mountains for over 1000 km. This project will be undertaken in partnership with
Yukon College, a two-year college, to engage undergraduates in research and
fieldwork, and to expose them to new research opportunities and career insights
beyond which are common for students in the Yukon and Northwest Territories.
Furthermore, we will, for the first time, be able to emplace seismometers and
GPS instruments near the zones of active seismicity, to better locate regions of
active faulting. While this area is sparsely populated, understanding seismic
risk here is essential for protecting critical infrastructure such as oil and
gas pipelines and mine waste impoundments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mackenzie
Mountains are actively deforming in a zone far inboard from the main plate
boundary (Yakutat terrane), while the region between the plate boundary and the
mountains is relatively aseismic. Early uplift of the Mackenzie Mountains
suggests that inherited lithosphere-scale terrane boundaries may also play a
role in their location. A prevailing hypothesis (Mazzotti and Hyndman, 2002) to
explain the anomalous characteristics of the Mackenzie Mountains is that lateral
transport in the relatively aseismic zone occurs along a crustal or
lithospheric-scale detachment, with little deformation between the Yakutat
indentor and the eventual inboard collision with the craton. Constraining
surface strain from GPS in association with seismic tomography and anisotropy
studies will enable us to test/refine/refute this hypothesis for intraplate
stress transfer and to understand the geometry and nature of interaction between
mobile lithosphere and the craton in much more detail than has been previously
possible in this remote area. This project will test a number of predictions
based on this prevailing model, related to: viscosity, lithosphere-scale
structure, evidence for crustal/lithosphere scale detachment, the transition
between mobile and cratonic lithosphere, the partitioning of strain between the
mobile belt and craton, and the influences and depth extent of major faults
(i.e., the Tintina fault), and the associations between high heat flow and
volcanism and lithosphere through upper mantle structure. As an integral part of
the project, the research team will partner with Yukon College to incorporate
First Nations and other local students in fieldwork, research and outreach, and
to contribute to geophysical career and scientific opportunities and broad
awareness for students at that institution. We will involve an undergraduate
student at University of Alaska Fairbanks with fieldwork and encourage the
student to follow this up with undergraduate research using the data. Other
institutional broader impacts include links to Canadian, French, and Australian
research partners, as well as linking to an ongoing (IRIS (Incorporated Research
Institutions for Seismology) undergraduate intern-associated) seismicity
analysis partnership with the United State Geologic Survey, where the intern is
also a possible candidate for eventual graduate student engagement in this
project, and the education of two graduate students. Furthermore, the new
instrumentation will provide first-order constraints on regions of active
faulting and seismic hazard, important for preventing industrial accidents and
their associated environmental impacts. Finally, we will integrate our surface
wave research into classroom materials for use at our institutions and to be
made publically available as part of an IRIS Education and Public Outreach
initiative.