* 1460369
* Investigating The Relationship Between Climate Change And Social Organization In A Small Scale Society
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Douglas Kennett, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 103,058.00

One of the most pressing issues in modern times is the effect that climate
change will have on populations. Archaeological studies are critical for
understanding these issues, as they offer important time depth to understand how
societies respond and adapt to environmental stress. This study examines the
relationship between "collapse", including the breakdown of political systems
and the abandonment of urban centers, with climate change in the Maya Lowlands.
Previous research has documented climatic drying from AD 660-1100, with
intervals of severe multi-decadal drought identified in the ninth through
eleventh centuries. This timeframe generally correlates with the "Classic Maya
collapse" between AD 750-1000. It is thought that extended episodes of low
precipitation caused crop failures that undermined economic and political
systems throughout the region. However, current archaeological studies are based
on ceramic chronologies that often span hundreds of years and hinder clear
identification of temporal relationships. The researchers will develop a high-
resolution radiocarbon chronology to identify chronological correlations between
periods of collapse and drought or lack thereof. Within the broader context,
this project will help to understand the interactions between demography, the
disintegration of political systems in the Maya lowlands, and climate change.
The research will contribute to training undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers, in addition to offering educational opportunities for
local Maya communities in Belize.

This project will help to answer several important questions. Does political
collapse and abandonment at the end of the Classic period correlate with
extended drought episodes? Did some centers persist longer during droughts than
others? What environmental or cultural adaptations may have helped populations
to adapt to increasing aridity? Excavations at two archaeological sites in the
central Maya Lowlands will focus on expanding the existing sample of burial and
animal bone samples for dating. Results from the radiocarbon dates will be
compared with a precisely dated speleothem record from southern Belize to test
for temporal relationships between drought and collapse. Osteological data from
burials will also be compared with these patterns to identify increased
nutritional deficiencies that may have been caused by famine from agricultural
shortages. Together, this interdisciplinary scientific work will examine whether
multi-decadal droughts contributed to agricultural failure, the breakdown of
political systems, and the abandonment of Classic Maya urban centers.