* 1460787
* Long-term Perspectives on Human-River Dynamics at the Confluence of the Illinois and Mississippi Rivers: Interdisciplinary Research for Students in Ecology and Archeology
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Jane Buikstra, Center For American Archeology
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 02/29/2020
* USD 275,111.00

This project is supported under the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program, which is an NSF-wide program although each Directorate
administers its own REU Site competition. This program supports active research
participation by undergraduate students in an effort to introduce them to
scientific research so as to encourage their continued engagement in the
nation's scientific research and development enterprise. REU projects involve
students in meaningful ways in ongoing research programs or in research projects
designed especially for the purpose. The REU program is a major contributor to
the NSF's goal of developing a diverse, internationally competitive, and
globally-engaged science and engineering workforce. The Social, Behavioral and
Economic (SBE) sciences Directorate awarded this REU Site grant to the Center
for American Archaeology with the goal of developing critical thinking
proficiency, STEM skills, and scientific literacy that are necessary for
undergraduate students to have successful careers in science and/or to make
informed contributions to public dialogues about science. This REU Site provides
instruction and practical experiences in 1) scientific problem-solving and
hypothesis-testing; 2) research design and implementation; 3) data collection
and analysis; 4) interpretation of results; and 5) professional and public
communication of scientific knowledge within the context of a collaborative,
multi-year interdisciplinary archeological/ecological project in which each
student is involved for one year. The scientific process is best taught through
immersive research experiences: thus, this REU site trains future scientists and
scientifically savvy citizens in essential collaboration skills and the ways in
which today's problems are informed through interdisciplinary research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site, with a unique interdisciplinary focus on
anthropological and ecological sciences, immerses undergraduate students in
problem-oriented research and allows students to confront challenges inherit to
both fields while teaching them to be critical evaluators of scientific
information and preparing them for careers in the sciences. The aforementioned
competencies are gained through participation in collaborative interdisciplinary
archeological and ecological research investigating deep-time human-ecosystem
interactions at the confluence of the Mississippi and Illinois rivers.
Integrating deep-time perspectives within current regional ecological models is
keenly important as humans escalate modifications of riverine ecosystems. Human
engagement with riverine systems and associated environments extends over
millennia, yet our measurement of human impacts encompasses at most the late
19th century to the present. This leaves a markedly foreshortened perspective
against which to measure effects of industrial farming, urban development,
climate change, invasive species introductions, and other anthropogenic factors,
on riverine ecosystems. Ecological science in general, as well as our
understanding of river ecosystems, is characterized by an underdeveloped
appreciation for the long-term presence of humans in this rich riverine
landscape. The program is open to all college students, while targeting
community college students and others with little experience or access to
research opportunities. Recruitment is facilitated through institutional ties
with Lewis &amp; Clark Community College as the lead institution in a nine
community college consortium located in eight states along the Mississippi River
region.