* 1460344
* Early Career Choice, Funding Variation and Scientific Output
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Joshua Graff Zivin, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2018
* USD 375,786.00

Young life science researchers, after completion of their post-doctoral
apprenticeship, may elect to begin their careers by either entering academia, or
by joining biotechnology or pharmaceutical firms. These choices clearly depend
upon scientist?s individual preferences for salary and degree of research
autonomy. However career choice is also affected by external constraints such as
the availability of, and competition for, research funding. Historically the
amount of public research funding has changed over time reflecting congressional
priorities. This project will provide the first quantitative evidence on the
heretofore hidden costs and potential benefits of variability in the public
funding of science research. Research funding variability may lead to a
misallocation of talent and reforms that create more certainty in the budget
allocation process could generate greater social benefits at lower costs. At the
same time, research funding variability may increase the transmission of
knowledge between academia and industry with potentially important policy
implications for advancing scientific innovation, improving health and promoting
economic growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exogenous variation in the availability
of public funding for research (both over time and across fields) is used to
examine the initial career choice of recipients of elite postdoctoral
fellowships in biology. These career choice constraints are then used in an
instrumental variables framework to estimate the long-run consequences of this
initial career choice, with a focus on both patent and publication outcomes. The
degree to which scarce public R&amp;D funding leads to positive productivity
shocks for private sector firms who can more readily draw from the academic
elite to staff their laboratories will also be directly assessed.&lt;br/&gt;