* 1460862
* REU Site: Summer Research in Chemistry and Biochemsitry at Miami University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Carole Dabney-Smith, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

In this project funded by the Research Experience for Undergraduate Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Carole Dabney-Smith and colleagues at Miami
University in Oxford, Ohio provide students with extensive, independent research
experiences that are designed to develop and refine students' experimental
skills and enhance their ability to work as part of a research team. The
combination of active research, professional development, and cohort-building
will provide the next generation of scientists with a well rounded experience
and strong encouragement to continue in one of many areas of science as a
career.

The project focuses on students underrepresented in chemistry and/or those who
do not have opportunities for research at their home institution. Students will
choose from research projects in analytical, biological, inorganic, organic,
physical chemistry, and chemistry education research, with most projects being
interdisciplinary, such as in the areas of bioanalytical, bio-inorganic,
biophysical, and nanotechnology. Students will also participate in sessions that
will cover a number of topics associated with professional development including
(i) the development of research proposals and scientific presentations, (ii)
understanding ethics in science and (iii) available career paths in chemistry
and biochemistry, including science policy. Activities are designed to prepare
students for various job opportunities for chemists and to build a strong
cohort. Many undergraduate chemistry and biochemistry students often lack
exposure to scientific research career opportunities or opportunities to apply
critical thinking skills to open-ended research. The broader impacts of Miami
University's Chemistry and Biochemistry REU program are to promote research in
chemistry and biochemistry as a career, especially for students underrepresented
in the physical sciences.