* 1460050
* IRES: Closing Oceans: Assessing the Dynamics of Turkish suture zones
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2015,09/30/2021
* J. Richard Kyle, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 09/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

IRES: Closing Oceans: Assessing the Dynamics of Turkish suture
zones&lt;br/&gt;PI: Catlos, co-PI: Elliott, Kyle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART
1:&lt;br/&gt;This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) program
provides four weeks of geological field-based research and training experiences
across Turkey for 12 US students. Over the next 3 years, these students will
investigate suture zones,i.e.locations where ancient ocean basins closed across
the country. Turkey contains a large number of these zones, which are key
locations used by geologists to understand how continents grow. Continental
growth is considered one of the most important problems facing Earth Scientists,
yet models for the process are debated, due in part to a lack of geologic
record. Because of its extensive outcrops of ancient rocks associated with
suture zones, Turkey is an ideal location to study this
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRES program has societal value, as Turkey's
suture zones can be associated with important ore and mineral resources or are
regions of major, present-day geologic hazards. Older faults that worked to
close the ocean basins today form regions of active earthquake activity or have
generated topography that leads to large landslides. Understanding the locations
and ages of Turkey's ancient suture zones has an impact on diverse topics,
including mineral exploration and hazard reduction. This proposal includes
partnerships with faculty at three Turkish universities (Dokuz Eylul University,
Middle East Technical University, and Karadeniz Technical University) who will
serve as mentors. Students chosen to participate are underrepresented in the
geosciences and are selected via Jackson School and UT Austin outreach programs.
Students will partner with Turkish researchers to explore a range of geological
concepts discussed in their courses while making a significant impact on our
understanding of processes related to the formation of continental crust.
Students will apply innovative methods to address scientific questions involving
both the timing and impacts of Turkey's suture zones, including electronic-based
field mapping techniques and new geochemical approaches. This in turn will lead
to insight into how the past geological history of Turkey impacts its present
day concerns, including the development of economically important resources and
hazard mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART
2:&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how continents grow is recognized as one of the most
important geodynamic problems facing Earth Scientists. Models for the process
are debated, due in part to a lack of exposure of the geologic record. Because
of its extensive exposures of ancient ocean suture zones and crustal fragments,
Turkey is an ideal location to study this process. This International Research
Experiences for Students (IRES) program provides four weeks of geological field-
based research and training experiences across Turkey for 12 US students. Over
the next 3 years, these students will investigate the arc accretion processes
that occurred in Turkey during the closure of branches of ancient ocean
basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the IRES program has societal value,
as paleogeographic reconstructions are used to identify important economic
resources that formed during specific times in Earth's history and assess
geologic hazards that result due to reactivation of older faults or mass
movement of rocks. This proposal includes partnerships with faculty at 3 Turkish
universities (Dokuz Eylul University, Middle East Technical University, and
Karadeniz Technical University) who will serve as mentors. Students chosen to
participate are underrepresented in the geosciences and are selected via Jackson
School and UT Austin outreach programs. Students will partner with Turkish
researchers to explore a multidisciplinary range of geological concepts
discussed in their courses while making a significant impact on our
understanding of processes related to the formation of continental crust.
Students will apply new and innovative field mapping, geochemical, and
geochronological methods, lending greater insight into the history and mechanics
of the assembly of Turkey.