* 1460988
* REU Site: Advanced Materials and Manufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Carol Barry, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 356,668.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site offers
research opportunities and a professional development program that includes
communication skills and a new program on workplace skills to outstanding
students from five Massachusetts community colleges. The students' research
projects will focus on areas that are key to the competitive position of our
nation: novel additive manufacturing technologies, nanomanufacturing processes,
sustainable (green) materials for manufacturing, and easily-manufactured
flexible electronics. This cross-disciplinary research encompasses the
University's Nanomanufacturing Center's HEROES Initiative (a collaboration
between the University and the Natick Soldier Research and Development
Engineering Center), and the Raytheon-UMass Lowell Research Institute (a
collaboration between the University and Raytheon Corporation). Through the REU
Site program, the students will develop networks that allow them to: (1) obtain
better research and cooperative learning positions, (2) further extend their
professional networks, and (3) seriously consider graduate programs in science
and engineering. These connections are critical for the advancement of lower
income community college students who are less likely to have family and friends
in professional positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site offers research opportunities in
advanced materials and manufacturing to outstanding students from five
Massachusetts community colleges. Over 10 weeks, these students will perform a
research project in (1) novel additive manufacturing technologies, specifically
the new materials, processes, and equipment required for improved performance
and expanded applications of rapid manufacturing processes; (2)
nanomanufacturing research, including roll-to-roll assembly, transfer, and
imprinting (embossing) processes and applications of these and other multiscale
manufacturing processes to applications such as omniphobic surfaces and
metamaterials; (3) advanced materials, such as creation of sustainable (green)
materials for new and existing manufacturing processes; and (4) materials,
design, and manufacturing for flexible electronics. This cross-disciplinary
research currently encompasses faculty from Chemical, Electrical, Mechanical,
and Plastics Engineering as well as the University's Nanomanufacturing Center,
HEROES Initiative, and the Raytheon-UMass Lowell Research Institute. In
addition, the students will collaborate with trained graduate student mentors;
participate in a professional development program that includes communication
skills and a new program on workplace skills; and be provided with opportunities
to present their research results at technical conferences and to access to
other University and professional programs. The REU program will provide the
community students with similar experiential learning and networking
opportunities that are offered incoming freshmen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program is supported by the
National Science Foundation's Division of Engineering Education and Centers
(EEC).