* 1460188
* Collaborative Research: SHINE: Data-constrained Simulations of Coronal Mass Ejection Initiation and Propagation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Jie Zhang, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Irfan S. Azeem
* 06/30/2018
* USD 162,528.00

This project addresses coronal mass ejections (CMEs) which are violent
expulsions of plasma from the Sun that contribute to space weather. It is vital
to understand how these eruptions happen and how they propagate towards Earth in
order to accurately predict their behavior. The current fleet of solar and space
observatories provides unprecedented temporal and spatial coverage of the
surface magnetic field, extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and X-ray coronal structures.
In this study, data-constrained simulations of CME initiation and propagation
will be performed starting from realistic initial conditions for the magnetic
field and plasma of an active region that contains a flux rope on the verge of
eruption. These simulations will provide a unique opportunity to investigate the
processes behind the eruption and early development of CMEs. The project has the
following science objectives: 1) Develop models of CME initiation that are
highly constrained by observations in order to study the early development
phases of CMEs; 2) Constrain CME properties near the Sun (kinetics, morphology,
shock and compression region parameters) based on the flux rope properties and
the ambient coronal field, and 3) Reproduce the observed three-part and two-
front structure of CMEs and their in situ properties using data-constrained
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations. Data-constrained non-linear force-free
field (NLFFF) models of observed erupting active regions will be used as initial
conditions to the Space Weather Modeling Framework (SWMF) global MHD code. The
initial conditions on the active region and flux rope plasma will also be
constrained by data using recently developed analysis techniques. These tools
will be used to propagate more realistic CMEs to 1AU. The properties of the
simulated CMEs (direction, velocity, acceleration, morphology, and shock-driving
capability) will be compared with all available observations (coronal EUV and
X-ray, white-light and in situ data).