* 1460861
* REU Site: Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences - Undergraduate Research Experience in the Gulf of Maine and the World Ocean
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2022
* David Fields, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2022
* USD 651,602.00

Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, in West Boothbay Harbor - Maine, plans to
implement an REU site that will support 10 students each year, for the next 5
years. This REU program will combine group learning and guided individual
research to help students address societal issues concerning the oceans. The
goals of this REU Program are i) to provide undergraduate students from around
the United States mentoring and access to high quality, hands on research
opportunities in Oceanography and the opportunity to understand its
interdisciplinary nature, ii) improve the capability and confidence of students
to learn independently, iii) help to prepare undergraduates for their
professional careers, and iv) increase the participation of underrepresented
minorities in marine science careers. REU students will be incorporated into
research groups consisting of technicians, post-docs, and junior and senior
scientists, gaining exposure to the suite of activities and personalities
involved in a science career. The recruitment goal is to engage students from
all groups underrepresented in ocean sciences, such that cohorts are ~ 40%
underrepresented students (including 1st generation college students). To
achieve the recruitment goals, the principal investigator will work with partner
organizations, like the Institute for Broadening Participation and Maine
Community College System. Program content and delivery will continually be
refined based on feedback from students and mentors in the form of pre-program,
midpoint and final evaluations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a group, students will
participate in a sampling cruise on the local estuary, and attend weekly
meetings to learn the fundamentals of the scientific process, such as how to
form testable hypotheses, critically evaluate data, and present information in a
scientific manner to their peers and to the public. Students will attend an
ethics in science discussion, a laboratory safety course with risk assessment
training and a concept mapping workshop during the early stages of their
project. Students participate in and become familiar with public outreach
through attendance at Bigelow's weekly Caf√© Scientifique talks (for the general
public), participation in the Lab's Open House and frequent public tours.