* 1460920
* REU/RET Site: Penn State REU and RET in Interdisciplinary Materials Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Jorge Sofo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL PART: It is clear that the traditional disciplinary boundaries
between chemistry, physics, and engineering are becoming blurred as modern
research requires the expertise of multiple disciplines and collaborative
research to be successful. This Research Experience for Undergraduates and
Teachers in Interdisciplinary Materials Physics is jointly hosted by the Physics
Department and the Center for Nanoscale Science (a DMR Materials Research
Science and Engineering Center) at Penn State. It will engage a highly diverse
group of 17 undergraduate students and 6 teachers each year in hands-on mentored
research within the fields of materials physics and interdisciplinary materials.
Students and teachers will learn and apply cutting-edge scientific techniques
and experience the challenges and rewards of working in a collaborative,
interdisciplinary research environment. They will learn and practice important
skills for conveying science and its discoveries through professional
development activities that include scientific seminars, professional networking
events, and outreach activities. Outside the lab, the Site will expose students
to the excitement of interdisciplinary research through facilities tours,
research seminars, and networking events. Teachers will gain material science
knowledge and transfer their experiences back to their students, influencing
them and their communities through the development of teaching resources with
their peers and Penn State faculty. Students will be inspired to pursue careers
in science and engineering, subsequently increasing representation in science
from underrepresented groups, including minorities and women.

TECHNICAL PART: Interdisciplinary Materials Physics is a broad range of research
topics spanning from the design, creation, and characterization of novel
materials to the theoretical understanding of atomic interactions within
materials. Students will participate in a 10 week mentored research experience
in condensed matter and materials physics or in interdisciplinary nano-materials
conducted in labs within Penn State's Physics Department or the cross-
disciplinary cohort of labs participating in the Center for Nanoscale Science.
Research topics will span studies in complex materials, thin films,
superconductivity, semi-conductors, magnetism, and novel properties of nanoscale
structures. To complement their research training, students will engage in
professional development focusing on the benefits of interdisciplinary science
and on communicating science to both professional and public audiences. The
culmination of their research experiences will be to present their work at a
cross-disciplinary undergraduate research symposium at Penn State.