* 1460151
* REU Site: California State University, Fresno Research Experiences in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Oscar Vega, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 05/31/2019
* USD 219,996.00

The California State University, Fresno summer REU will serve 24 students during
the summers of 2016-2018. The objectives of the program are: (1) to involve and
engage undergraduate students in research in mathematics; (2) to increase the
involvement of underrepresented and minority students in such research and to
encourage them to consider attending graduate school; and (3) to afford students
from institutions with limited research opportunities the chance to experience
mathematics research. Students will work in pairs on research problems of
current interest, often building on work completed by past participants of the
program. Each year, a senior faculty mentor will pair up with a junior mentor in
supervising student research, so as to broaden the impact of mentoring and
collaboration. The program will continue to provide its participants with a
supportive and welcoming environment, in which students are challenged to grow
academically as well as professionally. To this end the program will provide
workshops on improving writing and speaking skills, research methods, and
general attributes of academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research areas for this
cycle will be knot theory, complex analysis, analytic number theory, statistics,
finite geometry and combinatorics, and applied mathematics. More explicitly,
participants will study knot and link invariants, the distribution of zeros of
entire functions, exact zero loci of polynomial families whose generating
function is rational, volatility modeling, minimal dominating sets and blocking
sets in finite geometries, and numerical implementations of computing
algorithms. Students will give weekly presentations, and will complete three
final products: a polished 20 minute talk, a professional poster, and an article
quality research report. Guest speakers will give lectures on topics intended to
broaden students' mathematical horizons, and will engage program participants in
scientific discourse, both encouraging students to delve deeper into their
research topic, and validating their efforts to date. The Fresno State REU will
continue to participate in the NSF REU program-wide effort to involve
underrepresented minority students in research and to inform all students about
career opportunities available to them both in academia and otherwise. Students
will leave the program having studied a small area of mathematics deeply, having
improved their oral and written skills, having made new friends and connections,
and ready to be further challenged as an undergraduate student, graduate
student, or industry professional.