* 1460143
* IRES: U.S.-Netherlands Forensic Research Collaboration in Cultural Heritage Science
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Kenneth Shull, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2018
* USD 247,034.00

Scientific research in cultural heritage is a powerful vehicle for
interdisciplinary, integrated and global science training in STEM graduate and
undergraduate education and consistently exceeds STEM benchmarks of gender
inclusion. This U.S.-Netherlands International Research Experience for Students
(IRES) project supports three student cohorts, each consisting of one
undergraduate and four graduate students, for research visits to the Netherlands
to study the materials, structures and aging of cultural heritage artifacts. The
program approaches the analysis of art as a way to provide unique research and
educational experiences for U.S. student participants in chemistry, materials
science, electrical engineering, and computer science. Led by Principal
Investigator, Marc Walton, the cooperative activities with Dutch counterparts
are designed to provide access to advanced infrastructure for interdisciplinary
cultural heritage science while fostering long-term partnerships between
recognized centers of excellence in the U.S. and the Netherlands. The goal is to
advance our understanding of change in complex systems where results may lead to
improvements in the way we access, interpret, and care for art. Where
successful, resulting development of advanced technologies for detection of
trace colorants, stand-off chemical sensing, and empirical and predictive models
of materials alteration and change, at multiple time scales, can be important
drivers for innovation in fields that range from forensics and security to high
performance coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eight-week IRES experience will
be centered at the Atelier Building (Ateliergebouw) in Amsterdam, a core
facility that brings together the University of Amsterdam, the Rijksmuseum, the
scientific research arm of the Cultural Heritage Agency of the Netherlands, the
Delft University of Technology, and the Netherlands Forensic Institute. In
addition to the Dutch expert mentors from these institutions, collaborations
with scientists at major U.S. museums such as The Art Institute of Chicago, The
Metropolitan Museum of Art and the National Gallery in Washington, D.C., will
ensure timely focus to the IRES students' examination of technical questions
related to identifying and characterizing important works of art. With access to
cultural heritage scientists who are leaders in their field, the IRES
participants are expected to contribute to the central theme of understanding
and monitoring change in complex systems, including these areas: 1)
microanalytical tools in art and forensics, 2) change and reactivity in complex
paint systems, and 3) imaging and data mining. Upon return to the U.S., IRES
participants are to present the results of their work at the Gordon Research
Seminars on Scientific Methods in Cultural Heritage Research and at professional
meetings in the sciences and in conservation. Overall, this IRES will contribute
to a globally engaged U.S. science and engineering workforce, capable of
excelling in interdisciplinary and international research environments, where
science can be transformative.