* 1460686
* REU Site:   Fall Semester Student Research in Oceanography and Marine Science at BIOS
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Andrew Peters, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 12/31/2018
* USD 408,867.00

The Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS) will host a Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) program located at the BIOS marine research station in
Bermuda. The program is held during the fall semester (12 weeks) and introduces
eight undergraduate students per year to the techniques, skills and intellectual
processes required to conduct research in oceanography and the marine sciences.
Many REU research projects fall within the framework of the numerous long-term
oceanographic programs at BIOS, but students also have opportunities to focus on
near-shore processes including coral reef ecology, marine biodiversity,
molecular biology, marine and atmospheric pollution and climate change. All REU
students, regardless of project, have the opportunity to join BIOS scientists
for a research cruise aboard the R/V Atlantic Explorer. BIOS has an active
education program that insures a diverse graduate student population, providing
REU students with opportunities to interact with visiting students from Canada,
the USA and the UK. Students also meet local scientists from the Bermuda
Government and from industry. Students leave the program better prepared to
pursue professional careers and/or graduate programs by virtue of conducting
mentored research projects including the design, implementation, analysis, and
final write-up.