* 1460190
* SHINE: Instabilities Driven by Anisotropic Ion and Electron Beams in the Solar Wind: Analytical Theory, Numerical Simulations, and In-Situ Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Kai Germaschewski, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 05/31/2020
* USD 357,000.00

This 3-year SHINE project aims to apply a fundamental approach to tackle plasma
instabilities driven by anisotropic ion and electron beams in the solar wind,
and to improve our understanding of micro-instabilities in general. The project
will combine the analysis of linear and nonlinear effects, and create a
multidisciplinary collaboration among experts in theory, numerical simulation,
and observation, with relevance to many plasma systems. The research project
will support two young researchers in early phases of their careers and one
undergraduate student. The project team will engage local schools within the
University of New Hampshire's Upward Bound program, which is designed to help
high-school students from low-income families and/or first-generation potential
college students succeed in higher education. This activity will provide the
students with a unique opportunity to explore the field of space science. The
research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS
Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SHINE project involves an integrated and
multidisciplinary four-step research program to elucidate the interplay between
anisotropies and beams in the distribution functions of both ions and electrons
in the solar wind by means of analytical theory, numerical studies, and in-situ
observations. The project team will formulate a generalized theory for the
instability thresholds of anisotropic and beamed ions and electrons in the solar
wind by building on previously developed methods. Numerical solutions of the
hot-plasma dispersion relation will allow the project team to verify the
analytical findings. The project activities will include hybrid simulations to
investigate the nonlinear evolution of the ion instabilities. In the case of
electron-driven instabilities, a full particle-in-cell code will help the team
investigate the nonlinear evolution of the plasma and the excited waves. The
theoretical and numerical results from this project will be compared with
observations of plasma and wave properties in the solar wind. The project
efforts will be focused on answering the following key scientific question: what
determines the thresholds and nonlinear evolution of instabilities driven by
anisotropic ion and electron beams in the solar wind? The answer to this
question is of paramount interest to the heliophysics community, since physics-
driven solar-wind models critically depend on a detailed understanding of the
relevant microphysical processes that regulate non-thermal features in the ion
and electron distribution functions.