* 1460971
* REU Site: Enhancing Undergraduate Experience in Mobile Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Jie Wu, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 04/30/2019
* USD 342,525.00

This award funds a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Temple
University. Each summer a cohort of undergraduate students will work with Temple
faculty in small groups to design, implement, and evaluate research projects
involving mobile computing, wireless communication, and cloud computing. Mobile
cloud computing is an emerging research area and of interest to students as well
as industry. The research projects involve small, mobile devices such as
smartphones empowered by the abundant resources of the cloud for exploration of
novel applications such as crowdsourcing and participatory sensing. Thus the
students and researchers have the opportunity to explore problems that are
important and timely and relevant to all our citizens. This project builds human
capacity in computing and communications research and knowledge. The program
will provide experiences to undergraduate students that may influence their
choices about further education and future careers and continue to give them
confidence to pursue these choices and thus increase the size and diversity of
the scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site will focus on
recruiting students from 2 and 4 year institutions near Philadelphia and will
particularly seek students from groups under-represented in computing fields.
The students will participate in professional development activities that make
them more aware of graduate school and professional aspects of a computing
career. Students will also have access to and internal supercomputer and cloud
cluster. Thus the students will be able to use the state-of-the-art facilities
available at the university and interact with an experienced faculty team to
conduct challenging and timely research on emerging technologies that are
becoming pervasive in our society.