* 1460800
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Estuarine and Coastal Sciences at Mote Marine Laboratory
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Emily Hall, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2018
* USD 244,777.00

The Mote Marine Laboratory will continue to host a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site located at their campus in Sarasota, FL. The program
will support internships for a group of ten students every summer during a 10
week research and professional training experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mote
offers a diverse array of research in ocean sciences and emphasizes the
essential interconnectedness of varied disciplines towards the common goal of
fostering ocean health. Students are paired with Mote researchers from 24
research programs and conduct mentored research projects on one of several major
threats to coastal habitats: aquatic pollution, natural toxins, habitat
alteration, animal behavior due to habitat change, coral reef decline, ocean
acidification, and climate change. In addition to research skills, students gain
valuable experience in scientific communication by developing and presenting
research proposals for independent projects and reporting findings in poster
presentations. Career guidance on grantsmanship, scientific writing, presenting
poster and oral research talks, and pursuing graduate study in the Ocean
Sciences is provided in student-centered discussion groups. Students are also
exposed to a broader range of topics in coastal and estuarine sciences through
research seminars presented by Mote staff, visiting scientists, and Mote REU
Program alumni. Participants are encouraged to present research findings in
peer-reviewed literature and/or at professional conferences.