* 1460776
* REU Site: Earth, Wind, and Fire: Sustainable Energy in the 21st Century
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Larry Erickson, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2019
* USD 361,264.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:

This REU site will engage ten undergraduate students each summer in research on
sustainable energy, including projects on wind, solar and bioenergy. This site
will provide a rich research experience focused on the personal and professional
development of the participants. Students will gain not only the technical
abilities required to conduct research in sustainable energy, but will also
become aware of the social and political issues associated with sustainable
energy. By being involved in a team outreach project on sustainable energy,
students will learn to communicate their research to broad audiences and about
how their research fits into society. The REU site will also enhance the
participation of students from underrepresented groups in research and in
graduate school.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:

This REU site will engage ten undergraduate students in research on sustainable
energy each summer. The objectives of this REU site are to help students develop
the technical skills necessary to conduct research on sustainable energy, an
understanding of sustainability as an applied, multidisciplinary field, the
ability to engage in life-long learning, and the ability to communicate
engineering and science topics to K-12 students and public audiences. The REU
site will also enhance recruitment of students, particularly students from
underrepresented minorities, into graduate studies in science and engineering.
Towards meeting these objectives, participants will conduct research on
biofuels, wind and solar energy, rechargeable batteries, small renewal energy
systems, and algae. They will orally present the results of their research in a
poster at a summer-ending research symposium. In addition to their research,
students will participate in weekly seminars on sustainability and professional
development. They will attend field trips to see a wind farm and an ethanol
plant, and be engaged in a number of community building activities (e.g., a
visit to the Konza Prairie). A final key component of this project will be the
inclusion of a team outreach project related to sustainability. In this project,
groups of students will interact with K-12 students and public audiences.

Support from the Division of Engineering Education and Centers is gratefully
acknowledged.