* 1460604
* How prefrontal cortex augments reinforcement learning
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Anne Collins, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 01/31/2019
* USD 592,520.00

This research project investigates the nature of interactions between different
brain regions involved in how people learn and control their actions.
Theoretical models and empirical data suggest that the prefrontal cortex (PFC)
and basal ganglia (BG) interact in these types of motivated behavior, and that
the neurochemical dopamine plays a central role in both of these brain regions.
However, it has been difficult to isolate the separable contributions of these
different brain systems to learning. Dr. Frank and colleagues will investigate
how PFC augments human reinforcement learning by leveraging its well-studied
roles in working memory, cognitive control, abstraction, and rule
representation. This work has potential to substantially advance our
understanding of how humans are able to regulate their behaviors as a function
of motivation and cognitive control. Learning impairments are prevalent in many
psychiatric disorders. While in some cases, such as Parkinson's disease, the
mechanisms involved are relatively well understood, in others, such as
schizophrenia, the underlying deficits are poorly characterized. It is crucial
to properly isolate different components contributing to learning, so as to
appropriately relate them to separable mechanisms giving rise to those deficits.
If learning is considered as a unitary system, learning deficits that arise due
to impairments in one process and brain system may be mistakenly attributed to
the other system and lead to erroneous conclusions. Following the same approach
will shed light on the actual cause of learning impairments. As such, this
research has the potential to identify mechanisms that explain how disruption of
such brain circuitry leads to disorders in motivated behavior, cognitive
control, and impulsivity. Similarly, developmental learning disabilities may
involve a deficit in abstraction and generalization. The aim is to better
understand the underlying mechanisms and computations needed for such functions.
Drs. Frank and Collins will also provide mentoring on computational and data
analytic methods for under-represented women in the STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computerized experimental tasks will manipulate factors
thought to depend on PFC function, including working memory load and the degree
to which the discovery of coherent rules can be used to speed learning. Dr.
Frank and colleagues use mathematical modeling to separately estimate the
contributions of PFC function from that of basic BG processes. Using
electroencephalography (EEG), the investigators will measure human participants'
brain waves associated with PFC activity while they perform these tasks. Brain
wave activity is expected to predict cognitive performance on these tasks.
Critically, this brain-behavior relationship is expected to differ as a function
of genetic variants that reflect differences in dopamine function in PFC and BG.
Another study will directly manipulate dopamine (pharmacologically) in order to
determine how these brain and behavior relationships are causally altered by
dopamine levels. In all of these studies the investigators use detailed
mathematical models to isolate specific brain-behavior relationships guided by
contemporary theory. It is expected that genetic variants and pharmacological
manipulations will affect the way that the brain learns from decision outcomes
and controls actions.