* 1460735
* REU Site: Molecular Biosciences at the University of Oregon
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Peter O'Day, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 359,999.00

This REU Site award to the University of Oregon, in Eugene, OR, will support the
training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2015-2017. The REU
provides closely mentored cutting edge research projects in a rich active
learning environment for interns. Student interns receive research training in
methodologies, presentation, critical thinking, and experimental design. The
scientific focus of the REU Site is in molecular biosciences. Research areas
include molecular biology, biochemistry, molecular neuroscience, molecular
evolution, microbiology, developmental biology, genomics, structural biology &
biophysics, bioinformatics, molecular genetics, cell biology, and computational
biology. Program features include training in responsible conduct of research,
graduate school counseling, training in oral and written scientific
communication, accessing, processing, and evaluating scientific literature, and
informal and formal presentation of research outcomes. Weekly professional
development workshops, research group discussions, faculty seminars, and oral
and written progress reports provide rigorous preparation for graduate school
and careers in research. Professional and social interactions with active
researchers at all levels are offered. Targeting, recruiting and selection
strategies focus on students having limited access to research opportunities,
minority students from underrepresented groups, disadvantaged students, and
those with disabilities. The selection process involves all participating
faculty. Online application information is available at the program website
listed below.

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and all interns are expected to attend and
present findings at national professional conferences. The program aims to
enhance the diversity and talent of the next generation of life scientists in
the research community and train role models for further generations

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to assess the effectiveness of the training program. All interns agree
to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://uoreu.uoregon.edu or by contacting the PI (Dr. Peter O'Day at
oday@uoregon.edu).