* 1460035
* CAREER:  Scalable Algorithms for Extreme Computing on Heterogeneous Hardware, with Applications in Fluids and Biology
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Lorena Barba, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 02/28/2018
* USD 405,396.00

There is currently a world-wide quest to achieve exascale computing by the end
of the decade, with vigorous efforts in the US as well as China and Japan, in
particular. In the US, the President's Strategy for American Innovation (2009)
explicitly lists among its goals to dramatically increase our simulations
capacity via an exascale computer. The challenges to achieve this goal are
unprecedented: power constraints, microchip fabrication reaching physical
limits, the growing imbalance between compute capacity and interconnect
bandwidth, and the ever increasing number of cores in a
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the matters of highest priority are
development of scalable algorithms that can exploit the enormous parallelism of
new systems, and educating the next generation of computational scientists. The
first of these is at the center of the scientific part of this CAREER project. A
potentially transformative combination is emerging where a class of hierarchical
algorithms, offering ideal scaling linear with problem size, maps with excellent
performance to many-core hardware (such as GPUs). Algorithmic improvements will
be undertaken, such as combining elements of treecodes and fast multipole
methods, communication and synchronization avoidance, dynamic error control and
auto-tuning of the computation. The research program is vertically integrated
across disciplines, including applications at extreme scales in fluid dynamics
and biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce highly
scalable scientific software, reformulating the algorithms to achieve maximum
performance in many-core hardware. Disseminated and curated via the open-source
model, the computational infrastructure delivered will offer maximum impact,
beyond the application areas of focus. Community software that is able to scale
to millions of processors will be crucial to exploit post-petascale systems, and
this project aims to provide that. The educational part of this program, on the
other hand, builds on the PI's track record of success both in the use of
technology to support learning, and in catalyzing international collaboration
and outreach. The program includes enhancing educational environments using
technology for both curricular instruction and contributing to the nation's
science literacy (via open courseware). The goals of fostering the next
generation of computational scientists will be pursued via extra-mural advanced
training events, and online learning media.