* 1460079
* IRES: An International, Interdisciplinary Student Research Program in a Biological Hotspot of Southern Ecuador
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Lisette Waits, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2021
* USD 245,305.00

The NSF-IRES program International, Interdisciplinary Student Research in a
Biological Hotspot of Southern Ecuador will provide 8-week field research
opportunities for students from the University of Idaho (UI) in collaboration
with the Univesidad Técnica Particular de Loja, Ecuador. Six students (4-5
undergraduate, 1-2 graduate) per year will conduct team-based research at three
main field sites in southern Ecuador including dry-forest, Amazonian lowlands
and high Andes cloud forest and paramo ecosystems. Training will emphasize
cross-disciplinary synthesis, sensitivity to varying cultural/political norms,
and the flexibility to conduct rigorous scientific investigations in landscapes
with uniquely varied research challenges. Participating students from the UI
will work in interdisciplinary teams of 2-3 students addressing individual
research questions within the scope of a broad unifying topic focused around our
umbrella theme of biodiversity conservation. Six UTPL faculty with expertise in
conservation biology, conservation genetics, mammalian ecology, limnology,
insect ecology and phylogenetics, plant ecology and phylogenetics, and rural
sociology will serve as local project mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecuadorian
students from UTPL will collaborate with UI student team members to develop and
implement research projects. UI faculty with expertise in landscape and
organismal ecology, conservation biology, population ecology, conservation
genetics, hydrology, limnology, watershed management, rural sociology, natural
resource policy, and entomology will serve as co-mentors and collaborators.
Educational activities will include a spring planning and proposal development
course that emphasizes program logistics, the ecology, natural history and human
dimensions (sustainable development, culture, indigenous issues) of southern
Ecuador, interdisciplinary research methods, and the development of summer
research proposals. After an 8-week field season collecting data in Ecuador,
students will take a fall course designed to facilitate data analysis and
manuscript preparation, in a continued interdisciplinary setting, and
culminating in a final oral presentation and project report. Participating
students will gain experience with a rich array of cultures, thus building a
sophisticated, externalized perspective on science. Ultimately, graduates of
this program should excel at addressing the critical, multi-facetted
conservation dilemmas that face us as global citizens.