* 1460294
* Collaborative Research:   Magnetotelluric and Seismic Investigations of the Distribution of Magmatic and Hydrous Fluids Beneath Yellowstone
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Adam Schultz, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 04/30/2021
* USD 272,189.00

Collaborative Research: Magnetotelluric and Seismic Investigations of the
Distribution of Magmatic and Hydrous Fluids Beneath
Yellowstone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Yellowstone volcanic system in Idaho,
Montana, and Wyoming has produced three massive volcanic eruptions in the past
2.1 million years, the most recent 640,000 years ago. Smaller eruptions followed
until 70,000 years ago, and today, Yellowstone's volcanic system hosts a dynamic
hydrothermal system with thousands of small magnitude earthquakes occurring
annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a team from the University of
Wisconsin-Madison and Oregon State University is deploying a network of
sensitive magnetotelluric (MT) equipment, which record natural variations in
Earth's geomagnetic and geoelectric fields, in and around Yellowstone National
Park. The team is using MT data to sense small changes in conductivity of the
crust and mantle and, by combining MT and seismic measurements of the structure
beneath Yellowstone, the team will infer the distribution of fluids in the
magmatic system; how magma is stored at Yellowstone; and how mobile it is within
the region. This has implications for future volcanic activity at Yellowstone
and potential hazards such activity might pose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is also fostering the career of principal investigator Ninfa Bennington,
an early career female scientist, and involves field work by both graduate and
undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented groups. The team is
creating outreach materials that will be shared with more than 40,000 people per
year via interactive kiosks at the Geology Museum of the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, and is developing a smartphone app to share this content with
an even broader audience. In addition, they are working with Yellowstone
National Park to create content detailing the field work carried out, and the
results of the project, for the National Park Web site. These efforts will
ensure the results from this project reach a wide
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description of
Project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous seismic and magnetotelluric (MT) studies
of the crust and upper mantle beneath Yellowstone (YS) have provided insight
into the origin and migration of magmatic fluids into the YS crustal volcanic
system. However, important questions remain concerning the generation of
magmatism at YS and the migration and storage of these magmatic fluids within
the crustal volcanic system. The research team has developed three competing
hypotheses describing active volcanism at YS, which include different
explanations for: 1) the origin and location of magmatic fluids at upper
mantle/lower crustal depths 2) the preferred path of migration for these
magmatic fluids into the mid- to upper-crust, 3) the resulting distribution of
the magma reservoir, 4) the composition of the magma reservoir, and 5)
implications for future volcanism at YS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate these
hypotheses for active volcanism at YS, the team is conducting a high-resolution
MT survey in the YS region, and is combining those observations with existing
data to invert for the 3D resistivity structure in the crust and upper mantle
underneath YS. The team is also separately inverting seismic data to determine
the seismic velocity structure in the same region using multi-scale techniques.
The resulting models are sensitive to different properties of the subsurface
(e.g., MT to presence of melt and seismic velocity to increased temperature),
and therefore provide independent structural constraints. The team will combine
these independent, spatially coincident models through joint interpretations
test their hypotheses about the distribution and behavior of magmatic and
related fluids in the Yellowstone magmatic system.