* 1460700
* REU Site: Sensor Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2019
* John Vetelino, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 10/31/2019
* USD 400,948.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
Maine focuses on sensor science and engineering research which is of high
interest to the consumer, national defense, and homeland security, and reflects
one of the top research strengths at UMaine. Maine's sensor science and
engineering research ranges from basic theoretical studies to the design,
fabrication, and testing of prototype sensors for chemical and biological agents
related to terrorism; peroxide based explosives; neurotoxins; E-coli;
pesticides; nitric oxide (related to respiratory distress in humans); oil
viscosity for the automotive industry; airborne elements such as chlorine, and
mercury; fish pathogens; and ammonia/nitric oxide (for fossil fuel burning
systems). Other areas of research relate to the processing and analysis of data
obtained from sensors, wireless networks and their applications to biological
and envinronmental research. The program will provide state-of-the art,
interdisciplinary research and problem solving opportunities for REU
participants. Undergraduates will utilize their new knowledge to solve real-life
research problems that impact society. Society will benefit as undergraduates,
as a result of their research experiences, choose to continue in graduate school
to excel in technologically and scientifically challenging careers that advance
such areas as homeland security, food safety, transportation, communications,
and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU program will offer a 10-week
intensive summer research experience, for a total of 30 students, over a three
year period. The program will include: 1) individual research projects with
faculty research mentors utilizing specialized sensor science and engineering
research facilities, 2) ethics training, 3) student meetings, 4) seminars, 5)
field trips, 6) student presentations, and 7) career guidance, networking
opportunities, and mentorship. Recruitment will focus specifically on women and
minorities and provide research experiences for students at non-PhD granting
institutions. This emphasis on recruiting women and minorities will also further
impact the NSF Track III Stormwater Management Research Team (SMART), which
emphasizes the involvement of women and minority high school students and
teachers. The REU participants will share their research experiences with middle
and high school students and teachers participating in the SMART institute and
provide a further role model for these high school students.