* 1460377
* Creating a New Seismic Instrument from EarthScope Strainmeter Installations
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Charles Langston, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 05/31/2018
* USD 157,925.00

A major part of the National Science Foundation's EarthScope program facility is
the Plate Boundary Observatory located along the Pacific coasts of the
continental U.S. and Alaska. 74 borehole strainmeters have been installed as
part of the Plate Boundary Observatory and collect ground deformation data that
pertain to natural earthquake processes along the major fault systems of
California, Oregon, and Washington states. Strain signals recorded by these
systems depend on the conditions of the rock that immediately surrounds the
borehole at depths of 500 feet or more in addition to the engineering details of
how the instrument was cemented into the borehole. Unlike other geophysical
instruments, borehole strainmeters must be calibrated after they have been
installed to make sense of the resulting data. Scientists from the University of
Memphis and UNAVCO, the major facilities operator, will be developing a method
to calibrate these strainmeters by using seismic signals recorded by seismic
instruments that have been installed with nearly all strainmeters. These methods
will be developed for strainmeters within the ANZA seismic network of southern
California and will also rely on data collected by two additional seismic array
experiments. One has been installed at the Pinyon Flat Observatory run by the
University of California, San Diego and at other by UNAVCO at selected
strainmeter sites within the ANZA network. Calibration of these instruments is
an invaluable service to the scientific community but, more importantly,
calibrated and co-located seismic and strain instruments allow a new scientific
use of this EarthScope facility through recently developed theory of seismic
wave propagation. Each strainmeter/seismic instrument combination can take the
place of a large specialized array of seismic instruments to determine the
direction and speed of seismic waves generated by local earthquakes. This can
allow a network of borehole strainmeters to be used as a network of seismic
arrays to quickly locate and characterize an ongoing large earthquake. This can
have great societal benefit for Earthquake Early Warning on the west coast.

This collaborative project between the University of Memphis and UNAVCO will
result in analytic methods for efficiently calibrating Plate Boundary
Observatory (PBO) Gladwin Tensor Strain Meters (GTSMs) using seismic data from
earthquakes. The investigators will extend methods previously developed by the
University of Memphis that incorporate computation of reference, regional strain
fields using seismic wave gradiometry for large earthquakes recorded by the ANZA
southern California network. The present research will develop a method that
incorporates a single three-component seismic sensor co-located with a GTSM to
estimate strains from earthquake observations using wave gradiometry concepts
rather than using a large array of seismic sensors. UNAVCO has installed 3
broadband seismometers at PBO GTSMs in the ANZA network to augment existing
broadband/GTSM installations and UCSD has installed a dense, broadband array of
13 sensors within the area of the Pinyon Flat facility. Earthquake data from
these new and existing co-located instruments will be used to estimate reference
seismic strains that are then related to measured gauge strains by the GTSMs. An
essential constraint in developing this method is that the ANZA GTSMs have been
previously calibrated using the array method giving control on evaluating the
success of the single station method. Data from the short-period seismometers
installed with the GTSMs will also be incorporated in this work with the goal of
using this existing data set to calibrate any other PBO strain meter without
additional fieldwork. The over arching scientific goal of this project is to use
a well-calibrated GTSM and co-located seismic instrument as a partial ?gradient
tensor? seismic instrument that can serve as a ?point? seismic array for
analyzing the P-SV wave field. Such an instrument can, in principle, find wave
attributes such as propagation azimuth and slowness. The ANZA PBO network is,
therefore, an array of point arrays that can be used to study regional wave
propagation, wave scattering, and source parameters from moderate events in
southern California that should be useful in Earthquake Early Warning. This will
be a new application of EarthScope facilities.