* 1460031
* IRES: Nanomaterials undergraduate Research in Germany (NanoRING)
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Matthew Grayson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 04/30/2019
* USD 249,990.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The NSF-IRES program Nanomaterials undergraduate Research in
Germany (NanoRING) will provide 10-week nanoresearch opportunities at the
Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany for five US undergraduates from
the combined student pool of Northwestern University (NU) and the Univerity of
Texas in San Antonio (UTSA), a minority serving institution and partner of NU.
The specific research focus is on nanomaterials covering the subtopics of
nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, and nano-biomaterials. This thematic base
leverages TUM?s International Graduate School of Science and Engineering
(IGSSE).&lt;br/&gt;The research opportunity will be for undergraduates only, in
order to motivate and inspire young US researchers to invest in a future
research career. Particularly at UTSA, specific efforts will be made to reach
out to underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines so that the cohort?s
constituency will meet or exceed NSF?s goals for representation. Individual
German collaborators from within IGSSE have provided letters of collaboration to
host visiting student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;Unique
materials science expertise outside of the U.S. is particularly strong in
Germany. Electron transport experiments, crystal growth, heterostructure design,
graphene characterization, quantum dot spectroscopy, biosensor nanotechnology,
and photonic emitters / detectors all represent topics of research expertise and
mentorship that will benefit U.S. students. By training U.S. graduate and
undergraduate students at these facilities, students can learn unique skills to
advance their education and training. Furthermore, since they are
researching&lt;br/&gt;abroad, students will develop an identity within the
international scientific community, building up a professional network and
getting a first-hand perspective of larger scope of a research career. The
administrative structure of NanoRING will leverage existing infrastructures at
German universities through TUM?s graduate school for international students
IGSSE where the administrators have exhaustive experience hosting international
student research visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the greatest intended
payoffs of a student research-abroad experience is career retention. By
developing engineering and science skills in a supportive and engaging
multicultural environment, undergraduates will recognize their place within an
international peer community and will be motivated to continue their positive
experience in a career in STEM research. This is particularly important for
underrepresented groups within STEM disciplines. To enhance participation of
underrepresented groups, outreach to target student groups will meet or exceed
NSF goals for representation by coordinating with minority student groups at
both NU and UTSA. After the visit abroad, students will make a scientific
presentation to their home institution, and to their underrepresented group,
where applicable. The will also have the opportunity to apply for an additional
Publication Award to publish or present their scientific work at a conference,
promoting broad dissemination of results. A post-program assessment will assess
program structure &amp; content, track career choices, and a questionnaire will
discern the impact that these research-abroad experience had on the students,
their peers, and the broader scientific community.