* 1460654
* REU Site: Surface Engineering for Sensing, Energy and Nanoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Lev Gelb, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL PART: At the Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) Site at
the University of Texas at Dallas, each year ten talented undergraduates will
perform research in surface engineering with applications in nanotechnology,
energy, electronics and sensing. Their work will lead to new advances in areas
of great economic and societal importance, including nanoelectronics,
photovoltaics, catalysts, batteries, fuel cells, thermoelectrics, energy-
harvesting systems, heat transfer systems, and sensors. Training students to
perform research in these and related areas will help to maintain the
competitiveness of the United States workforce. Recruitment will focus on women
and students from under-represented groups, in particular those at institutions
where research opportunities are limited. In Texas, women and minorities are
significantly under-represented in higher education, so this program addresses a
critical regional need. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART: The Research
Experience for Undergraduate (REU) Site at the University of Texas at Dallas is
focused on surface engineering with applications in nanotechnology, energy,
electronics and sensing. Each year ten undergraduate students are recruited for
a ten-week summer research experience, with recruitment focusing on women and
students from under-represented groups and at institutions where research
opportunities are limited. Research will be supervised by an interdisciplinary
team of faculty from the Departments of Materials Science and Engineering and
Mechanical Engineering. Student projects will include the development of Li ion
batteries, new methods for semiconductor surface functionalization, advanced
plasma processing of materials, new nanostructured porous materials, flexible
electronics, organic hybrid solar cells, bottom-up methods for nanowire
deposition, and the characterization and modeling of materials. In addition to
participating in research, the REU fellows will attend an introductory short-
course in surface engineering, research seminars from faculty and outside
experts, and informal seminars on career planning and the ethics and business of
science and engineering. They will also visit several local high-tech
industries. At the end of each summer, Fellows will attend the annual American
Vacuum Society Texas Chapter Conference and present their research.