* 1460145
* IRES: Student-led social-ecological research in the drylands of Kenya and Colorado
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* John Moore, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2019
* USD 249,994.00

This IRES proposal will provide an opportunity for fifteen total students (five
per year over three years) to conduct social-ecological research on drylands,
comparing systems in Colorado and Kenya. The program will recruit students at
the beginning of their sophomore year and each cohort's activities will include
coursework and research over three semesters at Colorado State University plus
five weeks in Kenya working with mentors at the University of Nairobi.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student's individual projects will be "inquiry-driven"
research questions developed by the students in collaboration with mentors at
Colorado State's Natural Resource Ecology Laboratory and the Center for
Sustainable Dryland Ecosystems and Societies at the University of Nairobi, with
whom the US investigators have a long history of collaboration. The need to
consider landscapes as systems of interacting elements in which humans are
integral components is widely respected, and the project includes an excellent
matrix and mentoring plan to ensure strong individual research activities are
developed. Importantly, the inquiry-driven model has been shown to produce
strong educational development outcomes for students that will provide
professional development that promotes the ability to conduct self-motivated,
independent work based on critical thinking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program
includes four phases. The students will first spend two full semesters in
training and preparation for their field research. This phase will include a
drylands seminar course, training in CSU's SUPER (Skills for Undergraduate
Participation in Ecological Research) program and partnering with faculty and
near-peer mentors leading to drafting of a research question for their field
research in Kenya. The second phase will be the field work in Kenya, working
under the supervision and guidance of faculty at the University of Nairobi at
one or two possible field sites. The third phase will be an academic semester of
analyses of field data, culminating in scientific presentations in several
venues as well as preparing materials for stakeholders in Kenya. In the fourth
phase students may continue their research and/or serve as peer mentors for
future cohorts and other ecological training programs at CSU. Important research
results will be incorporated in course materials and program insights both
socio-ecological and educational will be published in the appropriate
literature. The project includes effective assessment plans and insights about
student learning will be carried forward to develop courses and field
experiences with UoN that combine scientific excellence with student
needs/preferences. Overall, this project has tremendous potential to help
produce well-rounded students with a strong understanding of the interactions of
ecological systems with human systems and who are ready to pursue a range of
professional opportunities.