* 1460569
* REU Site: Ecological and Evolutionary Dynamics in a Changing World: A scaffolded undergraduate research experience
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Katherine Gross, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 398,593.00

This REU Site award to the W.K. Kellogg Biological Station (KBS) of Michigan
State University (MSU), Hickory Corners, MI, will support the training of 10
students over 11 weeks during the summers of 2015- 2017. The program focuses on
the ecological and evolutionary processes that drive responses in plant, animal
and microbial systems to global change. Students will work with resident KBS
faculty that have affiliated positions in departments of Zoology (Integrative
Biology), Plant Biology, Plant Soil and Microbial Sciences, Microbiology and
Molecular Genetics, and Animal Science at MSU. Students will collaborate with
their mentor to design a project that takes advantage of the diverse habitats
around KBS and long term experiments set up to test hypotheses about how climate
change may impact agricultural systems. Students will participate in weekly
professional development seminars that address scientific best practices,
preparation for graduate training, preparation for scientific employment and
training in data management and analysis. Recruitment will target students from
under-represented groups or attending institutions with limited research
opportunities. The on-line application process is designed to identify highly
motivated students and relies on multiple factors, including writing skills and
life experiences. Program coordinators will identify appropriate candidates and
will forward these to mentors who will conduct interviews with applicants whose
skills and experience best match their research. The program will be assessed by
using the common assessment tool used by REU programs (URSSA SALG).

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students will be trained in the program.
Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences. The students will live in residence at
KBS, and will interact daily with resident faculty, graduate students and
postdocs, who conduct research on a broad range of ecological and evolutionary
topics.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine effectiveness of the training program. Students are
required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email
sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by contacting
the PI (Dr. Katherine Gross at kgross@kbs.msu.edu) or from
http://www.kbs.msu.edu/index.php/education/ugrad/reu