* 1460995
* EBICS:VITA REU Site
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Manu Platt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2019
* USD 399,997.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:

This EBICS (Emergent Behaviors of Integrated Cellular Systems): Virtually
Integrated Team Approach (VITA) REU Site seeks to engineer a variety of cell
types to work together in functional clusters, or biological machines, that will
perform desired tasks. These biological machines have the potential to enhance
or even transform our ability to accomplish certain tasks, e.g., detecting and
removing unwanted chemical or toxin from a food or drug, monitoring the
environment, or mimicking certain aspects of organ function. In addition to the
scientific foundational needs addressed by this project, there are U.S.
workforce development considerations being addressed, training next generation
of U.S. researchers how to communicate and perform multi-disciplinary work,
multi-institutional research, and to productively working in collaborative,
multi-ethnic, virtual teams, as these formats are progressively being used
across all enterprises. To do so, EBICS: VITA REU will immerse scholars into
virtual research teams at one of three institutions (Georgia Tech, Univ. of
Illinois, or MIT) with an independent project and mentor that contributes to a
larger research goal aligned with EBICS grand challenge. Targeted approaches for
recruiting cohorts of students traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering disciplines (women, underrepresented minority (URM) students,
students with disabilities, and students from schools with limited STEM research
opportunities) will occur with a set plan in place having already being
initiated.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:

This project acknowledges the support from the Division of Engineering Education
and Centers to train the next generation U.S. workforce to function successfully
in virtual teams that are multi-institutional, multi-disciplinary, and multi-
ethnic. EBICS is an NSF Science and Technology Center addressing the grand
challenge of engineering clusters of living cells or biological machines that
have desired functionalities and perform prescribed tasks. EBICS is also
defining quantitative design principles for creating such machines, and for
understanding and controlling the flow of information (genetic, biochemical,
mechanical, electrical) within and between cells, in a dynamic, multi-scale
fashion. This involves integration of concepts from tissue engineering, systems
biology, and synthetic biology, as well as established disciplines such as
electrical engineering and computer science; mechanical engineering; chemical
engineering; biomedical engineering; biology; chemistry. Research and
educational activities will incorporate REU scholars into virtual, multi-
institutional research Working Groups, with independent projects contributing to
a larger research thrust. Video- and tele-conferencing during the research
experience will provide committed professional development on presenting in
virtual formats. All virtual teams and REU scholars will travel and meet face-
to-face at the annual EBICS retreat to interact with their Working Group, as
well as other EBICS faculty from Georgia Tech, Univ. of Illinois, and MIT, EBICS
graduate and postdoctoral trainees, providing a broader network far beyond that
of just being at one institution. This EBICS:VITA REU will also employ a robust
evaluation to validate and document the effectiveness of this new multi-site,
virtual team REU model using a value-engaged, educative approach that defines
high quality STEM educational programming as that which effectively incorporates
cutting edge scientific content, strong instructional pedagogy and sensitivity
to diversity and equity issues.