* 1460874
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research Opportunity in Chemistry (SUROC) at UNC Chapel Hill
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Jeffrey Johnson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

This project funded by the Chemistry Division of NSF supports a Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, led by Professor Jeffrey Johnson. The site will support ten
students during the ten week summer program. Students participating in research
at this REU site will make explore areas important to society including energy,
green processes, and human health. A wide range of chemical problems will be
examined within the context of the award. Sample projects include (1)
development of smart materials for application in minimally invasive medical
implants; (2) development of next generation polymeric electrolytes for lithium-
ion batteries (3) preparation of novel polymers for highly efficient
photovoltaic cells; (4) advancing nitric oxide release mechanisms for biomedical
applications; (5) understanding key molecular recognition features that underlie
protein-protein interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the Summer
Undergraduate Research Opportunity in Chemistry (SUROC) is to provide
undergraduate students a meaningful research experience in an area of chemistry
that might otherwise be inaccessible. The goal is to provide a diverse, 10-week
experience that exposes these students to various facets of independent
research. In addition to hands-on laboratory work, students will learn what
opportunities are made available through the creation of new chemical knowledge.
The cohort of ten will participate in modules on entrepreneurship, site visits
to both a large pharmaceutical company and a small startup company, and training
in laboratory safety and research ethics. It is expected that the proposed REU
site can increase the diversity of talented, highly trained undergraduates
applying to top graduate programs across the country.