* 1460784
* REU Site: Interactive Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Patrick Mather, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2018
* USD 282,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL PART: The educational objectives of the Interactive Biomaterials
REU Site at Syracuse University are: (1) to train students in leading edge
research techniques through independent biomaterials research projects in a
multidisciplinary, collaborative, and open laboratory environment, (2) to
provide multifaceted mentoring opportunities and network-building experiences
that ultimately increase the likelihood that participants will pursue graduate
education in their chosen discipline, and (3) to train students to be effective
communicators of their research to their peers and the scientific community.
These goals will be accomplished through participation in independent,
interactive biomaterials research projects in faculty laboratories, one-on-one
mentoring from faculty advisors and graduate student mentors, an innovative
career mentoring program, interactive laboratory tours with REU student-led
demonstrations, student research presentations, team building activities, and
social events. This site aims to engage undergraduate students in meaningful and
stimulating research and educational and social experiences as a means of
increasing their enthusiasm and preparation for future graduate level study and
careers in biomaterials science and engineering. A partnership with the Hampton
Roads HBCU Cluster will help to broaden the participation of students from
institutions with limited research opportunities, women, and underrepresented
minorities in meaningful undergraduate research. A signature element of the REU
site is a career mentoring initiative, focused on both industrial and academic
career paths at the PhD level, which emphasizes the importance and benefits of
graduate education in STEM disciplines. The best practices of this REU site will
be broadly disseminated via the web and educational publications, with an aim to
produce models for replication at future REU
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART: The research projects available to
students in the REU site will advance fundamental scientific knowledge in areas
that include shape memory polymers, stimulus-responsive polymers, drug delivery,
control of bacterial biofilms, cell-biomaterial interactions, electrochemistry
of metallic biomaterials, tissue engineering, and molecular modeling of
interactive biomaterials. These hypothesis-driven, multidisciplinary research
projects draw upon the collective expertise of the faculty of the Syracuse
Biomaterials Institute, and, in many cases, foster collaborative research across
faculty laboratories, academic departments, and institutions. The site team is
highly qualified to mentor undergraduate students in their laboratories and has
a vast array of facilities and equipment at their disposal for training these
students in cutting edge research and analytical techniques.