* 1460704
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Reconfigurable and Multifunctional Soft Materials at UPRM
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Ubaldo Cordova, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 275,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL PART: The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) in
Reconfigurable and Multifunctional Soft Materials (RMSM) at the University of
Puerto Rico-Mayag√ºez (UPRM) will fund 10 undergraduate students for a 10-week
summer research and educational experience. Students will be recruited primarily
from schools that cannot provide them with opportunities for STEM research and
will focus on promoting a vibrant, top-notch research culture by showcasing
meritorious local scientists while strengthening partnerships with world-class
research institutions. REU programs, in general, are designed to advance
discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning
through hands on research and educational experiences for undergraduates. The
RMSM REU program will continue fostering this legacy and will help students to
strengthen their scientific communication skills through a series of seminars
that focus on professional development. They will have the opportunity to learn
a second language and immerse themselves in a different culture, while
participating in exciting research. Finally, the participants will help to
broaden dissemination to the next generation of researchers through
participation in the UPRM Science on Wheels program and :"Ciencia Puerto Rico"
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART: The RMSM REU will contribute to
the pool of underrepresented scientists, inspiring young students to enter
disciplines with transformative potential, such as finding methods to develop
smart soft materials for new consumer products and biomedical applications.
Students will conduct individual research projects in the development and
characterization of soft materials and their ability to respond away from
equilibrium. Knowledge in this area will open doors in a broad range of
scientific disciplines, which encompass the major challenges in the development
of novel materials. The chosen projects are relevant to ongoing research at UPRM
yet were selected because they are suitable for an REU participant to make
unique contributions during a summer session.