* 1460752
* REU Site: Research In Neutrino Astrophysics at the University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Madsen Jim, University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2019
* USD 231,872.00

This award supports a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at
the University of Wisconsin - River Falls to provide six undergraduates with
ten-week summer research experiences annually on projects with data from the
international IceCube Neutrino Observatory. To advance discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning, students will be
integrated into a research collaboration that opened the field of neutrino
astronomy, and work in a department where learning and involving undergraduates
in research are priorities. Students will acquire a broad range of research
skills, will learn to appreciate the value of fundamental science to society and
will be mentored on giving effective scientific presentations and in
communicating science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will make contributions to
the IceCube experiment that will help advance understanding and knowledge in the
field of neutrino astronomy. IceCube is a unique telescope located at the South
Pole. (However, students will not travel to the South Pole). Unlike traditional
optical telescopes, IceCube looks at the universe via particles called
neutrinos. Physics World deemed IceCube's observation of extraterrestrial
neutrinos, a result that ushered in the era of neutrino astronomy, the physics
breakthrough of the year 2013. With access to IceCube data, high performance
computing resources, and personnel, the students will make real contributions
while acquiring research skills that are transferrable to many fields of
science, technology, and engineering. Under the guidance of faculty advisors who
have many years of experience successfully supervising undergraduate research,
students will contribute to resolving some of the biggest puzzles in particle
astrophysics: the origin of high-energy cosmic rays, the nature of neutrino
oscillations, and the composition of dark matter.