* 1460338
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Subsistence Organization In A Traditional Society
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Marilyn Masson, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 17,185.00

Doctoral candidate Caroline Antonelli (University at Albany-SUNY) will evaluate
the sustainability of diverse agricultural systems employed by farmers in pre-
modern urban settings focusing on the late prehistoric Mesoamerican site of
Mayapan. Food supply challenges faced by residents of ancient cities were
especially acute in fragile environmental contexts characterized by chronic
instability. This study investigates the diverse and complex methods employed by
past agriculturalists that helped to mitigate risks and contribute toward
stable, enduring urban political economies in relatively extreme environmental
settings. Diversity in agricultural practices was manifested by a gardening-to-
farming continuum involving plots that graded from small, urban gardens to
larger, distant cultivation zones just beyond the urban sprawl. This study will
determine the duration and intensity of cultivation of specific types of crops,
the productive potential of local soils, human impacts to the environment in the
form of degradation or engineered improvements to soil, and the exploitation of
contrastive natural microenvironments formed by differences in soil, elevation,
and moisture. Archaeological science is uniquely positioned to reconstruct and
analyze the impacts of long-term human-environmental relationships and to
present useful applications of these findings to traditional farmers in
marginal, impoverished zones of the world today, including the study area
including this rural locality of the northwest Yucatan peninsula, Mexico. This
region is one of the driest zones in southern Mexico and historical records
attest to the regularity of droughts and hurricanes.

The study area was long thought to be of dismal agrarian potential, despite the
seeming contradiction that this zone was home to numerous large cities and
extensive rural populations through time, including the present day. This
investigation will be the first to systematically reconstruct the array of
urban-to-rural agrarian strategies and landscape impacts across time and space
from a geoarchaeological perspective in this part of southern Mexico. A key
broader impact is represented by educational outreach to local farmer
communities who will benefit from knowledge concerning intensive enrichment,
variable local agrarian potential, and niche cultivation practices of the past.
Data for this project will derive from interdisciplinary methods in archaeology
and geology, including geochemical soil composition, the USDA system of
geophysical soil classification, stable isotopic analysis, remote sensing-
assisted environmental mapping (Landsat satellite and LiDAR imagery), and the
use of spatial and statistical software. Mayapan was the largest city of the
Maya world of its time (A.D. 1200-1450) and home to a population of 20,000
residents who dwelled in a densely-packed urban zone. This city was the capital
of a vast regional state and trading domain that extended from the Gulf to the
Caribbean coasts, but little is known regarding its staple food supply. The
issue of agricultural sustainability, especially in the face of urban growth and
environmental constraints, is a problem of great interest to researchers in the
social sciences and to the modern world. This project will provide important new
archaeological data on long-term strategies for resiliency in human-
environmental systems.