* 1460766
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in the Mathematical Sciences and their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2019
* J Maurice Rojas, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 09/30/2019
* USD 343,408.00

The Mathematics Department at Texas A&amp;M University (College Station) will
continue their REU Site (Undergraduate Research in the Mathematical Sciences and
their Applications), now entering its 16th year. This program provides a novel
and accessible entry for undergraduates interested in modern mathematical
research. Three parallel summer programs, led by 4 active researchers, will
introduce the students to topics chosen from neural codes, algorithms for
solving polynomial equations, biochemical reaction networks, complexity theory,
models of immune response, and number theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site is
organized around three parallel sessions with different emphases: (1) algebraic
methods in computational biology, (2) algorithmic algebraic geometry, and (3)
number theory. These thematic areas link naturally with numerous applications in
science and engineering, and are of great theoretical interest as well. Students
participating in this REU Site will enhance their training as future research
scientists by being at a major research university that is also supportive and
collegial. Participants will present their results to the entire REU cohort in a
locally held conference. They will be encouraged to present at national
conferences (e.g., MAA Math Fest, special sessions at AMS meetings), and to
publish their results in professional journals. The PIs seek a diverse group of
participants and priority will be given to students for whom research
opportunities are limited.