* 1460495
* REU Site:  Comparative Approaches in Cellular, Molecular and Environmental Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Paulyn Cartwright, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 209,698.00

This REU Site award to Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory, Salisbury
Cove, Maine, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2016- 2017. The scientific focus of the MDI Biological Laboratory REU
Site is comparative approaches in cellular, molecular and environmental biology.
Students will engage in scientific research using diverse model systems under
the close guidance of a research scientist. The students will have access to
state of the art research facilities and the coastal ecological setting offered
by MDI Biological Laboratory. Students will have a wide range of opportunities
for training in cutting edge interdisciplinary approaches to molecular,
cellular, and environmental biology. Students will attend regularly scheduled
seminars, which include instruction on responsible conduct of research, as well
as symposia and workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total
of 20 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will
be trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and
many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Students
will be engaged in various outreach opportunities such as Family Science Night,
a community-based event which draws hundreds of participants. These outreach
experiences help to strengthen the ties between MDI Biological Laboratory and
the local community. Through participation in these programs they will learn to
discuss with lay audiences the broader impacts of their NSF-funded work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interested students are asked to apply online, and submit
an application form, short answer/essay questions, two faculty recommendations,
and a transcript. Applications are reviewed, scored, and ranked by a faculty
committee. Applications are due in March, with offers made in April and May. A
common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division
of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used
to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are required to
be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the
NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://mdibl.org/education/hs-undergrad/undergraduate-applications/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Paulyn Cartwright at pcart@ku.edu ) or the co-PI (Dr.
Robert Morris morris_robert@wheatoncollege.edu).