* 1460153
* IRES: Intelligent Search and Mapping of Submerged Cultural Heritage Ancient Shipwrecks using Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Christopher Clark, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 249,992.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project aims to
develop an Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUV) system for intelligent shipwreck
search, mapping and visualization. The proposed system will improve on current
approaches to marine archeology, and in doing so develop novel techniques that
can be applied to a general class of robot exploration tasks. First, an
investigation will be launched into probabilistic algorithms that identify
regions of high likelihood of containing unexplored shipwrecks that offline and
online AUV planning algorithms can use to maximize information gain when
searching for wrecks. Second, the development of visualization techniques
dedicated to surface reconstruction that merge side scanning sonar and stereo
image disparity maps while incorporating volume visualizations of marine site
science data. Third, and finally, these techniques will be applied in actual AUV
shipwreck search experiments in previously unexplored and under-explored areas
of the Mediterranean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The robotic exploration technology
developed in this project will be applicable to a wide range of applications in
archaeology, oceanography, biology, homeland security, and defense. The
Principal Investigators and student participants will disseminate research
findings via publications and professional conferences, and to local community
members and public internet portal. A digital archive of sites will be created
for the archeological community. This project aims to use the research findings
to introduce these robotic technologies to a broad audience including elementary
school children in both the US and Malta, and especially to groups typically
underrepresented in computer science and engineering. As part of the project,
robotics workshops will be run at elementary schools located in Malta and
Sicily.