* 1460048
* IRES: Behavioral Ecology Research Training in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Jordan Karubian, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 249,371.00

IRES 1460048 ABSTRACT (KARUBIAN, TULANE UNIVERSITY)

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION

International collaborations are becoming increasingly important in scientific
research, but students and young researchers from the US face significant
barriers to establishing productive research collaborations with international
colleagues. This in turn limits the competitiveness of the US to conduct top-
level science. This IRES project is designed to help meet these challenges by
providing students and young researchers with opportunities for international
training early in their educational and professional trajectories. This three-
year project will support a total of 21 undergraduate and graduate students from
three US institutions for research training and cultural experiences in
Australia. The students will work with the U.S. PIs and Australian researchers
on how dynamic environmental factors influence the social structure, behavior,
and fitness of small songbirds in an understudied environment?dry forests
-outside Brisbane. The project will provide technical training in modern
integrative behavioral ecology methods, and will build the capacity of IRES
students to work with foreign collaborators in the future. IRES students will
also use a range of dissemination modalities, including professional
presentations at conferences, peer-reviewed journal publications, video, and
internet productions, to increase interest in international research among US
university students, K-12 students, and the general public. Participants will
receive intensive mentoring before, during, and after their international
experience from both U.S. and Australian senior researchers. The project will
broaden access to international STEM research by actively recruiting and
retaining students from under-represented groups. In doing so, it will fulfill
the IRES program goals of educating a globally-engaged science and engineering
workforce capable of performing in an international research environment.

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION

This IRES project is designed to educate a globally-engaged science and
engineering workforce capable of excelling in an international research
environment. It will achieve this goal by providing individuals with
opportunities for international training early in their educational and
professional trajectories, with a focus on students in groups that are
traditionally under-represented in STEM. The three-year project will provide a
total of 21 undergraduate and graduate students from three US institutions with
international research training and cultural experiences in Australia. The
students will work with the U.S. PIs and Australian researchers on how dynamic
environmental factors influence the social structure, behavior, and fitness of
small songbirds in an understudied environment?dry sclerophyll forests outside
Brisbane. IRES students will leverage a NSF-funded automated telemetry system
and existing research by PIs and Australian hosts on the study site to produce
high tier, student-led publications. In doing so, this project will train a
cadre of undergraduate and graduate students and motivate these students to
pursue scientific research careers with an international focus, thus
contributing to the U.S. scientific workforce and making a significant
contribution to STEM education for under-represented groups.