* 1460967
* REU Site: Modeling and Simulation in Systems Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Reinhard Laubenbacher, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 04/30/2018
* USD 374,980.00

Many biological processes that underlie human health, an abundant and high
quality food supply, a healthy and sustainable environment, and a renewable
energy supply are complex, with multiple intertwined feedback loops. Systems
biology uses mathematics and mathematical models as the key enabling technology
to capture this complexity in predictive computer models that allow the
efficient design of control strategies, such as the development of new drugs for
a variety of human, animal, and plant diseases. There is considerable need for
mathematical scientists trained in the development and application of
mathematical algorithms for systems biology, and this project focuses on meeting
this need. The program takes advantage of a unique research environment that
brings together several ongoing programs to develop and implement mathematical
algorithms for modeling, simulation, and control of molecular networks. It
provides a 10-week, in-residence, intensive summer research program for U.S.
citizen or permanent resident undergraduate students from around the United
States and Puerto Rico. It will provide participants with a broad view of
available career opportunities for mathematical scientists in academia,
industry, and government. Participants will have the opportunity to expand their
professional network of peers and mentors. The award is supported by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences (MPS) and the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in
the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling and
simulation is a key technology for systems biology. The focus is on biological
systems that might be organized into gene regulatory, signaling, or metabolic
networks, maybe linked with spatial processes, such as translocation of
molecules across cellular compartments. Various intertwined feedback and
feedforward loops might be involved in the regulation of the system, linking the
molecular with the systemic level. Mathematical models of various kinds are
indispensable tools in the effort to understand these systems. There is a clear
need for mathematical scientists whose expertise can address these complexities
in innovative and rigorous ways. Career opportunities for mathematical
scientists with expertise in the biosciences are plentiful in both academics and
in industry, in particular in the health care field.