* 1460638
* Uniformity in Commutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Craig Huneke, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 04/30/2019
* USD 245,951.00

Commutative algebra and algebraic geometry are the study of the algebraic and
geometric properties of systems of non-linear equations. By contrast, linear
algebra, a fundamental tool of the sciences, is the study of linear systems of
equations. Often linear equations do not suffice to describe complex systems,
and higher degree polynomials must be used. Commutative algebras provide models,
called rings, of systems of polynomial equations where one can add and multiply.
The rings studied in this proposal usually come from a system of polynomial
equations. By studying the properties of this model, one can then better
understand the original system of equations. There are two main methods. One is
to understand the theory of modules over such rings. Modules are a type of
special representation of spaces where the equations hold. Studying these models
has been an extremely effective way to study equations. The other main technical
method is to study the same basic equations in rings which are reduced modulo a
prime number. In such a system, arithmetic becomes easier. For instance modulo 2
means that every even number is thought of as 0, and all odd numbers as 1. This
has a number of profound advantages which are used throughout this project. This
project has a substantial educational component. The PI has served as PhD
advisor and postdoc mentor to many researchers, and will continue this level of
activity.

The PI will investigate several aspects of commutative algebras which all fall
under the rubric of uniformity. Three fundamental questions on symbolic powers
of ideals and their relationship to regular powers are proposed. Significant
partial results have been obtained. The PI will also investigate a fundamental
question of Stillman concerning the complexity of equations. A variety of other
problems will be studied, including classification of Golod rings, existence of
rigid modules, the structure of iterated socles, and the development of
Frobenius Betti numbers and their properties. Several of the projects are
intended for collaboration with graduate students, postdocs, and young
researchers.