* 1460626
* REU Site: NYU Center for Behavioral Statistics and the Study of Motivated Perception
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Emily Balcetis, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2018
* USD 367,842.00

This project is supported under the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program, which is an NSF-wide program although each Directorate
administers its own REU Site competition. This program supports active research
participation by undergraduate students in an effort to introduce them to
scientific research so as to encourage their continued engagement in the
nation's scientific research and development enterprise. REU projects involve
students in meaningful ways in ongoing research programs or in research projects
designed especially for the purpose. The REU program is a major contributor to
the NSF's goal of developing a diverse, internationally competitive, and
globally-engaged science and engineering workforce. The Social, Behavioral and
Economic (SBE) sciences Directorate has awarded this REU Site grant to New York
University with the goal to provide opportunities in STEM areas that increase
engagement through the use of research-based learning communities. This REU Site
integrates research and learning for undergraduate students using a group-
learning approach to research and mentoring. Interns are diverse across race and
gender and the project targets students at non research extensive universities.
Research conducted at this REU Site aims to improve outcomes for minority group
members. The students are trained and mentored through all stages of research,
data collection, publication and presentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose
of the NYU REU Site project is to afford interns the opportunity to conduct
research that could be theoretically transformative, translational, and
interdisciplinary. The work in this project connects vision, group dynamics,
psychophysiology, and cognition. This REU site designs research experiences
using a learning community approach - one of the most effective means for
increasing belonging-ness within the sciences. This site accepts 10 interns for
8-weeks each summer. The primary objective is to provide extensive, immersive
training in basic and advanced behavioral statistics. The second objective of
the site is to develop critical thinking skills in the science of motivated
perception. Interns apply the theory of motivated perception by conducting
original research in any two of the following areas: (1) interpersonal emotion,
(2) politics, (3) health and fitness and (4) legal decision-making. In addition,
interns are trained in social cognitive techniques including eye tracking,
psychophysiology, and behavioral coding. The third objective is to increase a
sense of belonging in STEM fields for underrepresented students which serves as
a primary psychological factor predicting retention. Guided by PhD students and
PIs, interns participate in research teams composed of peers and serve as the
team leader for one of the projects. Further, interns present their research
results at conferences and receive continued mentorship even after their REU
term is over.