* 1460656
* REU Site: Future Leaders in Advanced Materials at the UCSB Materials Research Laboratory
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Dorothy Pak, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The University of California at Santa Barbara (UCSB)
Materials Research Laboratory (MRL), an NSF Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC), provides a nurturing research experience in
interdisciplinary materials science to a diverse group of undergraduate students
from colleges and universities across the country where undergraduate research
opportunities are limited. Eight undergraduates per year will complete 10-week
summer internships at the UCSB MRL, where they will join additional students
funded by the MRSEC program. All of these students will conduct research in the
laboratories of UCSB faculty and participate in a series of workshops and
colloquia intended to build scientific awareness and preparedness for graduate
training and a career in materials science and engineering. An international
component of the program will send an additional two students each summer to
Gothenburg, Sweden for 10-week summer research internships at the Chalmers
Institute of Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Available
research projects for REU participants in the laboratories of UCSB faculty cover
a wide range of materials science topics including magnetodielectric materials
with potential for use in capacitive detection of magnetic response,
hierarchically-ordered metal and metal oxide thin films with applications in
electronics and catalysis, organic semiconductors for thermoelectrics, design of
photochromic responsive materials with potential applications in energy storage
and chemical sensing, ultrasonic detection of failure in superalloy jet engine
turbine blades, functionalization of fullerenes for organic photoelectrics,
imaging of spins with nanoscale resolution with potential applications in
molecular imaging, and conductive polymers for thermoelectrics. Participants at
Chalmers will have opportunities to participate in research on measurement of
cellular adhesion forces along a nanoparticle density gradient and development
of soft materials for energy applications.