* 1460671
* REU Site: Research in Prokaryotic Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Diana Downs, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2018
* USD 314,119.00

This REU Site award to the University of Georgia, located in Athens, Georgia,
will support the training of 10 students for 9 weeks during the summers of
2015-2017. This program will introduce undergraduates to areas of microbial
research and increase their awareness of careers in microbiology. Students from
groups that are underrepresented in the scientific community, including deaf and
hard-of-hearing students and ethnic minorities, are encouraged to participate in
the program. REU participants conduct independent projects under the supervision
of faculty mentors residing in several Departments including, but not limited
to: Microbiology, Marine Sciences, and Infectious Diseases. All provide a
variety of research topics that address the functions of prokaryotic organisms.
Current techniques will be used in interdisciplinary approaches that combine
knowledge from the fields of Genetics, Biochemistry, Bioinformatics, Physiology,
Molecular Biology, Cellular Biology and Ecology. Research projects will address
broad questions including the role of prokaryotes in environmental and
geochemical processes. Participants will attend workshops to become familiar
with graduate school application and careers in microbiology. Student
applications are submitted electronically through the program website.
Competitive students will be selected by a committee of faculty. Participants
will assess the quality of the REU program by use of a common assessment tool
(SALG URSSA).

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences. Furthermore, students will have informal meetings
with faculty, attend scientific seminars, participate in discussions of ethical
issues in science, and join the regular research meetings of their lab groups.
Students will present their research results at the end of the summer in a
poster session.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://mib.uga.edu/programs, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Vincent J.
Starai at vjstarai@uga.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Diana Downs at dmdowns@uga.edu).