* 1460733
* REU Site: An Innovative Approach to Engage Underrepresented Minority Students in a Research Experience
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Kazuhiro Sonoda, Heritage University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2018
* USD 266,370.00

This REU Site award to Heritage University (HU), located in Toppenish, WA, will
support the training of 30 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2015-2017. The overall research theme of molecular biology involves 12 mentors
from HU and five regional partner institutions. Students can select from
projects that include 1) genomic studies on plants at the University of
Washington, Seattle; 2) polyploidy in plant evolution at the University of Puget
Sound, Tacoma; (3) insect molecular ecology at the USDA-ARS Lab, Wapato; 4)
molecular plant pathology at Washington State University, Prosser; 5) plant
genomics and biotechnology at Washington State University, Pullman; and 6) role
of histone variants in chromatin structure and DNA barcoding of native plants at
HU. The ten week research experience will include a one week workshop at HU that
will train students on the scientific method, basic skills in molecular biology,
keeping a laboratory notebook, data management in excel, and ethics/responsible
conduct of research. The overall strategy is to provide undergraduate students
with a fulfilling and challenging research experience supported by a richly
mentored environment. Students will be recruited at HU, Yakima Valley Community
College and Columbia Community College, with emphasis on underrepresented
students. These opportunities will provide students from the Yakima Valley area
with career options that include pursuit of graduate degrees in STEM. Students
are tracked to determine their continued interest in their academic field of
study, their career paths, and the lasting influences of the research
experience. The program will be assessed by using the REU common assessment tool
(SALG URSSA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are required to be tracked after the
program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information is available by visiting www.heritage.edu/REU , or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Nina Barcenas at Barcenas_N@heritage.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Kazuhiro Sonoda at Sonoda_K@heritage.edu).