* 1460296
* Schroedinger Institute Workshop on Mathematical Physics, Number Theory, and Noncommutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Steven Rosenberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2015
* USD 14,800.00

This award provides support for U.S.-based graduate students, postdoctoral
associates, and junior faculty to participate in the workshop "The interrelation
between mathematical physics, number theory and non-commutative geometry," March
2-13, 2015, at the Erwin Schroedinger International Institute for Mathematical
Physics in Vienna, Austria (www.esi.ac.at/activities/events/2015/the-
interrelation-between-mathematical-physics-number-theory-and-non-commutative-
geometry). This workshop explores the expanding relationship between theoretical
physics and pure mathematics, which now extends from quantum field theory in
physics to number theory in mathematics, two fields which were traditionally
considered to be far removed from each other. The funds will allow researchers
from U.S. institutions to participate in this cutting edge workshop.

Over the past two decades, the newly discovered relations between Feynman
integrals in quantum field theory and Grothendieck's theory of motives of
algebraic varieties has become a topic of growing importance in theoretical and
mathematical physics. The mathematical and physical theories have been
developing along parallel tracks, and there is a pressing need to create more
interaction between researchers from mathematics and physics working on these
topics. This workshop will bring together researchers in both fields, and will
focus on the following research directions: 1) Motives and periods in
perturbative quantum field theory; 2) Amplitudes and super-Yang-Mills theory; 3)
Algebraic structures in renormalization; and 4) Quantum field theory on
noncommutative spacetimes.