* 1460297
* The Process Of Cultural Interaction In The US Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Stephen Mrozowski, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2018
* USD 79,747.00

Dr. Heather Trigg and colleagues from the University of Massachusetts Boston
will explore how colonizers adapt to new social and physical environments by
investigating the establishment of the Spanish colony of New Mexico during the
17th century. The project examines the way early colonial Spanish households
functioned, focusing particularly on how colonists incorporated indigenous
Pueblo peoples into household activities, and how they made a living in the
Southwest's challenging environment. Spanish colonizers introduced new plants,
animals, and agricultural practices into this region, and these and later
introductions have had a dramatic effect on the Southwest's landscape. We know
little about Spanish household activities during this period or their impacts on
the environment. Because all written records held within the colony were
destroyed during the Pueblo Rebellion in the late 17th century, archaeology is
the primary way that the foundations of Hispanic society in the American
Southwest can be understood. The results of this investigation are relevant
beyond the region as the Spanish colonization of New Mexico provides a case
study for examining the development of relationships between colonizers and
indigenous peoples. The research contributes to an understanding of power
differentials, cultural pluralism, and the interplay between culture and the
environment. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The majority of 17th-century Spanish
colonizers lived in rural ranches, making the activities at these locations
particularly important. Previous studies of the region's colonization have
focused on Pueblo peoples' reactions to this colonization. Thus, Spanish
households are an important but underutilized source of information about
colonization processes. The research focuses on several questions. What were the
colonists' economic strategies? How did they incorporate native peoples'
practices and knowledge into these activities? What were the colonists'
relationships to the environment? The researchers explore these issues by
conducting archaeological excavations and obtaining environmental samples from
one of the most important early colonial Spanish sites in New Mexico. The types
and distribution of artifacts, such as ceramics, will be used to explore the
identity of the people contributing to the household and the types of activities
that they engaged. With biological data, such as pollen, researchers will
investigate the relationships colonizers had with the environment, focusing
particularly on changes resulting from the introduction of plow agriculture and
grazing livestock on this marginal environment. The project will provide for the
training of graduate students in all aspects of the research. The researchers
have developed a partnership with El Rancho de las Golondrinas, a living history
museum in Santa Fe, New Mexico that is dedicated to Hispanic history and
culture. Information developed through the project will be made available to the
general public in the form of exhibits, lectures, and docent training at the
museum.