* 1460019
* Bilateral Contracting in Network Financial Markets
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Darrell Duffie, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 11/30/2016
* USD 83,461.00

We exploit and generalize existing axiomatic and non-­cooperative theories of
bilateral bargaining, going back to non-­network based theories of John Nash and
Ariel Rubinstein. The broad impact of this project is the potential improvement
of allocative efficeincy in arange of network-based markets that operate through
bilateral negotaition, and the identfication of settings in which bilateral
bargaining over contracts is inefficeint. We extend trembling-hand type
equilibrium refinemnet concepts to alternating offer games, and extend axioms
for solutions of network-based bilateral bargaining
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will extend the theory of bilateral
contracting in network markets, such as over-the-counter markets for corporate
debt and bilateral derivatives including swaps. The goal is to better
distinguish conditions, including bargaining protocols, under which bilateral
contracting is socially efficient, constrained by the network structure of
market relationships and the menus of network-compatible contractible actions.
An example is the identification of situations in which contracting between
corporations and financial institutions will assign a bankrupt firm's assets to
its creditors and swap counterparties in an efficient manner. If not the
bankruptcy code should be used to override bilaterally negotiated contractual
treatments. Bankruptcy stays can trump rights of termination, collateral,
closeout netting, and assignment of insolvency priority. Statutes can give
courts or insolvency administrators the right to stay contracts at insolvency
and claw back inefficient transfers that occurred prior to insolvency.