* 1461704
* Evaluating Ethical Product Havens in the Global Economy
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Trina Hamilton, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 10/31/2020
* USD 145,842.00

This project will examine the evolution of trade patterns in the ethical diamond
market, focusing specifically on how they have evolved since the late 1990s when
Canadian diamonds entered and quickly cornered the so-called "ethical" market.
This project will focus on how consumers and retailers evaluate different
ethical products, and how "ethical havens" - production sites favored for their
ethical credentials, to the relative exclusion of others - are formed and
challenged over time. This research will contribute to public policy debates
about ethical market access and outcomes for countries and firms. In other
words, how do countries or individual operations gain ethical consumers' and
retailers' trust and allegiance? In light of the advocacy of ethical markets as
means of economic development and social and environmental regulation by
institutions such as the World Bank and the US Agency for International
Development (USAID), it is important to provide communities, firms, non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), national governments, and others with
insights about how to actively intervene to increase the viability of those
projects with the most benefits on the ground or, more fundamentally, whether or
not to pursue ethical markets in the first place. The researcher will share the
results of this research through summary reports, speaking engagements, and
media outreach. She will also convene a workshop on ethical havens to foster
comparative work (including a book project) on ethical markets and their spatial
outcomes across multiple industries, and will mentor undergraduate and graduate
research assistants in qualitative and quantitative data gathering and analysis.

One of the key questions surrounding so-called ethical markets is who benefits?
While there is evidence of price premiums and other benefits for producers,
there is also evidence of the dilution of ethical standards over time and the
exclusion of the most progressive practices and smallest producers. In the case
of ethical diamonds, the market has diversified over time, with new African
empowerment discourses backing product offerings from a range of countries, and
a diversity of retailer trajectories (i.e. some switching away from Canadian
diamonds, others sticking with them, and yet others diversifying). The question
remains, to what extent have the challenges to Canada's ethical monopoly
actually changed the market? Specifically, how much market share have different
ethical alternatives, including Canadian diamonds, gained and lost over time;
how have their governance structures and marketing strategies changed over time;
and, what factors explain these market shifts? This project will combine
quantitative and qualitative analysis, including the creation of a database of
ethical product offerings and representations (including changes over time), in-
depth interviews with retailers and other stakeholders, and consumer surveys.
Since consumer and corporate cultures vary geographically, this study will take
a comparative approach, focusing on potential national and sub-national
differences among major ethical diamond markets (the United States, Canada, and
the UK).