* 1461295
* REU Site: Human Impacts on the Colorado Plateau: Placed Based Research and Training.
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Amy Whipple, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 245,021.00

This REU Site award to Northern Arizona University, located in Flagstaff, AZ,
will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2015-
2017. Research is organized around a theme of placed-based research on human
impacts on the environment on the Colorado Plateau. Expert mentors come from
Biology, Forestry, and Environmental Sciences. Mentoring that begins with
multidimensional interactions of peers and faculty helps students to feel that
they are a fully-integrated part of the research endeavor and allows them to see
a pathway from community college to a scientific career. Program elements
include a research experience, and a field station-based introduction to
environmental science research, group activities with a focus on responsible
conduct of science and supporting Tribal and Community College students in
becoming scientists. The core of recruiting is via site visits and relationship
development between the PIs and faculty at the students' home institutions,
supplemented by emailed flyers and a website. Application forms, essays, and
reference letters are accepted in the winter and evaluated by the Co-PIs with
priority given to students from tribal and community colleges who come highly
recommended by their faculty and indicate a good match to the program in their
essay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 8 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Our program will
contribute to more Native American and Hispanic students continuing their
studies at 4-year and graduate-degree granting
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by
all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Program evaluation also includes
independent interviews of students and mentors and tracking and support for
future success. Students are required to be tracked after the program and must
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information is available by visiting http://nau.edu/Merriam-Powell/Research-
Experience/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Whipple at Amy.Whipple@nau.edu) or the
co-PI (Dr. Martinez at Theodore.Martinez@nau.edu).