* 1461306
* D0 Physics Research
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Paul Grannis, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 12/31/2017
* USD 161,266.00

The D0 experiment operated at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL)
proton-antiproton Tevatron collider from 1992 until 2011, and has produced
nearly 500 scientific publications to date. Notable among the results during
that period was the discovery of the top quark in 1995. During this period, the
Tevatron was the world's highest energy collider. This position now goes to the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN (proton-proton), but the Tevatron still has
some advantages because it is a proton- antiproton collider. This makes a large
number of proton and antiproton constituent particles, quark-antiquark
collisions, as opposed to the LHC collisions that are dominated by intermediary
particles called gluons. This enables unique measurements of quark-dominated
processes, including some aspects of single top quark production via the
Electroweak interaction and asymmetries between forward and backward produced
top quarks or hadrons containing bottom quarks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of
the D0 data continues with some 40 additional publications expected over the
next two years. These will contain further studies of the top quark, the Higgs
boson and the nature of the strong force. This award will fund one of the two
spokespersons of the D0 experiment. The spokespersons are responsible for all
physics analyses and guiding them toward publication. They provide mentoring for
the graduate students and postdocs conducting analyses, and oversee the internal
review of analyses by more senior members of the collaboration. In addition, the
spokespersons represent the collaboration to the FNAL Directorate, the funding
agencies, other experiments, and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About
500 students have been trained within the D0 experiment, and a similar number of
postdoctoral fellows have matured as scientists within the collaboration. The
training of students and postdocs will continue through the analyses conducted
during this grant. As in the past, we expect that these young men and women will
enter careers in physics education and research, medical science, information
technology, financial firms and government service. The mentoring of these
people is one of the most important tasks of the D0 spokespersons, and provides
one of the most lasting impacts on society by the experiment.