* 1461218
* REU Site: Mountains and Minds: New Chemical Insights Into Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Ruben Ceballos, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The Chemistry Division in the Mathematics and Physical Sciences Directorate and
the Division of Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences support a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site led by
Professor Mary J. Cloninger at Montana State University (MSU) and Professor
Ruben M. Ceballos at the University of Minnesota-Morris. Undergraduate research
occurs under the theme "New Chemical Insights Into Biology" in the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Montana State University, in the Native American
Research Lab, and at Universiti Teknologi MARA in Malaysia. Eight students
participate in the ten week REU program on-site at Montana State University,
with strong commitment to and preferential admission for Native American
students, Tribal College students, and students from small colleges in the upper
northwest region of the United States where resources for research are limited.
Two Native American students who have already completed a research experience,
either at MSU's REU Site or through another research mechanism, perform research
in Malaysia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this REU program is to
introduce students to state-of-the-art instrumentation and frontier research
techniques at the chemistry/biology interface. REU projects are designed to use
chemical approaches to study biological questions including extremophile
responses to stress, mechanisms of action for radical enzymes, native plant
natural product chemistry, multivalent intercellular recognition processes,
protein structure-function relationships, virus curing agents, hydroxylase
reactivity, excited electron states in DNA, chemical sensing materials, and
lipid membrane structure and function. These areas are all the focus of current
research in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Montana State
University, in the Native American Research Lab, and at Universiti Teknologi
MARA in Malaysia. The MSU students attend weekly workshops and group meetings.
All students participate in video conference group meetings and a poster
symposium, and all write a final paper. This REU program allows
interdisciplinary research, which uses chemical approaches to address biological
problems, to be more accessible to all students including Native Americans
students.