* 1461102
* REU Site: Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Gregory Hilmas, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2019
* USD 415,000.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site program
will provide rigorous training in research methods for undergraduate students in
the fields of mechanical engineering, manufacturing engineering, and materials
science and engineering. Particular attention will be paid to underrepresented
students in order to ensure program diversity and students from institutions
with limited STEM opportunities in order to provide research opportunities to
students that otherwise cannot access these opportunities. The program will
provide undergraduate students with the opportunity to engage with industrial
experts and will encourage the students to pursue graduate education. Investment
in this program will help the United States maintain a competitive advantage in
the critical manufacturing technology of Additive Manufacturing
(AM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort will foster interest in a key competitive
technology area and provide valuable knowledge related to the following
components: 1) a ten week summer program on AM research that combines analytical
studies and computer aided design and analysis with a hands-on laboratory
experience, 2) challenging individual research projects utilizing the skills of
mechanical engineering, manufacturing engineering, materials science and
engineering, and information technology, to address critical issues in AM, 3)
structured mentoring system for the students that includes a network of students
and faculty, 4) opportunities where industry and faculty experts discuss topics
such as state-of-the-art research, emerging technologies, etc., and 5) an
environment where students learn effective communication in a variety of
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
three-year program at Missouri University of Science and Technology (Missouri
S&amp;T) is focused in the area of Additive Manufacturing (AM). Each year ten
undergraduate students will join the Missouri S&amp;T team of faculty and
graduate students to engage in exciting, interdisciplinary AM research. To meet
the interdisciplinary nature of AM, the proposed program will be a joint effort
of the Departments of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Manufacturing
Engineering, Material Science and Engineering, and Information Science and
Technology, as well as the Center for Aerospace Manufacturing Technologies on
the Missouri S&amp;T campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this REU Site
program are to: 1) educate undergraduate students to the awesome possibilities
AM allows and stimulate them to learn more, 2) provide students with individual
challenging research projects in AM that include analytical, computer aided
design and analysis, and hands-on components in world class facilities with
state-of-the-art equipment, 3) attract talented undergraduate students,
particularly underrepresented students (at least 35% female and 20% minority)
and students from institutions with limited STEM research opportunities (at
least 50%), to conduct research in AM and motivate them to pursue graduate
studies, and 4) provide activities that expose the students to other exciting
areas of research and cutting?edge technologies, improve their communication
skills, etc.