* 1461829
* NSF-SIAM Symposium on the Mathematical and Computational Aspects of Materials Science
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* James Crowley, Society For Industrial and Applied Math (SIAM)
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2016
* USD 17,387.00

This proposal requests funds to support travel expenses for ten speakers and the
organizer of a one day symposium on the Mathematical and Computational Aspects
of Materials Science, see http://www.siam.org/meetings/cse15/symposium.php. This
symposium will take place at the SIAM Conference on Computational Science and
Engineering (CS&E), which will be held in Salt Lake City, Utah on March 14-18,
2015. The goal of the symposium is to bring together leaders in applied and
computational mathematics and materials science in order to develop
collaborative projects that will advance the state of the art in materials
design and analysis.

In response to the multi-agency Materials Genome Initiative for Global
Competitiveness, developed by the U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy,
and to advance their own research agendas, the materials science community has
embarked on various large-scale computational projects. These projects offer
challenging opportunities for materials scientists to collaborate with
mathematical and computational scientists in order to advance the state of the
art in materials research and design by developing mathematical models,
computational algorithms, and tools for data analysis. The symposium will
present an opportunity to look ahead and explore critical areas of materials
research where mathematical modeling and numerical simulations can accelerate
progress in technologically important areas, such as smart materials and design
and evaluation of new ways to store and transmit energy. In order to keep the
focus on accelerating progress, the speakers have been instructed to give
forward looking presentations, rather than presentations about their most recent
research activities.