* 1461088
* Manipulating and Classifying Memory Processing during Sleep
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Ken Paller, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 03/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

The ability to remember is central to human success. Whereas most memory
research focuses on the formation and/or recall of memories, events intervening
between the acquisition of new information and its subsequent retrieval may play
a central role in shaping memory storage and determining what can be remembered.
In particular, recent research suggests that memories are reactivated during
sleep. This insight has led researchers to hypothesize that reactivation during
sleep may have a profound influence on whether a memory persists or fades away.
However, investigating this question in humans has been hindered by difficulties
in measuring reactivation. Furthermore, merely measuring reactivation is
insufficient for showing that reactivation improves memory. To establish
causality, one must directly manipulate reactivation instead of just observing
when it happens. An overarching objective of this project is thus to monitor,
characterize, and manipulate memory reactivation during sleep. These efforts at
the intersection of memory research and sleep research will expand our
understanding of how memories are stored in the brain, providing knowledge that
can then guide efforts to improve learning and memory in a variety of contexts,
including in education, in the legal system, in public service training, for
individuals with memory dysfunction due to disease, for older individuals with
age-related memory decline, and for a wide variety of on-the-job uses of memory.
The research will also highlight the relevance of sleep for effective learning,
bolstering societal appreciation of the need for
sleep.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take the innovative approach of
combining auditory stimulation during sleep with extensive analysis of EEG
recordings. Through systematic arrangement of learning and testing procedures,
auditory stimulation will function as a prompt for memory reactivation in the
brain while relevant neural activity is simultaneously monitored. These
procedures make it possible to analyze neurocognitive processing during sleep
and to relate this processing to later memory performance. By manipulating which
memories are cued during sleep, causal inferences about how reactivation affects
stored memories will be made. Dr. Paller and his team will focus on established
physiological signals (e.g., N400 and sleep spindles) as well as on multivariate
analyses. By applying sophisticated pattern classifier analyses to sleep EEG
data collected immediately after the auditory cues are played, a time-varying
neural measure of how strongly the associated memory is reactivated during sleep
will be derived. This neural signature of memory reactivation can be related to
features of sleep physiology and also subsequent memory to shed light on exactly
which aspects of sleep promote strong memory reactivation and, ultimately,
accurate recall. This work thus provides a powerful new set of approaches for
investigating the fundamental brain events that enable memory storage to be
enduring for the vast amount of information we all need to remember.