* 1461061
* REU Site:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Mathematics at Indiana University
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Christopher Connell, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 07/31/2022
* USD 239,965.00

Continuing a tradition dating back nearly fifty years, the Department of
Mathematics at Indiana University will offer an intensive summer research
experiences for talented undergraduates. A keystone of our program is the high
level of participation from our internationally recognized faculty. These
faculty help develop students to the point of being able to successfully tackle
challenging open problems in mathematics. By providing a well-balanced and
structured environment together with milestones for both oral exposition at our
research conference and written reports of results, the IU REU lays the
groundwork for student success in their projects. Participant success is further
encouraged by the fostering of an intense and collaborative work environment,
and most importantly through the regular working sessions with mentors. In
addition to the abstract problem solving skills and intellectual stamina gained
by the participants, their professional development is further enhanced through
LaTeX workshops, tours and demonstrations of libraries and Indiana University's
extensive computational resources which are made available to participants,
regular research presentations by faculty members, and similar opportunities.
Our program continues to emphasize the recruiting of talented women, minorities
and first generation college students, and their success is a key component of
the metrics we use to evaluate and continually improve the effectiveness of our
model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Indiana University REU program provides an
immersive environment with a strong mentorship-oriented approach to research.
Eight students will work one-on-one or in small groups with faculty members,
spending eight weeks on our campus tackling carefully selected research
problems. Typically, these problems are unsolved, accessible, and mathematically
significant. Topics in pure mathematics are chosen from a broad swath of
mathematics including: geometric group theory, combinatorial topology and knot
theory, logic, complex and symbolic dynamics, tilings of surfaces, aspects of
category theory and several more. Topics in applied mathematics are drawn from
areas in computer science such as recursion theory or homotopy type theory and
areas of mathematical biology and chemistry from polymer organization and cell
function to phylogenetics. Housed together in a dormitory and sharing common
office space, students benefit from being immersed in mathematics collectively
and from the spontaneous collaboration that naturally follows. Regular
presentations by local faculty give the group a broader and deeper understanding
of mathematics as a whole. Students disseminate their findings by giving brief
presentations at a statewide undergraduate mathematics research conference,
giving an hour-long formal lecture to peers, faculty, and graduate students, and
writing a formal self-contained research report detailing their findings. Some
of these reports are expected to develop into peer-reviewed research papers.
Ultimately, our program significantly helps prepare participants to be the
leaders in today's highly technical workforce, whether in academia or industry.