* 1461576
* Quantifying Risk of Tree Species Regeneration Failure and Ecosystem Transitions in Lower Elevation Forests
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Anna Sala, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 10/31/2019
* USD 410,000.00

Ecological disturbances have the potential of causing transitions of low-
elevation forests into other ecosystem types, consequently altering the position
of lower treelines. Small shifts in these lower treelines can result in large
changes in forested area, which will have profound ecological and economic
impacts for society. These ecosystems already are experiencing dramatic changes
due to widespread disturbance and climate-driven mortality with long-term
implications for ecosystem services including water management, carbon stocks,
and maintenance of connectivity for wildlife species. This research project will
provide new perspectives, information, insights and approaches to advance basic
understanding about the processes that maintain low-elevation forests and
improve capabilities to forecast where and under what conditions these forests
may be lost. The project will provide critical information for identifying
vulnerable low-elevation forested regions, including those in the wildland-urban
interface. The findings will provide a novel but tractable means of quantifying
risk of regeneration failure and ecosystem transition in lower-elevation forests
to guide future land use and management priorities in the wildland-urban
interface of the western U.S. Project results will provide valuable information
and insights for policy makers, governmental agencies, and resource
administrators in assessing appropriate courses of action to minimize socio-
economic and ecological impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecosystem transitions at
lower elevation forests can occur because of both mortality of adult trees and
regeneration failure after disturbance. Increases in temperature and the
frequency of drought may prevent seedling regeneration at sites that adult trees
can generally tolerate. The investigators will explore answers to the core
question of how climate and ecological disturbances impact tree species
emergence and regeneration in lower-elevation forests. They will identify
regions prone to regeneration failure by linking fine-scaled physiological
greenhouse studies to broad-scale observational data of species regeneration
patterns as mediated through local and regional climate and hydrology models. It
will assess geographic patterns in the demography of lower treelines by using
forest inventory data, and mechanistic and correlative niche models of species
distributions. The investigators will identify vulnerable areas for active
management and improve basic understanding of processes governing the
distribution of lower-treeline forests by bridging the disciplines of
biogeography, biophysical ecology, and ecohydrology.