* 1461116
* Explore it! Building the Next Generation of Sustainable Forest Bioproduct Researchers
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Douglas Gardner, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2019
* USD 522,087.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:

The REU Site Program, Explore it! Building the Next Generation of Sustainable
Forest Bioproduct Researchers aims for participants to develop and utilize new
knowledge to address forest bioproduct issues impacting society in an ethical
manner. The REU Site recruits minorities through extensive use of existing
linkages with primarily minority serving institutions. Results are disseminated
via campus and international presentations, and through journal articles and
symposia. REU students work alongside middle-school teachers creating curricular
modules to teach STEM principles to middle school children employing the concept
of sustainable forest bioproducts as a vehicle. Participants present to and
interact with FBRI faculty, thereby broadening both their and the faculty
experiences. Society benefits as participants disseminate their findings, impact
middle school education, obtain a broader understanding of research ethics, and
further, enroll in graduate school to advance their careers. The international
scientific community benefits as the REU participants present their findings to
our Chilean colleagues, while learning of the parallel research performed at the
University of Concepcion.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:

This project is a continuation of a previously funded REU Site: Explore it!
Building the Next Generation of Sustainable Forest Bioproduct Researchers. This
REU Site provides 10 undergraduates with a ten week summer research experience,
leveraged on the focus areas of the University of Maine, Forest Bioproducts
Research Institute (FBRI). Focus on sustainable forest bioproducts is highly
topical and of great global importance in the area of sustainable bioproduct
alternatives. Students conduct research advancing their knowledge of the field
in general and one of the thematic elements, specifically: 1) sustainability and
LCA, 2) feedstock extraction/modification, 3), process control and sensing, 4)
nanomaterial production and utilization, and 5) new product development. REU
funding provides stipends and professional development activities for 30
undergraduates over 3 years. Additional non-NSF REU funded students will
participate, including 6 Chilean students on a mutual exchange with 6 US
students, thereby broadening the impact of the program. Students are mentored by
one of 12 Faculty, all of whom are senior personnel in the FBRI, Maine Maritime
Academy (MMA) or University of Concepcion-UDT, Chile. The REU program concludes
with a forest products industry field trip to Chile, and also involves a
research conference where participants present their work to Chilean faculty and
students. A unique set of evaluation and assessment tools are employed that
allow tracking of student performance, thus enabling feedback to students and
the program alike. The Site Proposal EEC-1461116 acknowledges the support from
the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC).