* 1461870
* BDD: A Big-Data Computational Laboratory for the Optimization of Olfactory Search Algorithms in Turbulent Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Charles Meneveau, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The detrimental effects of natural disasters, sources of pollution and malicious
acts of terrorism spread beyond the point of impact and threaten safety and
security in a much larger region. Fluid turbulence is complicit in these events:
It quickly disperses pollutants or an agent released from a source into the
atmosphere or the sea, and its whirls and eddies carry the dispersed agent away
from the source. When the location of the source is unknown, turbulence also
obfuscates the ability of a remote sensor to infer the source location. This
project exploits big-data strategies to develop new search algorithms that can
identify the source of pollutants or other agents released in turbulent air or
in the sea, using stationary or moving sensors. The principal objective is to
directly enhance our readiness in responding to adverse events where the release
of an agent threatens human or environmental safety.

The ability to identify a contaminant source and dispersion pattern in complex
turbulent flows has significant environmental and security implications. In
cases where the strength of the source is not known, it must be inferred from
remote measurements. When both the location and strength of the contaminant
source are unknown, tracking the scalar source is an ill-posed problem and, as a
result, most challenging. These tasks are often also the most urgent in
responding to environmental and security threats. Preparedness in such
circumstances requires prior planning and adaptive real-time capabilities.
Therefore, both optimal placement of stationary sensors and olfactory search
algorithms are devised in order to accurately and efficiently identify the
location and strength of contaminants - a formidable engineering challenge due
to the highly intermittent signal at the detector and the complexity of the
precursor turbulent dispersion path. Optimal strategies to decode that
information are formulated using a big-data computational laboratory where the
entire space-time evolution of various turbulent flows, computed from high-
fidelity direct numerical simulations, can be probed in real-time. The source-
identification algorithm is formulated as a variational problem where properties
of the adjoint field are exploited to identify the source location. The
variational approach provides a natural framework to optimize the placement of
stationary sensors in a region of interest, and to guide the motion of an
olfactory robot towards the source. Repeated virtual experiments using the
publicly-accessible computational laboratory, the various flow configurations,
and different levels of fidelity of the flow field provide an accurate
assessment of the performance of the search strategy in presence of scale-
dependent model uncertainty. Real-world performance of the search strategy is
tested using an autonomous underwater vehicle.