* 1461143
* REU Site: Chemistry of Nanoscale Architectures for Imaging and Environmental Applications at Jackson State University Serving Minority and Disadvantaged Students
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,11/30/2018
* Hongtao Yu, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 11/30/2018
* USD 270,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry Division is funding Professor Paresh Ray and
colleagues at Jackson State University (JSU), to host an REU site called
"Chemistry of Nanoscale Architectures for Imaging and Environmental Applications
at Jackson State University Serving Minority and Disadvantaged Students." This
REU site will provide ten weeks of research and educational experiences for
eight undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented minorities and
non-research intensive universities. Built around a theme of understanding the
imaging and environmental applications of nanoscale architectures and their
environmental implications, this REU site is led by an interdisciplinary team of
chemists, nanotechnologists, environmental engineers, and environmental
scientists. The REU students will be provided with career and educational
activities that include nanoscience-related research projects, short courses on
nanoscience and workshops on scientific writing. There will also be training in
presentation skills and counseling on graduate study in chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site, hosted at the fifth largest HBCU
(Historically Black College and University) in the nation, seeks to promote
diversity in the future scientific workforce in nanoscience. Through their
experience at JSU, the participants will be provided with valuable
educational/research experiences as they consider career pathways in science.
For the students from non-research intensive institutions, this will be an
experience that they might otherwise not have. The principal broader impact of
this REU site is on the training and mentoring of African American and
disadvantaged students with great potential for careers in STEM.