* 1461060
* REU Site: HCISec - Enhancing Undergraduate Research in Modern Human Computer Interaction Security and Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Xinwen Fu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 05/31/2019
* USD 249,677.00

This CISE Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award funds a new
REU Site at the University of Massachusetts Lowell. Each summer, undergraduate
students from across the nation will work on challenging research problems
related to human computer interaction (HCI) and privacy. Students will work with
faculty mentors to use tools and techniques to solve problems that are timely
and important. The students will investigate threats against human-action
modalities, such as using cameras to spy on touch input or other common everyday
interactions with technologies pervasive in our society. This site should help
develop computing professionals who can build future computing systems and
applications that are secure and trustworthy and that we can all use with
confidence. This REU experience provides students with the foundations and
inspiration to pursue computing careers and research in areas that are rapidly
evolving and impacting all of our citizens. This project is co-funded by the
Cyber Corps (R): Scholarship for Service Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
will use partnerships with Historically Black Colleges and Universities and with
non-research universities to recruit undergraduate students from groups
traditionally under-represented in computer science. The site includes a
significant research component combined with professional development
opportunities for the participating undergraduate students. New HCI technologies
create new venues of threats to user privacy and security. Students will
investigate defense related approaches to mitigate these threats using
techniques such as a secure finger mouse and other countermeasures. The
resulting research may contribute to the body of research related to sustaining
secure and trustworthy cyberspace. The ultimate goal is to contribute to the
development of a diverse scientific workforce with expertise in areas critical
to national security in the evolving global society of the future.