* 1461005
* REU Site: 3D Herbivory and Biodiversity of Tardigrades in North American Forest Canopies: Inspiring Students with Physical Disabilities to Pursue Field Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Margaret Lowman, Baker University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 286,285.00

This REU Site award to Baker University, Baldwin City, KS, in collaboration with
the California Academy of Science, San Francisco, CA, will support the training
of eight students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2015-2017. The program
offers students with and without ambulatory disability (on crutches or in
wheelchairs) the opportunity to conduct original research into the world of
water bears (phylum Tardigrada) and the ecological mysteries of the high
frontier of the forest canopy. Students will be trained to climb ropes and
sample treetop habitats to discover new distributions, ecologies, and species.
They will use advanced microscopes (PC, DIC, AF, SEM) to amass the data and
images necessary for analysis, presentation, and publication. Student
researchers will travel to alternative forest types at LTER sites in Florida,
Massachusetts, or Oregon to collect comparative data. Students will complete the
research process with a poster presentation at the California Academy of
Science, where they will also engage in public outreach by teaching climbing
techniques used to sample the tree canopy. The three-dimensional, comparative
ecological studies of tardigrades living in forest canopies will shed light on
both the distribution of these organisms and the complexity of underexplored
temperate forests. It is anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from
schools with limited research opportunities and who may have ambulatory
disabilities will be trained in the program. Students will be immersed in
research design, planning, conduct, analysis and reporting. All will present
their work as posters and talks at scientific meetings, and many will write
manuscripts for peer reviewed journals. Our results-orientated REU experience
will motivate students, with or without a disability, to pursue graduate degrees
and will enhance their careers as they become educators, scientists, and leaders
of thought.

The common web-based assessment tool for REU programs (funded by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure) will be used to
measure the effectiveness of the training program. Students must agree to be
tracked after the program by the NSF automated email reporting system.
Information is available at www.bakeru.edu/canopy, or by contacting William
Miller (William.Miller@BakerU.edu) or Meg Lowman (mlowman@calacademy.org).