* 1461119
* REU Site: Security of Smart Things: From Small Devices to Large Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Selcuk Uluagac, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 355,922.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at the Florida International University. Undergraduate students from across
the nation will participate in summer research focused on the security of smart
devices, particularly wearable devices. The research projects will introduce
practical innovations and testbeds for maintaining the privacy and security of
smart devices such as wearable technologies, sensors, and mobile devices as well
as smart infrastructures involving smart buildings, smart grids, and smart
lighting and communication infrastructures. The students should acquire skills
that will lead to rewarding professional careers in areas that are vital for
preserving our national security.

The students will learn how to design, implement, and assess research projects
in areas that are needed to ensure safety and privacy of all citizens. The site
will focus on recruiting under-represented minorities, particularly drawing on
the surrounding universities with large Hispanic populations. The students will
use of state-of-the art facilities and devices run by faculty members with
significant expertise in the security of smart things. The goals of the project
include providing a quality research experience for undergraduates, increasing
participation of female and under-represented minorities in computing fields,
and preparing students to pursue graduate studies in cyber security fields, and
building a community of security of smart things researchers. This site is co-
funded by the CISE Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) Program.