* 1461027
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Opportunities at the Interface of Computational and Experimental Chemistry at the University of North Texas
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Angela Wilson, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 243,742.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) supports a Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) site led by Angela K. Wilson and LeGrande Slaughter at
the University of North Texas for three summers, starting in 2015. The Site is
entitled, "Opportunities in Chemistry at the Interface of Computation and
Experiment at the University of North Texas." The site will support eight
students per summer in a ten week program. The UNT Chemistry Department is a
Ph.D.-granting program with a strong record of undergraduate research
involvement. Emphasis in the proposed REU site is placed on the integration of
computational chemistry and experiment. Students will undergo diverse training
at the interface of theory and experiment, in areas such as solar cells,
catalysis, forensic chemistry, semiconductors, chemical sensors, targeted
molecule delivery, atmospheric chemistry, interfacial chemistry, and theoretical
chemistry.

The UNT REU program will focus on increasing research opportunities for a
diverse group of students, with special efforts to recruit students from
underserved populations and institutions, and students at the early stage of
their undergraduate studies. Students will be exposed to a wide range of career,
research, community service, and leadership opportunities in chemistry,
including direct interactions with successful chemists, and visits to companies.
Successful attainment of the program goals will enhance the infrastructure for
science education for underserved populations, and continued contacts with REU
participants and partnering predominantly undergraduate institutions (PUIs) will
enable identification of effective practices for promoting research success,
which will be disseminated to the broader research community.