* 1461169
* REU Site: Ecology, Evolution and Behavior Field Research at Mountain Lake Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Edmund Brodie, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2021
* USD 604,218.00

This REU Site award to University of Virginia's Mountain Lake Biological
Station, located in Giles County, Virginia, will support the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2015-2019. The project supports
guided but independent, self-motivated original biological research in field-
based ecology, evolution, and behavior. Students live and work full-time at the
biological field station. They participate in formal training in the design and
conduct of research, scientific ethics and professional behavior, writing and
presentation techniques, and other matters of scientific and academic life.
Students prepare written and oral proposals and final reports. Participants are
included in the rich, supportive, collaborative, and stimulating intellectual
and social life at the field station. Mountain Lake has hosted a NSF REU-Sites
program since 1993.

It is anticipated that a total of 50 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences. A high proportion of program alumni publish their
work (33%) and matriculate in graduate programs (44%). The program includes
women (72% in past years), students from small colleges (39%), and participants
from groups underrepresented in science (35%). The project partners with three
outside groups: Hampton University (HBCU), University of Puerto Rico, and the
Ecological Society of America's SEEDS program. Students are recruited nationwide
via a nearly 1000-member list of personal and organizational contacts and
partner pre-screening.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are
required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email
sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://mlbs.org/reuprogram or by contacting the PI (Dr. Eric Nagy at
enagy@virginia.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Butch Brodie at bbrodie@virginia.edu).