* 1461190
* REU Site: Technical Experience in Advancing Modeling Sciences (TEAMS)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Robb Winter, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 07/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:

The proposed research site will recruit undergraduate students in the science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. The vicinity of the host
institution, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSMT), to a number of
Tribal Colleges and Universities affords SDSMT a unique opportunity to introduce
research to American Indians students and provide them with the resources to
complete degrees in the STEM fields.

The site is entitled "Technical Experience in Advancing Modeling Sciences
(TEAMS)." As the name implies, the research projects will involve modeling in a
number of areas including materials, defense, renewable energy, and three-
dimensional printing. The projects will be performed in parallel with
experiments to best expose the participants to the research area and to best
connect their findings to problems of interest. For example, one modeling
project will investigate why purification materials in biofuel production (i.e.,
ethanol from corn) clog up. By understanding what occurs at the molecular level,
and how the material interacts with the waste byproducts, the models can
influence the design of new materials for these applications.

Also, modeling projects are inherently collaborative, so the site will also
teach students how to work in collaborative (i.e., team) environments. A number
of skills feed into effective collaborative relationships, so workshops,
seminars, and activities will be conducted to assist participants in developing
these collaborative skills. Some examples include teamwork building, writing
workshops, and large data set analysis. The ultimate goal is to provide the
TEAMS REU participants the tools and experiences to increase their success as
they pursue STEM careers.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:

The purpose of the proposed research is to host a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site entitled "Technical Experience in Advancing Modeling
Sciences (TEAMS)." The TEAMS REU site aims to provide undergraduates with the
opportunity to make a significant contribution to collaborative modeling
research projects. Specifically, the goals of the TEAMS REU site are as follows:
(i) provide research opportunities in a number of modeling mediums including
molecular dynamics, transport phenomenon, and solid mechanics, (ii) develop
students' appreciation of team diversity and collaborative efforts in research,
(iii) enhance students' teamwork, communication, critical thinking, and
professional skills, (iv) expose students to the importance of modeling in a
number of fields, (v) transition students from pre-engineering programs into
four-year degree programs, (vi) guide students to pursue graduate programs, and
(vii) increase the opportunities for underrepresented groups.

A number of activities are planned to meet these objectives. Some examples
include developing teamwork skills, exposing students to modeling work outside
the REU site, and writing workshops to enhance communication ability. The reason
for developing these skills is because they are all important to modeling
research. For example, modeling research is typically collaborative. As such,
projects require researchers to work in a team setting and communicate their
respective perspectives and expertise to their collaborative partners. Other
objectives involve preparing participants for four-year or graduate programs and
enhancing participation of underrepresented groups like American Indians. An
example seminar is designed to guide students on how to identify and apply fora
graduate program meeting their interests. With regards to research
opportunities, a number of modeling projects have been designed to be completed
by undergraduates within a year's time. These projects coincide with current
experimental efforts and will complement those efforts.