* 1461617
* SBP:  Broadening Participation of STEM Faculty Through Work Design
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Tammy Allen, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 03/31/2020
* USD 380,000.00

Nontechnical Description of Significance and
Importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work design plays a central role in the way
individuals experience work. Structural characteristics of jobs such as social
support, decision-making autonomy, and perceived significance are positively
associated with outcomes such as job satisfaction and retention. However,
effects of characteristics of jobs vary across gender, even when males and
females occupy the same position. Differences are also evident in time
allocation on faculty jobs: males spend more time engaged in research than
females, who put more time into mentoring and service. Gendered patterns are
especially pronounced among STEM faculty. While such differences have been well
documented, we have little understanding why the work experiences of male and
female faculty diverge. The proposed project uses work design theory as a lens
for investigating the variability in work experiences and job outcomes across
male and female STEM faculty, providing new insight into structural barriers
that help and hinder underrepresented groups in STEM careers. The plan of work
includes a three-wave longitudinal panel design survey, a 10-day daily
experience sampling method study, a series of focus group interviews, and an
archival review of promotion and tenure files. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lack of female role models discourages female
participation in STEM careers; thus, increasing the number of female faculty in
male dominated STEM fields is key to broadening participation of women in STEM.
Findings from the theoretically derived proposed set of relationships will
elucidate the complex interplay between top down and bottom up processes within
organizations that contribute to alignment between individual and organizational
goals and that can lead to the design of effective programs and interventions
within organizations. Expected outcomes include a more nuanced understanding of
the daily work experiences of female STEM faculty and how those experiences
differ from their male counterparts. It is also expected that the findings will
reveal micro level processes that inhibit the successful progression and
retention of female faculty. This proposed research unites diverse expertise
across several fields of science in effort to apply a multidisciplinary
perspective to the research questions. The findings will be used to help inform
and stimulate ways in which organizations can alter work design processes, in an
effort to advance the careers of women in STEM. Funding will be used to support
a doctoral student researcher. The doctoral student will gain research project
management experience and be involved in products associated with the research
(e.g., conference presentations; publications). The proposed project will also
provide research experiences for undergraduates who will be supervised by the
doctoral research assistant. Such experiences contribute to the development of a
scientifically literate workforce in that undergraduates who participate in
research have reported cognitive gains such as increased confidence in their
ability to do science and learning to "think and work like a scientist."
Developmental activities and experiences will include lab meeting and
departmental presentations, scholarly article discussions, and written
developmental plans.