* 1461179
* REU Site: Summer Research Internships in Manufacturing and Techno-Entrepreneurship Preparation
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Vahid Motevalli, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2018
* USD 383,907.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new three year
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site focuses on manufacturing
related research and provides student interns with techno-entrepreneurship
experiences. The potential impact of this REU site arises from the students'
involvement in one of the most exciting and rapidly developing areas of
engineering - manufacturing research, both basic and applied. This unique
experience will play a transformational role in preparing future leaders in the
emerging areas of manufacturing. The research topics also address some of the
cutting-edge manufacturing technologies which will be key areas for the US
industry and national competitiveness for the next few decades. Furthermore, the
process and the focus of recruitment on participation of underrepresented groups
will lead to a much broader exposure of young students in this group. This
exposure and experience will lead to the development and improvement of
disadvantaged communities through the empowering potential of techno-
entrepreneurship. It is anticipated that this site will also impact the nation's
need to increase the number of U.S. citizens and permanent residents engaged in
research-related and start-up careers in private
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The five
project objectives of the REU site are to: 1) provide undergraduate students
with opportunities to conduct manufacturing research; 2) increase the number of
future professionals in manufacturing; 3) allow interns to self-assess their
interest in techno-entrepreneurship; 4) allow interns to self-assess their
interest in graduate school, and; 5) enable the College of Engineering at
Tennessee Tech University (TTU) to become, and be perceived as, a nationally
recognized top tier undergraduate and graduate program. Each year, a different
group of ten talented freshmen though senior undergraduate students will be
nationally recruited to conduct research on the TTU campus as part of this ten-
week summer internship program. Ten faculty members and ten graduate students
from the College of Engineering will serve as mentors. The program includes a
Lean LauchPad short course, professional development workshops, and an off-
campus techno-entrepreneurship enrichment program. Recruitment of summer interns
will be from five groups: 1) institutions with a limited STEM research base (at
least 50% of the students); 2) minority institutions; 3) women; 4) persons with
disabilities, and; 5) TTU programs (no more than 30% of total from TTU).
Selection of interns will be based upon their career objectives, academic
qualifications, past work experiences, underrepresented groups and institution
type.