* 1461132
* REU Site: Social Network Analysis for Solving Minority Health Disparities
* SBE,SMA
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Kirk Dombrowski, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 01/31/2018
* USD 349,996.00

This project is supported under the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program, which is an NSF-wide program although each Directorate
administers its own REU Site competition. This program supports active research
participation by undergraduate students in an effort to introduce them to
scientific research so as to encourage their continued engagement in the
nation's scientific research and development enterprise. REU projects involve
students in meaningful ways in ongoing research programs or in research projects
designed especially for the purpose. The REU program is a major contributor to
the NSF's goal of developing a diverse, internationally competitive, and
globally-engaged science and engineering workforce. The Social, Behavioral and
Economic (SBE) sciences Directorate awarded this REU Site grant to the
University of Nebraska ? Lincoln (UNL) in order to stimulate participant
interest in social network analysis (SNA) and behavioral health with a focus on
minority health disparities. Participants undergo an extensive methodological
training in SNA by the project PI while gaining exposure to a range of research
topics and potential science research fields. In conjunction with the Minority
Health Disparities Initiative (MHDI), they join a collaborative community of
transdisciplinary researchers and community health workers from state and local
agencies tackling minority health disparities in Nebraska. The expansion of
existing REU to Minority Health Disparities is critical for providing students
diverse experiences during the summer and expanding the number of students
interested in minority health research through innovative methods like social
network analysis and culturally sensitive paradigms, such as Community Based
Participatory Research (CBPR). Research occurs within 8 participating
laboratories that are housed in several departments across two UN campuses. The
summer program includes training in professionalism and provide individual
career mentoring and cohort activities. Building off of existing recruitment
strategies employed by UNL?s Ronald E. McNair Postbaccalaureate Achievement
Program, the project recruits junior- and senior-level undergraduates from a
wide-range of backgrounds, home institutions, ages, gender, and ethnicity, with
emphasis on under-represented minority and female students in the Midwest.
Participants are encouraged to pursue careers in behavioral health sciences and
have opportunities to present the results of their research to both other REU
participants and to a wider audience of health practitioners at the annual
Nebraska Minority Health Summit, co-sponsored by the Minority Health Disparities
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the late 1990s, a combined focus on
social networks and health has had a significant impact on both health research
and social science. SNA has emerged as a key analytical lens for sociologists,
pushing relational sociology forward at a rapid pace in the last two decades. It
has also emerged as a set of general purpose tools and approaches which cross-
cut a range of sciences. Without exaggeration, researchers working on networks
choose freely among techniques and measures developed from fields as distant as
computer security, virology, primatology, and studies of the world-wide-web.
Social science, and social network analysis have much to contribute in such a
transdiciplinary realm. SNA is among the oldest and most rigorous approaches to
network analysis, and one with a rich empirical base. While physicists model
human networks as metaphors of more basic physical material, SNA researchers
have traditionally sought to draw their abstractions from the actual interaction
of human beings. The potential of this approach to influence public health and
related fields is already apparent. What is needed now is less borrowing, and
more researchers trained across newly interwoven fields. In this program, REU
participants learn basic approaches to network SNA and then employ these skills
in a range of sponsoring NIH- and NSF-funded research projects at UNL and the
University of Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC) that focus on minority health and
health disparities. Network training takes place in a 2 week intensive network
science practicum, followed by 8 weeks of participation in an MHDI-affiliated
research project. These projects are united by a collective focus on fundamental
questions related both to minority health and to broadening participation in
minority health, and are currently funded by a range of federal and state
sources. The project is co-funded by the EPSCoR program.