* 1461166
* REU Site: Socially Relevant Computing in Pervasive Computing, Computer Vision, and Human-Computer Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* David Wilson, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 323,815.00

The Socially Relevant Computing REU Site at UNC Charlotte engages a diverse
group of undergraduate students in an intensive 9-week summer research
experience. REU students conduct research as part of a collaborative research
community, working with faculty, graduate students, and peers. Each project has
a socially relevant theme, providing undergraduate students with the opportunity
to apply and extend their computing knowledge and deepen their understanding of
the societal and global impact of computing research. The goals of the program
are to increase interest in attending graduate school, enhance preparation for
careers in research and innovation, and broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in the field of computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
students will be involved in research that leads to the creation of new
technologies that support humans in socially relevant tasks, requiring advances
in the areas of pervasive computing, computer vision, and human computer
interaction. Projects include: creating robust and scalable methods to analyze
large sets of medical images to support clinical decision-making and diagnosis,
developing new algorithms and systems that support large scale scientific data
collection in crowdsensing and citizen science projects, and creating novel
interfaces and systems for analyzing user interactions while preserving privacy
in intelligent spaces. More information about the Socially Relevant Computing
REU Site can be found at the program website: www.reu.uncc.edu.