* 1461619
* WORKSHOP:  Journeys in World Politics:A Mentoring Workshop for Junior Women Studying International Relations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Sara Mitchell, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 156,435.00

Diversity is an important issue in academic communities. The Journeys in World
Politics project seeks to enhance gender diversity in an area of political
science research that has been male-dominated historically, the study of
international relations, although the success of the Journeys mentoring program
can be generalized to other projects to advance gender and racial diversity in
political science and other academic disciplines. The Journeys in World Politics
workshops provide mentoring for young female Political Scientists. The three day
workshops support 18-20 participants and include research presentations by
junior scholars and feedback from discussants, oral autobiographies by senior
scholars, and career and gender discussion sessions involving topics such as
networking, balancing family and work, negotiating salary, and gender issues in
the classroom. The project provides active mentoring for female scholars and
connects the workshop participants to broader networks of women in academia. Our
project tracks the success of participants through a series of follow up surveys
and comparisons of participants to their academic peer groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many studies have evaluated the status of women in
political science over the past 30 years. Several indicators - differences in
salaries, differences in publication rates in the top political science
journals, differences in publication rates in books and edited volumes,
differences in placement at research versus teaching institutions, differences
in satisfaction with graduate school training, differences in scholarly
citations, and increasing attrition rates for female scholars at all academic
levels - evidence a significant gender gap in the field. While recent studies
show some decline in this gender gap, the under-representation of female
scholars at top research institutions and high rank levels is problematic.
Proactive solutions to these structural problems have been evaluated and among
the most promising avenues for change are active mentoring and the creation of
friendly and nurturing academic environments. The Journeys in World Politics
program applies this knowledge by providing mentoring and networking for young
female scholars, creating opportunities to mentor female PhDs outside their home
departments. The program also allows for collection of more systematic data to
evaluate the impact of mentoring programs on long-term success rates for female
political scientists. NSF Funds will be used to support the costs of the
workshops, to track the success of the mentoring program through survey research
and collection of outcomes assessment data, to support a formal evaluation of
the Journeys workshops, to support publications on the Journeys program, and to
build networks of women in political science more broadly.