* 1461255
* REU Site in Interdisciplinary Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Boyd Goodson, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2019
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL PART: The REU Site at Southern Illinois University Carbondale will
provide research opportunities for an average of 14 undergraduates per year
(including 2 supported internally) for a 9 week period each summer. Students
will be involved in interdisciplinary projects in the broadly defined area of
materials research. Inclusion of faculty mentors from various disciplines
(Chemistry, Physics, Engineering, Microbiology, and the Materials Technology
Center) will enable the REU students to develop skills needed to excel in both
academic and industrial research environments, where interdisciplinary teams are
standard and researchers must communicate effectively across disciplines.
Students will also be required to think about the application of their research
to new technologies and the manufacturing of new devices, and they will have the
opportunity to present their results to a diverse audience. Primary goals of the
site include: (1) creating a positive image of science and engineering as a
career choice, (2) providing a nurturing environment and instilling a sense of
confidence in the art of discussing and practicing science, (3) improving the
participants' oral and written communication skills, (4) teaching of basic
research tools, including literature searches and the operation of modern
instrumentation, (5) fostering a collaborative teamwork approach to research,
and (6) increasing the number of domestic students, especially those from
underrepresented groups, who choose to pursue STEM careers. A detailed
assessment plan will evaluate the success of the
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART: The Site will recruit primarily
from 2 and 4-year institutions residing in neighboring states or the Mississippi
Delta region, and from those institutions with traditionally high enrollments of
students from underrepresented groups. Students participating in the Site will
learn to network with other scientists and engineers through various social
activities including weekly lunches with faculty mentors and weekend trips to
cultural, industrial, and recreational locations. The available mentored
research projects promise to be excellent training grounds for working in
materials and related fields. Students will be exposed to a variety of
transformative projects at the forefront of science and engineering, including:
(1) studies related to the synthesis of advanced functional materials (graphene,
two-dimensional layered chalcogenides, metal oxide nanowires and functionalized
structures, inorganic heterostructures, nanocomposites, nanoscale catalysts,
novel electron-accepting materials, electrospun nanofibers, etc.), (2) materials
characterization (via electron microscopies, solid- and solution-state nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, low-temperature electronic,
optical/magnetic transport measurements, ultraviolet/visible/infrared
spectroscopies, etc.), (3) theoretical/computational studies (wherein students
will learn how to study materials via density functional theory calculations,
molecular dynamics simulations, etc.), and (4) materials applications varying
from energy storage and photovoltaics, to biosensors and nanoparticle-based
antigen-delivery vehicles.