* 1461632
* Dynamics and Mechanisms of Electron Delocalization over Supramolecular Mixed Valence Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Clifford Kubiak, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2018
* USD 507,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Clifford P. Kubiak of the
Department of Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry at the University of California, San
Diego (UCSD) will develop and study new systems that undergo ultrafast chemical
reactions, those that occur in one-trillionth of a second (1 picosecond) over
large supramolecular structures. The goal of this research is to develop
molecular devices by the self-assembly of large materials with specific
functions related to information storage and switching. The supramolecular mixed
valence complexes that will be studied in this project and studies of the
dynamics of electron transfer across them offer a chemistry-driven approach to
assembling complex structures that can gate, store, and transfer charges. The
study of these systems will likely influence and guide broader thought about the
specific chemical, physical, and engineering issues that will bring molecular
electronic based devices into the mainstream, and findings will be widely
disseminated. The project will continue to involve undergraduate students
through the UCSD undergraduate research mentor program. The project will also be
interfaced with existing outreach programs at UCSD for the recruitment of
underrepresented students. There will also be a strong international
collaboration with a research group at the University of Uppsala,
Sweden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of electron transfer processes through
non-covalent interactions is important to the broader understanding of how long-
range electron transfer occurs in natural and artificial supramolecular systems.
This project builds on discoveries from the immediately preceding NSF support
period. Specifically, it will involve experimental studies of the dynamics and
mechanisms of electron delocalization in supramolecular mixed valence complexes.
Synthetic studies will be directed toward the preparation of new supramolecular
assemblies linked by weak non-covalent interactions including hydrogen bonds and
pi-stacked organic structures. These will be used to test theories of the
relationship between infrared spectral lineshape and the dynamical mechanism for
electron transfer in mixed valent systems. Studies of ultrafast electron
transfer in supramolecular complexes will be conducted to determine the
timescale and mechanism of delocalization of an electron after its injection
into a supramolecular assembly. This project seeks to explore a new concept in
the assembly of complex structures - the use of electron delocalization to
"harden" weak interactions like hydrogen bonds to produce more stable
assemblies, and position them for more permanent forms of chemical attachment.