* 1461806
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Regional Interaction as World-System Incorporation in Classic Period Mesoamerica
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Nathan Wilson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 22,235.00

Researchers seek to understand how interaction between large states and small
polities impacts populations of said small polities at the local and regional
level. With increased global interconnectedness and the continued development of
world-wide economic systems, the impacts of these systems on local populations,
both positive and negative, have become an increasingly important focus of
study. Archaeology is particularly well-suited to examine similar processes of
interaction in the past and can therefore inform on these processes of economic
and political expansion in the present. In the Classic Period (AD 300-900) of
ancient Mesoamerica, the large city of Teotihuacan (located near present-day
Mexico City), engaged in various forms of contact with many other regions. Forms
of interaction included trade, conquest, and cultural dissemination. This
project will focus on one location of interaction with Teotihuacan, the Sierra
de los Tuxtlas Region of Southern Veracruz, Mexico. It will address the impacts
of Teotihuacan influence on local populations in the region and assess the ways
in which this influence altered regional social and economic systems. In doing
so, this project will contribute to the general study of economic expansion and
implements an approach to examine foreign-induced regional economic change from
the local perspective, which can be applied broadly. This research will be
conducted by Arizona State University doctoral student Nathan D. Wilson, under
the direction of Dr. Michael E. Smith. Data from this project will serve as the
basis for Mr. Wilson's doctoral dissertation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses the issue of peripheral incorporation into larger systems and how this
process is manifest regionally. It implements a world-systems framework in
quantifying interaction between core-affiliated populations and a negotiated
periphery. To evaluate this, it will study peripheral consumption of imported
goods in the Western Tuxtlas Region (WTR) of southern Veracruz, Mexico. Through
multiple lines of evidence, this research will ascertain the regional economic
effects for two WTR polities that were connected to an intrusive center
(Matacapan) displaying cultural affiliation to the Mexican highland capital of
Teotihuacan. Prior research in the region has focused on intensive production
and regional, interpolity distribution of specific pottery types associated with
Matacapan. This project will build upon this previous research by: (1) more
effectively quantifying consumption of these products in two neighboring
polities and (2) assessing distribution and consumption of other Matacapan-
produced goods. In doing so, it will construct a regional, diachronic view of
the different ways through which these two indigenous polities (and different
populations within one of the polities) incorporated into a Teotihuacan world-
system via interaction with Matacapan. The proposed research is geared toward
analytical methods (e.g., attribute analysis, Instrumental Neutron Activation
Analysis [INAA], and petrography) to help differentiate between Early and Middle
Classic Period contexts, assess the accuracy of visual sourcing of obsidian, and
separate local utilitarian pottery types from imported versions. Sample
selection from previously excavated materials will be done in Mexico, while
sample preparation and chemical and mineralogical analyses will be completed by
laboratories in the United States.