* 1461441
* Evaluating the Impacts of Cross-Curricular, Place-Based Pedagogy to  Enhance Student Success
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Destiny Petroske, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,275,736.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will inform the body of knowledge about the
importance and conduct of undergraduate and graduate research experiences in
recruiting and retaining underrepresented individuals into STEM studies, and
preparing the next generation of STEM professionals. The connection of faculty
to research and thereby the students to culturally and locally relevant research
is an important step in retaining students who are more likely to pursue
advanced degrees. For those students entering the workforce directly from a
tribal college it is equally important that they have a well-defined skill set
in mathematics, science, and technology for entry into the STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northwest Indian College (NWIC) will enhance its current
degree program in Native environmental sciences to include modules that capture
scientific concepts in a Native knowledge or place-based context. The college
will study the affects of this type of instruction on the academic success of
American Indian students.