* 1461183
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Tropical Biology at the La Selva Biological Station, Costa Rica
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2015
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 387,419.00

This REU Site award to the Organization for Tropical Studies, located in Durham,
NC, will support the training of 10 students for nine weeks during the summers
of 2015-2017. This program exposes students to the wide array of research taking
place at the La Selva Research Station in a lowland wet tropical forest of Costa
Rica. As part of the program, students will work under the mentorship of active
researchers on projects related to tropical ecology and evolutionary biology.
Research areas include forest regeneration, faunal declines, land use changes,
and biological corridors. In addition, students participate in a series of
workshops on ethics, science communication, statistics in R, and tropical
biology. The core objective of the program is for students to conduct
independent research under the guidance of a research mentor. Students design
their own research project from beginning to end and develop, conduct, and
present their findings at the end of the summer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, from groups underrepresented in the
sciences and non-RI research institutions will be trained in this program.
Students design their own research projects from beginning to end and develop,
conduct, and present their findings at the end of the summer. A second objective
of the program is for the students to publish their research results and present
their findings at national and international meetings. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Program assessments are documented by pre- and post-program surveys
and a program-wide evaluation. In addition, a common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information is available by visiting the OTS website at
www.tropicalstudies.org or by contacting the PI (Dr. Elizabeth C. Losos at
&lt;elosos@duke.edu&gt;).