* 1461914
* BDD: Efficient and Scalable Collection, Analytics and Processing of Big Data for Disaster Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Sanjay Madria, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2020
* USD 346,632.00

The outcomes from this project is to assist human operators in their disaster
management coordination and planning, such as directing a medical physician's
team to their nearest cluster of affected people in a region to administer
medications as necessary, or finding a safe route for evacuation of affected
people. Sensor data integrated with microblogs such as Tweets help identifying
some local events and people's sentiments, which are significantly useful in
handling/understanding disaster situations. It will also benefit other
applications such as real-time tracking of road/driving conditions in vehicular
networks.

This research is conducted jointly with Osaka University in Japan, to benefit
both the universities in enhancing not only their knowledge but also to learn
global perspective in solving important problems. The research team is designing
schemes for dynamic and collaborative data compression and multi-streams
compression of multi-dimensional sensor data with error correction and recovery
for addressing the energy efficiency and bandwidth limitation issues.
Compression schemes exploit temporal locality and delta compression to provide
better bandwidth utilization. Different methods for measuring error are designed
and compared for the compressibility and actual error for variations in methods
of utilizing the error tolerance. In addition, the team is developing algorithms
for highly scalable indexing schemes for efficient data retrieval involving
mainly range queries, top-k query, ranked-based searches and snapshot queries
for multi-dimensional sensor data from different data sources to address the
issue of timely dissemination. Hilbert Curve based linearization technique
integrated with an overlay network is designed to (1) map multidimensional
attributes onto a single dimension while preserving its data locality, and (2)
to create a balanced network by associating only one node with each leaf of the
virtual tree and then partition the multidimensional search space into subspaces
and assign each node to a unique subspace. This allows an overlay network to
start from a predefined prefix to handle data skewness. This research is also
designing a scheme for using microblog messages as social sensors for efficient
integration with other sensor data. We are using machine-learning techniques to
match each message with its associate location based on the characteristics of
the message. The results will be validated and evaluated using the sensor cloud
test-bed available at Missouri S&T.