* 1461390
* Quantification and Reduction of Spatial Scale-Induced Uncertainty
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Daoqin Tong, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/28/2018
* USD 149,994.00

This research project will examine spatial scale-induced uncertainties and
address issues involved in assembling multi-source, multi-scale data in a
spatial analysis. Many spatial studies are compromised due to a discrepancy
between the spatial scale at which data are analyzed and the spatial scale at
which the phenomenon under investigation operates. One consequence has been that
research findings often conflict when analyses are conducted at differing
scales. Decision making and policy formulation therefore may be misguided by
conflicting, biased research findings brought about by spatial scale. Lacking
appropriate ways to deal with this spatial problem has made many existing
findings less compelling or even invalid. In the era of big data with the
advancement of spatial data collection technologies, data that were once
difficult or impossible to obtain are now widely available at various spatial
scales and are being used to study a variety of problems. Questions regarding
spatial data thus become more pressing. The strategies to be developed for
addressing the spatial scale issues have the potential to be applied to many
fields and applications. The research results will benefit researchers and
practitioners in processing, analyzing, and presenting multi-source, multi-scale
spatial data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous studies have been conducted to
understand how issues related to scale influence analyses and interpretation.
Despite the efforts, this remains a widely recognized, complex problem with few
generalizable solutions. Even when studies are conducted at the appropriate
spatial scale, uncertainty may exist because data are usually collected at
different scales and therefore must be aggregated or interpolated to achieve the
study scale. Using a large public health surveillance dataset, the investigators
will develop a measurement error-based statistical framework to quantify the
space scale-induced uncertainties and provide strategies to ameliorate the
issues. The research will address issues of 1) characterization of scale due to
spatial scale definition and data misalignment in the measurement error
framework; 2) quantification of the effects of scale issues on the estimation
significance and parameter biasedness; and 3) strategies that may be used to
reduce uncertainties in a multi-scale analysis.