* 1461477
* Dynamics of Mesoscopically Structured Molecular Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Michael Fayer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2019
* USD 871,567.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Michael Fayer of
Stanford University to conduct experimental studies to examine the behavior of a
number of molecules that show interesting and unusual liquid-phase behavior.
Among the liquids to be studied are liquid crystals (used in LCD devices), ionic
liquids (salts that melt at low temperatures, which show promise as more benign
solvents), supercooled liquids (systems that remain liquid below the normal
freezing point), and aqueous surfactant systems (which mimic cell membranes).
The graduate students working on this project will receive state-of-the-art
training in ultrafast laser science, while working on chemical problems with
real-world impact. For part of his educational activities, Prof. Fayer and his
research students will be working with high school students through Stanford's
Inspiring Future Scientists in Chemistry Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof.
Michael Fayer and his research group will use ultrafast spectroscopy to probe
transient structures and dynamics in complex liquids. The specific studies
include: (1) a study of the dynamics of liquid crystals and supercooled liquids
via optical heterodyne detected optical Kerr effect (OHD-OKE) and 2D-IR
spectroscopy; (2) a study of the changes in dynamical properties of ionic
liquids with small amounts of co-solvents by OHD-OKE, 2D-IR and time-reolved
fluorescence spectroscopy; (3) measurement of the properties of surfactant layer
and bilayer structures with OHD-OKE and 2D-IR spectroscopies. Researchers
working on this project will receive excellent technical training in laser
science and cutting edge optical methods. The inclusion of high school students
in the research in the Fayer laboratory stands out as a relatively uncommon
engagement with the broader community.