* 1461514
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   A multidimensional investigation of the dynamics of market transition and social change in rural China and Bangladesh
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Keith Hunley, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 280,223.00

Wealth is a critical determinant of well-being. Understanding how people gain
access to wealth is therefore critically important in efforts to eradicate
poverty and promote well-being. Research among marginalized populations within
the United States suggests that restricted access to material wealth and formal
education results in risk pooling by sharing limited resources through kin and
friendship networks. But those same networks may also restrict individual access
to material wealth and thereby inhibit economic mobility. Understanding how
social networks either buffer against risk or impede access to the forms of
wealth most closely associated with well-being is necessary for policy makers
and social scientists who wish to understand the causes and consequences of
poverty and associated social problems. Therefore, the research supported by
this award will investigate the relationship between economic development and a
range of wealth types, including material wealth, health, education, and social
networks.

The research will be undertaken by Dr. Siobhan Mattison (University of New
Mexico), Dr. Tami Blumenfield Kedar (Furman University), and Dr. Mary Shenk
(University of Missouri). To understand how various forms of wealth interact
with each other and with health to affect well-being, the team has designed a
comparative study in two societies where access to material wealth, education,
and healthcare is rapidly changing and altering local social networks. The study
populations comprise two small-scale agricultural populations, the Mosuo of
Southwest China and the villagers of Matlab, a rural district in Bangladesh. In
both places, formerly subsistence-based populations are rapidly becoming
integrated with regional, national, and international markets in labor and
goods. This provides a natural experiment that allows them explore how recent
and ongoing shifts in labor and educational opportunities, family systems, and
demographic processes affect wealth and well-being. The researchers will conduct
demographic and social network surveys to collect economic and social
information, take anthropometric measures to assess health, and conduct focus
groups, in-depth interviews, and short video interviews to examine local
interpretations of wealth and well-being. The comparative approach employed by
the study will allow an understanding of how different social norms and
institutions act to either help or limit access to changing forms of wealth.
Findings will also show whether these norms are protective or harmful with
respect to well-being in different socio-economic contexts. The results of this
study will provide a detailed understanding of how individual-level and larger-
level social constraints affect the distribution of wealth and well-being in
economies undergoing economic development, thus providing a useful model for
understanding the opportunities and challenges affecting people struggling to
thrive in the United States and around the world. The project is jointly funded
by the Cultural Anthropology Program, the Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.