* 1461838
* Sensitivity of the midlatitude waveguide to the dynamics and observations of Arctic tropopause-based vortices
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* David Turner, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 07/31/2020
* USD 298,112.00

Heating due to infrared radiation is a great source of uncertainty in weather
and climate prediction models, and high impact weather events are often strongly
influenced by sub-synoptic-scale features that affect such heating. This
proposal will closely examine specific processes active within tropopause polar
vortices (TPVs) before they encounter the jet stream. Improved knowledge gained
through detailed analysis of the processes, and their interactions with the jet
stream, will lead to improvements in weather and climate prediction by improving
their representation in numerical models. TPVs are unique because they can exist
for long periods of time before affecting the jet stream, and are therefore a
key feature to observe and accurately represent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator will develop human capacity and teach students how to
advance science through the entire spectrum of research. Quality-controlled
datasets, developed during the course of the research, will be made openly
available to the research community for use as a long-term tool for
predictability studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work would test the
hypothesis: diabatic heating from radiation, coupled with weak deformation, is
required to maintain the structure of tropopause polar vortices (TPVs) as they
encounter increasing vertical shear associated with the waveguide. The project
will use three approaches: (1) analyzing the statistical characteristics of TPVs
based upon downstream impact, (2) isolating and identifying important physical
processes important for TPV development and maintaining TPV intensity as they
approach the waveguide through controlled numerical modeling experiments, and
(3) diagnosing key uncertainties to identify specific methods of improving
process representation in numerical models. Experiments will be conducted using
the atmospheric version of the Model for Prediction Across Scales (MPAS) and
parallel simulations using the Advanced Weather Research and Forecasting (ARW)
model with the Data Assimilation Research Testbed (DART).