* 1461926
* BDD: Data-Driven Critical Information Exchange in Disaster Affected Public-Private Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Shu-Ching Chen, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 315,998.00

The disruption of business caused by a wide-spread disaster such as a hurricane
or an earthquake has a huge impact on the economy. A key reason that businesses
fail to operate after a disaster is the lack of information on the availability
of power and supplies, the road conditions, and so on. While there is no
shortage of disaster planning or recovery toolkits and disaster information or
news portals, currently there are no effective solutions that will help
businesses to revive the business ecosystem interrupted by the
disaster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to design and develop
data-driven solutions to address critical information exchange needs in disaster
affected public-private networks and to achieve intelligent (context-aware and
user-specific) information delivery, analysis, sharing, and collaboration among
both private and public sector participants in disaster management. The project
is conducting research on: (1) design and develop effective information
integration and summarization methods to help users improve situational
awareness; (2) design and develop intelligent information delivery techniques to
help users quickly identify the information they need; and (3) design and
develop automatic techniques for dynamic community generation. These research
components constitute a holistic effort to effectively organize, discover,
search and disseminate real-time disaster information and create a collaborative
platform for preparedness and recovery that helps disaster impacted communities
to better understand what the current disaster situation is and how the
community is recovering. The developed techniques are designed to be all-hazard
capable so that they can be used in hurricane, earthquake, terrorism, or other
unanticipated disaster events, and they can also be applied to other information
management domains.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project fosters the international
collaboration between the Florida International University (FIU) team and the
Japan team in disaster management and its broader impact is also aligned with
the national goal of broadening participation in education. FIU is number one in
the nation in awarding bachelor's and master's degrees to Hispanic students and
its history of involving the participation of underrepresented groups in
research efforts will be leveraged during the course of this project.