* 1461089
* REU Site: Training and Research Experiences in Nonlinear Dynamics (TREND)
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Michelle Girvan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2019
* USD 352,855.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) site in non-linear dynamics at the University of Maryland. The main goal
of the program is to engage undergraduate students in cutting-edge research in
the area of nonlinear dynamics. Through guided mentorship by faculty members and
interactions with post-docs and graduate students, undergraduates will gain
hands-on experience by participating directly in the research process. One major
impact of the program of the program will be in the education of the next
generation of scientists and engineers. Further, the program offers seminars and
trips that expose students to a wide variety of subjects and opportunities while
building a sense of community. Another impact of the program takes the form of
the refereed publications generated by the research efforts of the TREND
students and other program participants, in addition to the conference
presentations that arise from the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site will
support ten undergraduates per summer in ten weeks of research. Potential
research topics include: magnetic reconnection, turbulence, and nonlinear
phenomena in plasmas; chaos and synchronism in large systems of network-coupled
components; dynamics of granular and soft-matter flow; development of
singularities in fluids and solids; nonlinear dynamics in optical systems and
charged particle beams; autonomous control of vehicles with forecast
uncertainty; and nonlinear physics of living systems. Two weekly seminar series
will complement and reinforce the learning experience. The first seminar series
will expose students to state-of-the-art research in nonlinear science at a
level appropriate for undergraduates. The second seminar series will focus on
research skills development, including critical reading of research papers, oral
and written communication, and preparation for graduate school. Students will
give oral presentations and participate in a poster session on the final day of
the program, and funding will be provided to all students to subsequently
present their work at a relevant national or regional conference.