* 1461009
* Neuro-Cognitive Studies of Sleep and the Generalization of Emotional Learning and Threat Detection
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Mark Gluck, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 586,326.00

The ability to encode emotionally laden memories and exploit them efficiently in
novel situations is among the most important learning capabilities of an
individual. From correct recognition of facial expressions in emotionally-
charged social situations, to discrimination between threatening and safe
signals in fight-or-flight scenarios, the way we build on our past emotional
experiences to decipher unfamiliar conditions strongly determines our ability to
survive and function adaptively. Contemporary research on sleep and memory
indicates that sleep plays a key role in the generalization of past experiences
to novel situations, a process involving core brain regions such as the
hippocampus, amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex. However, significant
inconsistencies exist between findings regarding the effect of sleep on
emotional versus non-emotional memories. These inconsistencies pose a
significant obstacle for reaching a comprehensive understanding of how sleep
affects memory and learning in general, and how it differentially affect fear
memories in particular. Understanding how sleep assists processing of emotional
memories can bridge those gaps, as well as contribute broader knowledge to
inform any future developments in prevention and treatment of anxiety disorders
that involve both sleep and memory generalization disruptions, specifically
post-traumatic stress disorder for which sleep irregularities have been
emphasized as a key factor.

Current studies suggest that generalizing acquired associations of non-emotional
stimuli to novel situations is influenced by a specific sleep stage termed Slow-
Wave-Sleep (SWS). Processing of emotional stimuli, on the other hand, was shown
to be influenced mostly by another sleep stage, Rapid-Eye-Movement (REM) sleep.
These potential inconsistencies raise the question of how sleep influences
processes requiring a combination of the two, namely, generalization of
emotional memories. These issues, however, were only sporadically addressed in
human studies, and were mainly concentrated on a narrow definition of memory
generalization. The current project will attempt to elucidate the mechanism
involved in the way sleep affects fear generalization and threat detection in
humans, addressing the empirical and theoretical gaps by: (1) Employing long-
term monitoring of sleep stages prior to, and following, fear learning, that may
be more sensitive in detecting relations between cognitive mechanisms and sleep
characteristics compared to studies using only single-night monitoring (2) Using
novel neurocognitive assessments of fear generalization processes, focusing on
discriminative learning of threat and safe stimuli, accompanied by functional
neuroimaging (fMRI); (3) Studying computational network models of the key brain
regions known to be involved in fear learning to simulate and interpret the
experimental findings. These three approaches will allow establishing how fear
generalization is affected by individual baselines of sleep patterns, whether it
is differently affected by the type of stimuli generalization (discriminative
versus similarity-based) required by the behavioral task, and what the level of
involvement of the key brain regions is in each type of generalization task and
in relation to the individual sleep patterns.