* 1461215
* REU Site: Summer Engineering Research Experiences in Diabetes for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* John Georgiadis, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2019
* USD 322,510.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT: The number of researchers in the U.S. must
increase significantly to preserve the global leadership in research and
technology. The education of highly skilled researchers requires strong
educational programs at all levels. Research experiences can greatly influence
the future and motivation of young engineers and scientists and can provide
professional, intellectual, and personal benefits for undergraduate students..
By performing research projects related to a disease that affects more than 25
million people in the U.S., we have the potential to advance understanding while
influencing your engineers in their career. The program specifically targets
students without previous research experience. This focus combined with support
from community college programs will provide the opportunity to impact students
at critical career transition points. In addition to research experience
students are provided with a broader understanding of the disease and its impact
on society. The program impacts students at multiple academic stages. Mentoring
activities will be provided and fostered for graduate students to facilitate
interactions with the REU student, and REU students will develop an enrichment
activity for a high school STEM program. The high school students are from
diverse backgrounds and will be exposed to cutting edge engineering research and
opportunities for impact in the field of diabetes.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:

The primary goals of this program in the Biomedical Engineering (BME) Department
at the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) are: 1) Students will experience
engineering research by completing challenging diabetes-related projects with
faculty at IIT. 2) Develop and apply mentoring in graduate and undergraduate
researchers. 3) Expose student to the broader health implications of their
research. 4) Provide engineering research experiences to students without
previous experience with an emphasis on students from community colleges. 5)
Integrate ethics discussion and training into all aspects of the student
experience. Laboratory experience is an essential component of this research
proposal. However, seminars, mentoring workshops, ethics training, a K-12
outreach activity and tours of clinical facilities are provided to enhance the
experience.

Upon completion of the summer program students will have a diverse set of
research skills and knowledge by completion of the following specific
objectives: Specific Objective (S.O.) 1: Students complete a diabetes related
research project working with an engineering mentor from IIT. S.O. 2: Increase
participation by targeted student populations, specifically students without
previous research experience and those from colleges and universities where
research opportunities in STEM are limited. S.O. 4: Develop and apply mentoring
skills in graduate and REU students through training and interactions with
students at multiple education levels. S.O. 4: Increase student knowledge of the
health implications related to diabetes and the importance of engineering
research. S.O. 5: Communicate research ideas and findings through both informal
discussion and formal presentations. This proposal targets students with limited
opportunity for engineering research and those from colleges and universities
where research opportunities in STEM are limited (specifically community college
students), with a specific focus on women and students from underrepresented
minority groups. This Research Experiences for Undergraduates program receives
support from the Division of Engineering Education and Centers.