* 1461048
* REU Site: Advanced Processing and Materials Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Samir Aouadi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This is a 10-week summer program whose main objective is
to provide a research and education experience to 10 undergraduate students in
the broad area of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of North
Texas. This program will involve faculty in three different departments,
Materials Science and Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and Physics, with an
emphasis on training undergraduate students in designing, fabricating, and
testing a wide variety of materials. These activities have the potential to
influence these students by providing them with real-life experience conducting
research in materials science and engineering. Each summer, the Site will
recruit 10 undergraduate students to be part of this mentoring program provided
by a diverse group of faculty members. The focus will be on providing research
opportunities for minorities, women, underrepresented groups, and students from
non-PhD granting and/or non-research intensive institutions. During the course
of this program, the students will develop skills characteristic of scientific
researchers in literature review, materials design, hands-on laboratory skills,
problem solving, experiment planning and design, and writing and presenting
technical papers. The program will also provide students with relevant
information regarding graduate school. This will include helping students to
identify suitable programs, to understand the available financial resources, to
complete the application process, and to recognize the job prospects after
completion of a graduate program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The
specific materials design, preparation, and characterization techniques that the
students will learn include coating processes, arc melting, wire drawing, rod
and plate rolling, sintering, X-Ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy,
focused ion beam techniques, Raman spectroscopy, Auger electron spectroscopy,
wear testing, mechanical testing, density functional theory, and molecular
dynamics. Major goals of this program include: (1) improviing students'
communication skills through reports/papers, presentations, and posters and
through working within the research team involved in their specific project, (2)
performing research effectively under the supervision of a faculty mentor and
from undergraduates, graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, and other
research colleagues, (3) developing students' ability to ask scientific
questions, (4) developing analytical and computational skills to answer
scientific questions, (5) inspiring students to pursue careers in materials
science and engineering and related STEM fields through a series of workshops,
and (6) gaining familiarity with the role of each group member who is involved
in a project to guide students' future performance in these roles.