* 1461270
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Climate Science at Colorado State University
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2020
* A Denning, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard Grant
* 09/30/2020
* USD 595,766.00

Fifty undergraduate students (10 per year for five years) will be recruited to
participate in a 10-week summer residential research experience in Atmospheric
Science at Colorado State University. Their research will include understanding
and prediction of weather, climate, and air pollution. Established partnerships
with a network of minority-serving undergraduate institutions will be used to
ensure that participating students are recruited from a broad range of
demographics representing the US population, including groups that have
previously been underrepresented in meteorology and atmospheric science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU participants will go through the full research process
of choosing a topic, developing a research idea, conducting a literature review,
writing a final report, and giving a presentation in a conference setting. The
culmination of the summer research experience is a symposium where REU
participants will present a scientific poster and give an oral presentation on
their summer research projects. By the conclusion of the summer research program
participants will be well prepared to conduct scientific research, have a deeper
understanding of the graduate school experience. Through the REU Site, students
will establish a network of individuals and mentors, who will not only be future
resources, but mentors who will play an important role in the development of
participants as scientists.