* 1461165
* REU Site: Research Experience in Cyber and Civil Infrastructure Security for Students with ADHD: Fostering Innovation
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Arash Esmaili Zaghi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2019
* USD 414,099.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported by the NSF
Division of Engineering Education and Centers, this REU Site addresses a
national need for research and workforce training in critical infrastructure
resilience by providing undergraduate students with ADHD with interdisciplinary
research experience in the cyber and physical security aspects of critical
infrastructure resilience. The program will cultivate individuals with highly-
desirable skills sets, including creative problem solving and risk taking
abilities, for careers in the security of critical infrastructures while
targeting the needs of ADHD students who are severely underrepresented and
underserved in engineering programs and at risk of academic failure. The REU
Site will directly benefit the ADHD students in the program by providing a
positive research and education experience that recognizes their unique
intellectual strengths and encourages them to continue in engineering careers.
Understanding the difficulties and problems these students face in traditional
engineering research and education settings enables specialized learning
environments to be designed that increase their participation and foster their
creative potential. These specialized learning environments may increase the
level of education of a traditionally under-accomplished group in the society.
Efforts will be made to inform engineering researchers and educators about the
project to promote awareness within the engineering community of the diverse
learning needs and learning styles of divergent thinkers. The information
disseminated through this project may help lead to a paradigm shift in how
individuals with ADHD are perceived by our society and education system and may
lead to significant improvements to the wellbeing of these individuals and their
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported by the NSF Division of Engineering
Education and Centers, this REU Site program adopts a radically novel approach
to education and training of engineering students for careers in critical
infrastructure security. The growing interconnection, interdependence,
complexity, and integration among cyber and civil infrastructure systems; the
ever-increasing sophistication of cyber threats, and the severity of recent
manmade and natural hazards, demand novel, interdisciplinary research approaches
to the security of critical infrastructure. This project capitalizes on the
potential of individuals with significant divergent thinking and risk taking
characteristics to suggest radical solutions for the security of critical
infrastructure. By offering interdisciplinary research training opportunities to
engineering students with high creative potential who have ADHD, this REU
departs from traditional approaches that focus on talent development, and the
outcomes of this project may lead to improvements in how engineering education
is performed. The knowledge generated through this project regarding the
experience of ADHD students and the impediments they face in traditional
engineering education and research settings, may significantly encourage future
research in learning environments, workforce development, and may ultimately
broaden participation of non-traditional, underrepresented groups in engineering
disciplines. This REU Site program has the potential to underscore findings
concerning the ability of ADHD students to perform well in situations that
demand creative problem solving approaches. If retained, trained, and mentored
properly, this underserved population of students presents significant potential
to benefit the society in areas in which innovation and creativity are most
needed.