* 1461583
* Dynamics and Control of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Systems for Meeting Transient Demand in Distributed Generation Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Faryar Jabbari, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 04/30/2019
* USD 374,446.00

Dynamically dispatched power plants are required for the increasingly
distributed nature of power generation. This ability to meet demand transients
is key to developing safe, resilient and independent power networks, in response
to natural or man-made disruptions. Furthermore, it is desirable for systems to
be able to run at partial load without large losses in efficiency or
performance. Partial load operation may occur, for example, to provide power to
a small group of geographically remote users, or to make up for the variable
power output from other forms of generation. Solid oxide fuel cells offer high
efficiency, ultra-low pollutant emissions, and scalability and flexibility for
distributed generation. However, while fuel cells are capable of tracking fast
power variations, they are not used in this fashion due to important technical
challenges, including dynamic preheating and processing of the fuel and oxidant,
and the inability to control the fuel cell temperature profile dynamics. The
current project seeks to overcome these limitations with innovations in fuel
cell system design and control for dynamic operation, toward enhanced levels of
reliability as well as reduced costs. This project includes fuel cell system
designs, system level dynamic simulations, and new control techniques to enable
fuel cell systems to become a key, if not the preferred, dynamically dispatched
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at developing a better
understanding of the issues faced in, and developing solutions for, fast dynamic
operation of high temperature fuel cell systems. Using advanced control
techniques, and exploiting under-used flexibilities in the overall system
design, could produce significant improvements in dynamic operation and thermal
management. Different fuel cell configurations (co-flow, counter flow and cross
flow) will be studied and evaluated. Three major tasks will be accomplished: (i)
development of high fidelity models with significant spatial resolution for
dynamic controller design computations, (ii) evaluation of system designs for
separating decoupled control loops, identifying new mechanisms for actuation and
sensing, and developing a variety of control strategies, and (iii) application
of performance oriented anti-windup techniques to enable controllers designed
for key subsystems to withstand occasional saturation without much performance
compromise. Degradation and life-cycle analysis will be used to evaluate the
effectiveness of the approaches. Project will produce reliable dynamic models
and a systematic approach to design and control fuel cell systems to enable
higher, and reliable, renewable power use.