* 1461724
* Symposium: Health in Africa and the Post-2015 Millennium Development Agenda
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Ezekiel Kalipeni, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2021
* USD 49,540.00

This award provides support for a three day conference titled "Health in Africa
and the Post-2015 Millennium Development Agenda" to be held at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign on May 20-22, 2015. The symposium will facilitate
an interdisciplinary examination of the health conditions in Africa 15 years
after the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) that were
adopted in 2000 by the United Nations. The MDGs are a set of eight international
development goals with a vision to create a world with less poverty, hunger and
disease, greater survival prospects for mothers and their infants, better
educated children, equal opportunities for women, and a healthier environment; a
world in which developed and developing countries work in partnership for the
betterment of all. The objective of this symposium is to assess the success and
failures of the Millennium Development Goals in the areas of health and disease
in sub-Saharan Africa. A core group of researchers based at the University of
Illinois in the fields of medical geography, public/global health, and
epidemiology will lead the symposium. An interdisciplinary group of both young
and well established researchers from Africa and North America, including
graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups, will be
invited to participate in the three day event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the
commitment of the United Nations and its member nations to achieve the
Millennium Development goals by 2015, progress on three of the goals related to
health is yet to be realized. Sub-Saharan Africa continues to bear the burden of
a high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and Ebola and faces an
emerging prevalence of non-communicable disease such as cardiovascular diseases
and diabetes. The challenges posed by this dual burden of disease and its
demographic, economic, social and epidemiological impacts are enormous in a
continent facing resource-constrained health systems. This conference will place
particular focus on the socio-environmental and geopolitical factors affecting
health conditions in Africa. Specific papers will examine these factors from
different theoretical perspectives, including disease ecology, the demographic
transition model, the epidemiologic transition and nutrition transition
frameworks as well as globalization. Conference findings will be widely
disseminated with the intent to advance recommendations for the "Post-2015
Development Agenda". The conference will also provide a forum to launch
collaborative initiatives for mitigating the dual burden of disease in sub-
Saharan Africa.