* 1461416
* Computational Intersection Theory for Infinite Dimensional Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Jason Mireles James, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 06/30/2016
* USD 45,564.00

The purpose of this research is to develop mathematically rigorous computational
methods for studying intersections of stable and unstable manifolds of infinite
dimensional dynamical systems. The problem splits naturally into two distinct
technical challenges. First it is necessary to extend existing methods of
computational intersection theory to higher dimensions than currently
accessible. This problem will be addressed via reductions to lower dimensional
slow stable invariant manifolds. In order to study connecting dynamics it is
also important to compute the linear bundles of these reduced manifolds. This
requires an extension of classical Floquet theory into the slow manifold
setting. The second major challenge is to develop a-posteriori techniques for
proving the existence of connecting orbits in infinite dimensions. The question
is: can we conclude the existence of connecting orbits in the infinite
dimensional system once the existence of corresponding connections have been
established in a projection of high enough finite dimension? Answering this
question requires extending existing methods for studying infinite dimensional
equilibria and periodic orbits to the setting of the boundary value problems
which describe connecting orbits. The project will also consider the
plausibility of computer assisted techniques for studying continuation with
respect to parameter, as well as bifurcations of connecting orbits.

This research will yield new methods for insuring the correctness of scientific
computations. The focus of the project is on infinite dimensional models of
applied mathematics such as partial differential equations, delay equations, and
renormalization operators. In addition to providing mathematically rigorous
error bounds for approximate numerical solutions of these problems, the
techniques of computer assisted proof resulting from this work are able to
provide answers to theoretical questions about the global dynamics of nonlinear
systems. For example by establishing the existence of some transverse connecting
orbits it is possible to prove the existence of turbulence, spatiotemporal
chaos, or positive topological entropy in the phase space of a partial
differential equation. Other theoretical problems which might be approached
computationally once the techniques of this project become available include
studying the combinatorial dynamics of renormalization operators, as well as
some problems in nonlinear analysis involving the application of Floer's
Homology theory. A central theme of this project is that at each stage of
advancement the theoretical and computational tools developed will be applied to
established problems of applied mathematics and dynamical systems theory.