* 1461358
* Building on the Success of Critical Issues in Mathematics Education Workshops
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* David Eisenbud, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 03/31/2018
* USD 99,038.00

Improving mathematics education in the US will require the commitment and input
of many professionals, including research mathematicians. Engaging research
mathematicians in mathematics education requires supporting productive
participation of mathematicians by fostering an understanding of critical issues
in mathematics education and the capacity for working across professional
communities. The conferences will be designed and implemented by one of the
premiere mathematics institutes positioned to continue its example of
substantial and disciplined engagement of mathematicians with mathematics
educators toward the improvement of mathematics education. The design of the
conferences will allow the mathematics and mathematics education community to
address issues that are vital to the improvement of mathematics education in the
US, with a focus on engaging mathematicians systematically in this work. A
special emphasis will be on engaging department chairs and other leaders in the
mathematical community in this work to broaden the impact of the work. These
conferences will continue and build upon prior successful strategies with new
innovations for engaging the mathematics community to increase the awareness and
activity of mathematicians to make productive contributions to mathematics
education, working across professional communities, to be active stewards of the
field. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the
DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the two
workshops are to recruit key individuals in the mathematics and mathematics
education research communities to work together for the improvement of
mathematics education; frame critical issues; draw attention to issues of
diverse participation and success in mathematics; and provide images of
productive engagement for participants to draw upon as they return to their
professional communities. The design of the conferences is based on a program
logic model that the recruitment and productive engagement of mathematicians and
mathematics departments in critical issues of mathematics education nationally
will increase our understanding of how to involve mathematicians in education
work in a systematic, informed, and salable way, and will lead to more
mathematicians constructively supporting mathematics education. The conferences,
held in 2015 and 2016, will focus on developmental mathematics and other
critical issues in mathematics education. An internationally renowned Education
Advisory Committee (EAC) will charge a group of lead organizers to refine a set
of guiding questions that will provide coherence for the planning, selection of
speakers, and activities. A cross-section of mathematicians and mathematics
educators, including those representing leadership and teams in both
communities, will be invited to participate. The lead organizers will finalize a
plan of action developed in consultation with the conference participants and
EAC, to be disseminated online and to serve as a focus of the conference
reports. The conferences would be rigorously evaluated to inform the organizers
and the broader community on whether innovations in the conference design
support increased mathematicians' involvement and study the hypothesized sources
of impact via survey and interviews with mathematicians and other participants.