* 1461932
* BDD: Dynamic Evolution of Smart-Phone Based Emergency Communications Network
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Slobodan Vucetic, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 04/30/2019
* USD 314,999.00

Emergency communications networks are crucial for reaching out and helping
affected people during long-persisting disasters such as the Tohoku earthquake
in Japan or Hurricane Katrina in the US. Because of the ubiquitous availability
of smartphones, it is important to integrate them into the emergency
communications network consisting of both surviving cellular network and
deployed emergency communications infrastructure. All these components vary in
their ability to provide necessary communications as the disaster unfolds. It is
therefore essential to continuously monitor and ``tune'' the network to provide
the best possible coverage and communications capability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores how to interconnect clusters of
smartphones via WiFi tethering technology and integrate them with the deployed
emergency network. Since the densities of people and hence of smartphones can
vary substantially over the affected area, the project will explore mechanisms
to conserve battery and other smartphone resources by exploiting
overlap/redundancy in the sensed data. Another key issue addressed by the
project is the evolution of the emergency network as the disaster situation
itself evolves. The project analyzes data obtained from twitter during the
disaster in order to get insights into how the network should evolve.
Furthermore, the project examines how to deploy the mobile access points
initially and later move them to tune the network to the needs of the evolving
disaster. The analysis of twitter data involves several bigdata challenges
including classification, prioritization, and ordering of tweets so the
interpretation and decision making -- which is still expected to be done by
humans -- is considerably simplified.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The rapidly
increasing penetration of smart phones that carry a wide array of sensors makes
them ideal for disaster communications. In addition, twitter has established
itself as the premier human communication mechanism during disasters owing to
its modest technological requirements and ease of use. This project takes these
phenomena and stitches them together to create an agile disaster communications
network that can provide significant additional value in quickly reaching
affected people and collecting crucial data for rushing the required assistance
to them. As a part of US-Japan joint program, with research teams from Temple
University in the United States and Aizu University in Japan, the project will
develop technologies that will be of direct relevance to both countries.