* 1461063
* REU Site: Materials, Application and Development for Organic Photovoltaic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Seth Hubbard, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 353,997.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Organic photovoltaic devices (OPV) provide opportunities
for a low cost solar energy technology, but improved materials are critical to
commercial viability. Undergraduate participants in the Rochester Institute of
Technology REU Site will (i) conduct research to develop materials while (ii)
learning the theory of OPV operation and (iii) engineering new device
architectures. Thus, the project will provide a blueprint for substantiating the
expansion from laboratory prototypes to mass-produced units and will help build
an educated and experienced workforce to tackle ongoing issues in energy and
sustainability. Broader impacts of the program will also be achieved through
dissemination of findings on (i) engaging deaf students in undergraduate
research, (ii) outreach, recruitment, and retention of "2+2" or "2+3" students
who choose a community college or small 4-year institution to complete general
education requirements and then transfer into a strong science, technology or
engineering program to complete a bachelor's degree. These students often enter
a research-focused university underprepared for the rigor of science and
engineering and lagging in technology exposure. Success associated with the
broad theme of organic photovoltaics may enable affordable, sustainable OPV
energy systems that contribute to US energy independence and a low-cost,
portable technology vital for energy in developing
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project is centered on
the development of improved materials targeted for organic photovoltaic (OPV)
devices, which will contribute to a broad portfolio of solar energy
technologies. Within the scope of the proposal, the undergraduates will
participate in (i) experimental validation of simple theoretical components that
will lead to well-directed and implementable synthesis strategies and (ii)
manufacture and testing of prototype photovoltaic devices. The project will
build upon RIT's functional printing strengths to bring OPV technology closer to
commercial manufacture through ink development and substrate modification.
Participating students will develop a fundamental understanding of how their
chosen field of science contributes to the interdisciplinary nature of OPV
materials research. The students will participate in extramurally funded
research projects and as co-authors of resulting peer-reviewed publications
and/or national conference presentations.