* 1461160
* REU Site: Summer Program for Interdisciplinary Research and Education - Emerging Interface Technologies (SPIRE-EIT)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Eliot Winer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 04/30/2018
* USD 405,195.00

SPIRE-EIT (Summer Program for Interdisciplinary Research and Education -
Emerging Interface Technologies) at Iowa State University is a 10-week
interdisciplinary summer experience for 10 undergraduates that integrates
research and education in emerging interface technologies with a personal, life-
changing experience for participants. Students' personal transformations since
2006 have been a dramatic and consistent result alongside research publications.
Students are provided with classroom training and gain hands-on experience using
cutting-edge instruments, equipment, computers and cyberinfrastructure. Classes
in computer programming and graphics, interface design, human-computer
interaction, research skills, team skills, and ethics occupy approximately 35%
of the students' time. In an unusual structure that is focused on building a
community of practice, students conduct interdisciplinary research projects in
groups of two or three, with all students co-located in the Virtual Reality
Applications Center (VRAC). Each group interacts with VRAC graduate students
under the supervision of VRAC faculty. The research projects are presented at an
end-of-the summer campus-wide research symposium in the form of posters, demos,
and a five-page research paper. Frequently the students present their research
at research conferences later during the school year.

Two major trends are driving research in Emerging Interface Technologies: a
dramatic increase of interface technologies themselves, and the ubiquitous
permeation of technology into our everyday lives. Correspondingly, this research
focuses on new interfaces that enhance people's perception, understanding, and
performance. The SPIRE exposes students to four broad areas of EIT: information
visualization, mobile/ubiquitous interfaces, intelligent agents, and enabling
cyberinfrastructure. More information about this REU Site can be found at the
SPIRE-EIT web site: http://www.vrac.iastate.edu/hci/reu/ .