* 1461918
* INSPIRE: Modeling the Magnetic Interactions between Stars and Planets
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2022
* David Alexander, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 09/30/2022
* USD 999,964.00

This INSPIRE (Integrated NSF Support Promoting Interdisciplinary Research and
Education) project is jointly funded by the Division of Astronomical Sciences in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, by the Geospace Section
of the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences in the Directorate for
Geosciences, by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and by the Office of International and
Integrative Activities. Currently, more than 1800 confirmed planetary systems
beyond our solar system (i.e. extrasolar planets or exoplanets) have been
discovered through ground and space-based astronomical techniques, with an
additional 3600 candidate systems yet to be confirmed. These recent discoveries
have resulted in dramatic growth in research related to the study of exoplanets
with the ultimate objective being the discovery and characterization of
habitable Earth-sized systems. The primary goal of this project is to improve
our understanding of the interactions between stars and their planets, in
particular the role of magnetic fields, to ultimately provide information on the
habitability of exoplanet systems. The project's objectives are particularly
well-matched to the interdisciplinary goals of the INSPIRE program. First, the
project will attack a problem of significance to a broad scientific community,
namely the characterization and identification of habitable exoplanets. Second,
this research will provide an improved understanding of the Sun's interaction
with the planets of our solar system. Furthermore, this project has potential
for significant societal impact with regards to the search for life elsewhere in
the Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will apply
techniques and methods drawn from the space physics community to the
traditionally astrophysical research area of exoplanets. The project team has
significant expertise in computational modeling of the magnetospheres of rocky
planets like the Earth and gas giants like Jupiter and Saturn. They will combine
their magnetospheric code with available magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) models of
the heliosphere in order to model interactions of the solar wind with planetary
magnetospheres. A key aspect of the project is to apply these combined models to
a much broader class of star-planet interactions by scaling the models to
simulate a wide range of stellar parameters. Once the star-planet interactions
are modeled, then given varying levels of stellar activity and planetary
magnetospheric characteristics, the models will be used predict radio emission
for a wide range of systems. These predictions can then be used to target
specific systems for further observation and characterization as to their
potential habitability.