* 1461574
* Collaborative Research: Low-cost imaging and analysis of the August 24, 2014 M6.1 South Napa California earthquake surface rupture (RAPID)
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Edwin Nissen, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 01/31/2016
* USD 16,235.00

Non-Technical Explanation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements of the change in
shape of Earth's surface following a significant earthquake, including ground
offsets caused when faults break all the way to the surface, can be used to
understand the physics governing fault behavior, including earthquakes, and the
properties of the Earth's crust. These features can be quickly eroded by natural
effects and people working to repair damaged structures, roads, and other
infrastructure. Rapid documentation of fragile earthquake-generated features is
essential for both the scientific characterization of such events as well as for
informing emergency response and recovery. New laser scanning (LiDAR) and
photogrammetric (Structure from Motion) techniques for generating three-
dimensional, "point-cloud" feature reconstructions powerfully augment
traditional geological field methods. We are working to develop low-cost
Structure-from-Motion technology for post-earthquake capture, measurement, and
archiving of surface offsets from the 24 August 2014 Mw 6.0 South Napa
earthquake. These data are integrated with post-earthquake airborne laser
scanning and compared with pre-earthquake scans to accurately capture the
surface rupture and adjacent deformation, and to interpret earthquake
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid
collection of high-resolution imagery after an earthquake is essential in order
to map surface ruptures before onset of degradation or repair, as well as to
accurately deconvolve coseismic and post-seismic deformation. The distribution
of coseismic slip and the presence and nature of after-slip are both fundamental
to understanding the frictional and mechanical properties of faults zones.
Fortunately, recent advances in low-cost, aerial topographic imaging and
differencing have given geologists the tools to collect and interpret sub-meter
resolution imagery at unparalleled resolution and in record time. We are using
Structure from Motion (SfM) mapping and multi-temporal airborne Light Detection
and Ranging (LiDAR) to map surface offsets and the off-fault, 3-dimensional
(3-D) displacement field generated by from the 24 August 2014 Mw 6.0 South Napa
earthquake. This is the first ground-rupturing earthquake within the US since
the advent of SfM mapping in the early 2010s and also the first with pre-event
LiDAR coverage. The study addresses three key scientific questions. (1) What is
the accuracy and reproducibility of surface offset measurements? (2) To what
extent does early post-seismic deformation bias inferences of coseismic slip at
the surface, and at depth? (3) How representative are surface offsets of deeper
fault slip and what is the nature of the shallow slip deficit? These questions
have implications not only for the mechanics of this fault but also for how such
observations are interpreted in other events where such data are lacking. The
project will showcase best practice in collecting, interpreting and archiving
such data. We will also have strong collaborations with active response
activities undertaken with US Geological Survey and California Geological Survey
colleagues. These rich datasets will enable us to provide virtual educational
experiences in immersive environments.