* 1461952
* Strong Electron Correlations and Quantum Critical Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Philip Phillips, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2019
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and educational activities in the area of strongly interacting electron
matter. The key problem motivating this study is the physics of materials
exhibiting high temperature superconductivity. These materials, which were
discovered in 1987, conduct electricity without any power loss when cooled below
a critical temperature which is much larger than temperatures required for
"conventional" superconductors. Even though close to 3 decades has passed since
their discovery, no clear understanding of these high-temperature
superconductors has emerged. The problem is that the physics of these materials
requires the solution to some of the key unsolved problems in theoretical
physics and mathematics. The research activity discussed in this project focuses
on some of these problems with an eye for making predictions for new
superconducting materials. The PI and his research team will solve models that
are relevant to high temperature superconductors and geared toward unlocking the
long-standing puzzle of what the electrons do before they enter the
superconducting phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support graduate
students seeking their PhD degrees in theoretical solid state physics. In
addition, the PI will 1) continue with his recruitment activities of
underrepresented minority students to the graduate program in physics at the
University of Illinois, 2) enhance scientific literacy by giving elementary
physics demonstrations to local public and private schools, and 3) continue with
his public lectures on strongly coupled systems at universities in developing
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and educational activities in the area of
strongly interacting electron matter. The key problem motivating this study is
the physics of materials exhibiting high temperature superconductivity. These
materials reside in parameter space where traditional perturbative methods in
field theory fail. To solve this problem, the PI and his research team will use
newly developed methods in string theory to bridge the gap between where
perturbative methods fail and strong coupling physics resides. The specific
goals are 1) to provide an explanation for the power-law optical conductivity in
the copper-oxide superconductors, 2) to develop a model for Fermi arcs in the
normal state, 3) to find a solution to the problem of strongly coupled fixed
points, 4) to propose a realistic model for superconductivity in the presence of
Fermi arcs and 5) to develop computational tools for strongly coupled systems in
the presence of disorder. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support graduate
students seeking their PhD degrees in theoretical solid state physics. In
addition, the PI will 1) continue with his recruitment activities of
underrepresented minority students to the graduate program in physics at the
University of Illinois, 2) enhance scientific literacy by giving elementary
physics demonstrations to local public and private schools, and 3) continue with
his public lectures on strongly coupled systems at universities in developing
countries.