* 1461547
* CAREER: Primitives and Policies for Complex Behavior in Human and Robotic Hands
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Veronica Santos, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2017
* USD 238,863.00

Each human fingertip has approximately 2000 tactile sensors. Stimulation of
these sensors triggers reactive grip responses that are mediated by the spine.
In comparison to the dexterous capabilities of the human hand, robotic
manipulation capabilities in unstructured environments are crude. When
controlled by a human operator, robotic manipulators are further limited by
restricted information flow (command and sensing) at the human-machine
interface. All human-machine systems, from telesurgery robots to
neuroprostheses, must address the critical issue of communication delays which
can range, depending upon the distance between the human and the machine, from
less than a second to hours. For artificial manipulation, even delays of one
second can result in adverse events such as increased bleeding from an open
incision or increased frustration and eventual disuse of an advanced prosthesis.
Taking a cue from biology, autonomous low-level reflexes that detect stimuli and
implement a corrective response in robotic hands without a human in the loop
could buy time for communication, information processing, and decision-making in
human-machine systems. A long-term research objective of the PI is to advance
robotic manipulation with grip reflex algorithm primitives, artificial tactile
sensors, and generalizable grasp policy algorithms inspired by the human hand.
In this project, she will focus on understanding what drives low-level reactive
grip responses, how human-machine performance can benefit from the
implementation of similar autonomous primitives, and what grasp policies can be
learned by a robotic hand. Contributions of this work will include
characterization of the reactive grip responses in human hands, development of
human-inspired grip reflex algorithm primitives and tactile sensors for robotic
hands, and development of learning algorithms that autonomously extract general
grasp policies for robotic hands. Research outcomes will enhance our fundamental
understanding of grasp primitives in human hands that provide a foundation for
dexterous manipulation, and improve the functionality of robotic hands through
grip reflex algorithm primitives and learning algorithms that extract grasp
policies.

Broader Impacts: This research will transform artificial manipulation by
enabling robotic grasp with dynamic control of adduction/abduction degrees-of-
freedom and use of biomimetic tactile sensors, thereby revolutionizing robotic
manipulators intended for unstructured, access-limited, or unsafe environments
(including space, underwater, military, rescue, surgery, assistive,
rehabilitative, and prosthetic) that require robustness in the face of
uncertainty, control delays, or limited information flow at the human-machine
interface. In conjunction with her research the PI will work to engage students
at an early age in the exploration of the rich field of robotics. To that end,
she will develop hands-on instructional modules for teaching elementary and
middle school students about robotics using low-cost materials and deploy them
locally for the benefit of students under-represented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics fields. She will also develop an interactive
exhibit for a science museum on robotic hands deploy it locally for the benefit
of school-aged children and the general public in the metropolitan Phoenix area.