* 1461222
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary research in a diverse Appalachian ridge and valley ecosystem
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Elizabeth Dobbins, Samford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2018
* USD 329,774.00

This REU Site award to Samford University, located in Birmingham, AL, will
provide research training for 12 students, for 9 weeks during the summers of
2015-2017. The program focuses on multidisciplinary research to study biological
and biochemical interactions ranging from the molecular to the landscape scale
in a diverse Appalachian ridge and valley ecosystem at Oak Mountain State Park
(OMSP) near Birmingham, AL. There are a wide range of potential student
projects, involving both field and laboratory research, to address questions in
ecology, population biology, botany, geography, plant chemistry, molecular
biology, neuroscience, biochemistry, cell biology and pathogenesis. Mentors are
from the Departments of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Chemistry,
Geography, and Pharmacy at Samford University and Birmingham Southern College.
Students are selected based on academic record, professional goals, and
potential for outstanding research. Outstanding undergraduate students who have
limited opportunities to participate in research at their home institutions and
students from underrepresented minority groups are particularly encouraged to
apply.

It is anticipated that a total of 36 students will be trained in the program.
Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences. In addition to research, students will
participate in weekly workshops on ethical conduct in research, data analysis,
professional communication skills, professional development activities, and the
graduate school application process. Discussions and seminars with mentors,
experts, and fellow students will help participants integrate their knowledge
about complex biological and biochemical interactions across research topics.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are
required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email
sent via the NSF reporting system to determine their continued interest in their
academic field of study, their career paths, and the lasting influences of their
research experience. More information is available by visiting
www.samford.edu/REU, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Malia Fincher at
rmfinche@samford.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Betsy Dobbins at egdobbin@samford.edu).