* 1461831
* Chemical Reactions at Surfaces GRC/GRS - From Model Studies to Complex Real World Systems, February 7-8, 2015
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Andrew Gellman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis (CAT) program in the Division of Chemistry supports this
project which provides funds for the attendance and research presentations of
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers from U.S. universities at the
Chemical Reactions at Surfaces Gordon Research Seminar to be held on February
7-8, 2015 at the Ventura Beach Marriott in Ventura Beach, CA. Knowledge about
chemical reactions at surfaces underpins important technologies such as
catalysis and economically important industries that utilize catalysis. The
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) will involve seminars, poster presentations and
discussion on this topic broadly, and the subsequent Gordon Research Conference
(GRC) that the students and postdocs will be able to attend will focus
specifically on topics of theory and computation of reactions at surfaces,
environmental chemistry, fundamental mechanistic studies, catalysis, new
materials for surface chemistry, and surface layer chemistry. Historically,
Gordon Research Seminars and Conferences are a forum for scientists to present
and discuss pre-publication results and data. The discussion serves to shape the
future of the field and to provide an opportunity for scientists of all career
stages and expertise to interact in formal and informal settings. Thus, the
GRS/GRC provides a means to create scientific networks and to develop human
resources needed to further science.