* 1461040
* REU Site: Chemistry Applied to Real World Problems - Chemical Sciences at CSU
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Matthew Shores, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 325,000.00

In this project funded by the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Matt Shores and James Neilson of
Colorado State University are leading a summer research program to engage
undergraduate students in chemistry research applied to real world challenges,
spanning problems concerning the environment to energy to medicine. Nine
students each summer, for three summers, participate in a 10-week research
program. Broader impacts are addressed by providing opportunities for scientific
discovery to students who might not otherwise have that access. The fundamental
research experiences are augmented with activities directed toward educational
and professional development, including writing workshops, career panels,
presentation opportunities, field trips to industrial sites, and scientific
ethics modules. Graduate students and postdocs interacting closely with REU
participants are trained in effective mentoring
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in this REU program perform
research with one of 27 faculty mentors at CSU, some in collaborative and cross-
disciplinary projects. Research thrusts include nanomaterials development for
batteries, magnets and solar cells; (asymmetric) catalysis and organic and
peptide syntheses for precise control of fine chemical molecular structures; and
development of spectroscopy and spectrometry techniques for energy exploration
and environmental sensing. Training on multiple techniques through CSU's Central
Instrument Facility and presentations at interdisciplinary research meetings are
key aspects of helping students translate basic research to addressing real
world challenges. Research results are disseminated widely in student
presentations and as manuscripts published in competitive chemistry journals.
The REU program activities are integrated with several research collaborations
and ongoing initiatives at CSU, greatly broadening the overall reach of their
program.