* 1461129
* REU Site:  An International Research Experience for Chemistry Undergraduate Students in Austria (iREU)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Michael Sponsler, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 362,840.00

In this International REU Sites funded by the Chemistry Division and the
International Science and Engineering (ISE) Section of the Office of
International and Integrative Activities (OIIA) both at the National Science
Foundation, Professors Karin Ruhlandt and Michael Sponsler of Syracuse
University will oversee the mentored research participation of six American
students, recruited nationally each year, for ten weeks at either of two
Austrian universities, the Technical University of Graz and Karl Franzens
University of Graz. These institutions will fund the research participation of a
similar number of Austrian research students at Syracuse University. The
research exchange program, begun in 2005 with NSF support, provides the students
both research experience and opportunities for intense cultural immersion. The
American students will also attend a capstone event at Syracuse University three
months after their return to the US. They will be reunited for a reception in
their honor and a symposium in which they will describe their scientific
accomplishments and cultural insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this program include the students' intimate insights into the technical and
non-technical aspects of international science provided by their experience and
preparing them to successfully operate and serve as leaders in the global arena
of science. Benefits of international exposure will also accrue to students and
other members of the chemistry departments in both Graz and Syracuse.
Participating students will develop a number of lasting and useful international
contacts. The research done by the students will also be presented at
conferences and published in journals.