* 1461607
* RUI: Preparation of Free-standing Icosahedral Quasicrystalline Nanoparticles and Their Application in Self Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2015,05/31/2019
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 05/31/2019
* USD 132,506.00

Non-technical summary: Icosahedral quasicrystalline structure is distinguished
by its unique atomic configuration. In contrast to the long history of amorphous
and crystalline structures, this particular structure was first reported only
thirty years ago. Furthermore, icosahedral quasicrystalline nanoparticles have
not yet been reported, despite the intense study and wide applications of
crystalline and amorphous nanoparticles. The focus of this project is on the
fabrication of such icosahedral quasicrystalline nanoparticles. Application of
these particles in self assembly is expected to result in a three dimensional
icosahedral quasicrystalline pattern, and will aid in understanding the
importance of factors affecting the stability of icosahedral quasicrystalline
structure. The project has a significant impact on undergraduate education at
Clarion University (CU), a rural institution located in northwest Pennsylvania,
approximately two hours drive from any major cities and academic centers.
Notably CU accepts many first generation college students. This work gives these
students a rare opportunity to observe and participate in scientific research
and discovery, stimulating their interest toward, and boosting their confidence
in developing careers in science and technology. It also adds to the enrichment
of our knowledge in the field of nanotechnology in the form of peer-reviewed
publications and presentations at conferences. Additionally the project is
integrated into eight undergraduate physics and nanotechnology courses, directly
impacting the education of approximately one hundred students per year. Finally,
as the result of outreach efforts in collaboration with a well-established
Science in Motion program, this project provides students and teachers of local
high schools with a unique opportunity to participate and
learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary: Studies in the past thirty years
have resulted in reports of some alloys with stable icosahedral quasicrystalline
structures. This progress paves the way for the current project, making the
fabrication of icosahedral quasicrystalline nanoparticles from these alloys
possible. The nanoparticles are produced by the combined usage of mechanical
breaking, chemical etching, surface functionalizing, de-functionalizing, and
size sorting. The particle sizes range from ten nanometers to one micrometer.
Experimental conditions are adjusted to generate particles of either spherical
or dodecahedral pentagonal morphologies for different applications. Out of
multiple potential applications, the researchers focus on studying self-assembly
of said nanoparticles. Due to the unique dodecahedral pentagonal morphology of
the selected nanoparticles, assembly of a three dimensional icosahedral
quasicrystalline structure is expected. This type of structure has not yet been
reported and can be used as a model to understand the atomic configuration of
icosahedral quasicrystalline structure.