* 1461516
* Nanoscale Sintering Understanding
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Kathy Lu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 04/30/2018
* USD 336,682.00

Sintering is an important materials consolidation and densification strategy. It
is used to make components with complex shapes, in near net-shapes, and with
relatively simple equipment. Also, different compositions and structures can be
flexibly tailored using sintering. However, sintering is also a complex process.
With the progress of nanoparticle-based materials, many conventional sintering
theories cannot predict new sintering behaviors; relying on existing sintering
knowledge to guide nanoparticle-based material processing has led to numerous
failures and contradictory results. This award supports fundamental research to
build our understanding of the sintering process, to test the scalability of
sintering equations from nanometers up, and to quantify the function of pores in
nanostructure evolution and shrinkage. Successful nano-sintering represents
exciting possibilities in improved structural, electrical, optical, and other
functional properties and unprecedented nanostructures. The application areas
are numerous, including energy storage/conversion, nanophotonic devices,
microfluidic devices, catalysts, microreactor devices, and optical components.
This program also includes extensive outreach activities (such as HBCU, local
schools, camps) to increase the participation of underrepresented groups in
engineering, especially in the area of nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
award supports research to build direct and quantitative sintering shrinkage-
nanostructure evolution correlations, test the scalability of sintering
equations from nanoscale and up, and quantify the function of pores in
nanostructure evolution and shrinkage. There are three key components to this
research. The first is to demonstrate that below a critical density, shrinkage
extrapolation from grain neck size is dependent on coarsening-induced grain-
reconfiguration; microstructure scalability is only valid for homogenous
microstructures. The second is to show that above the critical density, pore
size, distribution, and shape are critical factors for decoupling grain boundary
diffusion from grain boundary migration and 3D microstructure reconstruction is
a unique technique to provide such quantitative data. The third component is to
illustrate that sintering of particle packing in unusual configurations is
dependent on the balance between packing structures and diffusion mechanisms.
The research will provide the much needed linkage between nanoparticle
arrangement, microstructural evolution, and shrinkage by using small features
that can track individual to multiple nanoparticles and reconstructing 3D
nanostructures. The sintering knowledge gained will provide not only effective
solutions to nanoparticle-based sintering but also never-before conduits for
net-shape sintering, novel nanostructures, and a vast array of complex material
design capabilities.