* 1461841
* CAREER: Biomolecular Nanophotonic Fabry-Perot Interferometry (BioNanoFPI)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Long Que, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2015
* USD 128,356.00

CAREER: Biomolecular Nanophotonic Fabry-Perot Interferometry
(BioNanoFPI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposes to design a Biomolecular
Nanophotonic Fabry-Perot Interferometer (BioNanoFPI) platform that will allow
scalable parallel detection of multiple bio-agents with concentrations in the
femtomole range and ease-of-operation using a broadband white light source
instead of a laser. The development of a polymer-based micromachined FPI (µFPI)
with integrated nanostructures will enable a BioNanoFPI platform that allows for
the creation of two-dimensional, highly-multiplexed, inexpensive arrays to
conduct large-scale parallel screening of chemical and biomedical
libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER project is to
establish a significant advancement in biomolecular nanophotonics by theoretical
modeling and interfacing liquid-state biopolymers to solid-state nanophotonic
and micromachined devices. There are three main components of this career
development plan. The scientific component of this project focuses on: (i) the
theoretical modeling and understanding of and experimental confirmation of the
signal enhancement mechanism of the nanopillar plasmonic substrates, and the
interactions between the nanopillar-plasmonic substrates and micromachined
Fabry-Perot Interferometry (µFPI); (ii) the theoretical modeling of the
dielectric behavior of biopolymers and experimental elucidation of interactions
of antibodies and antigens in the nanostructured Fabry-Perot cavity. The
technological component of this project focuses on: (i) the development of an
inexpensive nanofabrication process to construct a nanopillar array for
plasmonic substrates; (ii) the precise control of sub100 nm
nanostructure/nanopillar arrays in the µFPI cavity for highly sensitive label
free bioassays, and a robust batch fabrication method of nanostructure-filled
polymer-based µFPI arrays integrated with micro and nanofluidic networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This proposed research will help
advance fundamental knowledge of signal enhancement mechanisms of the nanopillar
plasmonic substrates and the BioNanoFPI micro/nanosystem. Understanding the
fundamental physical mechanism of this micro/nanosystem might trigger other
important ideas and innovations for bionanotechnology applications. This
research has a broad range of applications to pathogen, disease detection,
environmental monitoring and security. In addition, drug screening and discovery
can benefit tremendously by using high throughput multiplexed label-free
biosensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The PI proposes a coherent and
comprehensive education, dissemination and outreach component that includes
developing a new technical elective course ?Introduction to Nano-biophotonics,?
integrating research results with existing nano and micro courses, mentoring
graduate, undergraduate and underrepresented students and dissemination and
outreach to the local community. A webpage will be designed especially to
disseminate the outcomes of ?Introduction to Nano-biophotonics.? The proposed
educational and outreach program will be accomplished through the NSF-sponsored
REU program at Louisiana Tech to educate undergraduate students and through the
NSF-sponsored NERO program to educate women and under-represented students in
K-12, high school and prospective students from local small rural and small town
schools. The overall educational goal is to help next-generation workforce
development by training students to carry out research with sound theory and
allowing them to gain hands-on laboratory skills for their advanced
careers.&lt;br/&gt;