* 1461602
* CAREER: Non-invasive fields for directed 3D microgel assembly for tissue engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Utkan Demirci, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 04/30/2017
* USD 64,073.00

1150733&lt;br/&gt;Demirci&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tissue engineering holds great
promise to enable alternative therapies for diseases such as diabetes, kidney,
liver, and heart failure. A common approach in tissue engineering is seeding
cells in biodegradable scaffolds (top-down), which brings cells together to
mimic native tissues. These scaffolds are expected to degrade and be replaced by
cellular growth and extracellular matrix deposition over time. Challenges in
current tissue engineering approaches are: (i) achieving complex three-
dimensional (3D) cellular architecture and organization, (ii) control over
cellular proximity and microscale resolution, (iii) enhancing transport through
scaffold porosity and embedded microchannels, mimicking vascular network in
vivo. Directed assembly of nano- and micro-scale particles is of great interest
and has found applications in many fields including electronics, nanomaterials,
and holds great potential for tissue engineering. Tissues are made up of
repeating functional units. Bottom-up tissue engineering aims to assemble
microscale hydrogels (microgels) as building blocks to form organized 3D tissue
constructs with spatial control over microarchitecture mimicking native tissues.
The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in developing a platform technology
that utilizes nanoparticles and microgels as building blocks to create 3D
complex multi-layer constructs via external magnetic fields. The final outcome
of the project will offer a broadly applicable, nanoparticle-based, "magnetic-
induced microgel assembly" platform. This platform would become a broadly
available biotechnological tool and method to create 3D tissue models in vitro
that could be used for tissue/organ replacement, regenerative medicine, high
throughput screening, as well as pharmaceutical drug discovery. The outcomes of
this project will open new avenues for physical and biologic research and have a
considerable impact on fundamental and applied science, education, and medicine.
The broader impacts of this proposal include educational aims to involve, train
and mentor: a) local Boston high school students from the lowest income
communities through Brigham and Women's Hospital Student Success Jobs Program,
b) undergraduate students through Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program, and c) graduate students to
translate book-based knowhow to practice by utilizing the principles identified
in this project on the complex multidisciplinary nature of magnetic assembly of
microscale structures. The broader impacts of the proposed research cover levels
at the local, national and international education with an extended influence on
public awareness about the interface of biology and microfluidic technologies.
At the local level, the aim is to provide students with experience with
interdisciplinary science, allowing them to perform research and learn
scientific methods. Further, the principal investigator (PI) will recruit
students from Harvard University's underrepresented minority research program.
This program brings underrepresented minorities and women to Harvard from other
universities every summer allowing them to work on the proposed research
project. The PI will also develop graduate courses and arrange field trips with
local high schools in educating students about microfluidics research. At the
national level, the PI will educate the students and the public at other
institutions on technological and scientific challenges. Additionally, the PI
will pursue international educational efforts as well as play a role as a
lecturer for activities such as NSF supported international summer schools.