* 1461286
* REU Site: Investigations in Geometry and Knot Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Rolland Trapp, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 239,991.00

The REU Sites project "Investigations in Geometry and Knot Theory" is an 8-week
program for 8 undergraduates at California State University, San Bernardino. The
program aims to further our understanding in two vibrant areas of mathematics:
Differential Geometry and Knot Theory. In each of three summers, each of the
eight participants will be presented with background material in each of these
areas and given the opportunity to pursue open-ended research problems in the
field of their choice. A group of students will work in each field, with
significant mathematical interaction occurring between students working in the
same field. Moreover, participants will work closely with their mentors in an
enriching environment to complete background reading related to their topic,
give presentations on relevant material, conduct research, and begin writing a
journal-style paper. As the summer progresses, students will perform their own
literature searches, make independent discoveries and engage in creative
mathematical research. Thus participants will have a comprehensive and cohort
research experience. The program will advance discovery through actively
engaging undergraduate students in mathematical research and strongly
encouraging them to become active participants in the mathematical community.

Overall, both fields are rich with a variety of questions to explore. The
unsolved problems presented in the field of Differential Geometry range widely
from determining efficient methods of expressing curvature of surfaces, to
developing theories regarding the types of curvature that one might possibly
encounter on any particular surface. It is of particular emphasis that an
example of the type of surface one might consider is our universe itself! This
component of the project has two main goals. On any smooth surface, the Riemann
Curvature Tensor is an object that encodes the surface's curvature at every
point on the surface. It is known that this object can be expressed as a
combination of other types of curvatures, and we aim to understand the nature of
how different curvature tensors could be expressed according to this
decomposition. Previous results present a deep relationship between this and the
ability to embed the surface into flat space, and a better understanding of this
relationship both aims to distinguish between curvature tensors and sheds light
on this embedding question. The second goal aims to collect the known work in a
particular class of surfaces and attempt to unify the work in this area into one
theory, complete with examples illustrating different aspects of this theory.
The Knot Theory component of this project focuses on problems involving knot
invariants. In general, knot theory has applications in recombinant DNA and
synthetic chemistry; however, participants will focus their attention on several
significant knot invariants related to the Jones polynomial of a link. As the
Jones polynomial is one of the most subtle and significant discoveries in the
last thirty years, these invariants are part of an active and vibrant area of
mathematical research. Overall, these questions are of interest to
mathematicians since they generally seek to understand the structure of how the
universe works, but they are also of interest to the scientific community
because of the potential applications of our findings.