* 1461440
* Rethinking the Local Effects of Political and Economic Transformation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Aurora Donzelli, Sarah Lawrence College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2018
* USD 109,842.00

The research supported by this award will examine how major political and
economic changes affect the ways in which ordinary people speak, imagine the
future, and navigate moral decision making in their daily lives. During the last
three decades, liberal models of democracy and neoliberal economic reforms,
based on American political and economic doctrines, have brought about
fundamental transformations in many countries of the global South. New emphases
on democratic aspirations, transparency, entrepreneurialism, and human rights
have been incorporated into political cultures formerly grounded in social
hierarchy, secrecy, and fatalism. Understanding the role that key concepts of
American political culture have in the transformations occurring in the emergent
countries of the global South is critical for fostering geopolitical
communication and stability through the development of programs and policies
based on a deeper knowledge of culturally specific dimensions of moral and
political reasoning. However, such understanding can only be acquired through
attention to the micro-processes of daily life at the level of individuals and
communities. Therefore, anthropologists who study the local-level effects of
these major national shifts often take advantage of the natural experiment
provided by the fact that once-isolated populations are now increasingly exposed
for the first time to Western models of the goal-oriented political actor driven
by rational choices, a situation that highlights the mechanisms involved.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this research, linguistic anthropologist Dr. Aurora
Donzelli (Sarah Lawrence College) will travel to the Toraja highlands of
Sulawesi, Indonesia. This is an appropriate site for pursuing these questions
because not only is Indonesia the world's second-fastest growing economy, it has
also, since 1998, transitioned quickly from having highly centralized system of
state-led development to a decentralized system based on market capitalism. As a
result of this watershed transformation, the relatively remote Toraja have been
confronted with a new rhetoric of democratic aspirations, a new world of actual
goods and imaginable consumptions, and a new social legitimacy of personal
ambition. The researcher will gather data on this complex transition from a
moral regime centered on the social expectation that personal wants should
remain hidden and unexpressed to a new acceptance of the public expression of
individual ambition. To document the collision between these different
moralities, she will conduct careful analysis of the linguistic and semiotic
resources employed in two apparently unrelated domains of human sociality: the
public sphere of political speechmaking and ritual exchange and the private
domain of domestic interaction. Because the investigator first studied the
Toraja over a decade ago, she has baseline data that will enable her to
undertake a longitudinal study of changes in their linguistic and moral
practices that have resulted from national economic and political
transformation. Findings from this research will provide material for
comparative analyses of moral and linguistic transformations in the wake of
social and political reform and will further the understanding of the
linguistic, social, and cultural dynamics that support institutional
transformations.