* 1461717
* Proposal for conference support for the ASME 2015 4th Global Congress on NanoEngineering for Medicine and Biology (Minneapolis, April 19 - 22, 2015)
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Daniel Irimia, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 12/31/2015
* USD 25,150.00

PI: Bischof, John C. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1461717&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is to provide support
for the 2015 ASME Fourth Global Congress on Nanoengineering for Medicine and
Biology (NEMB). The congress will take place on April 19 - 22, 2015, in
Minneapolis, MN at the University of Minnesota. The broader significance and
importance of this congress is expanding the participation beyond the existing
American Society of Mechanical Engineering (ASME) to foster interdisciplinary
research and education. A particular goal is to involve students and other young
postdoctoral and faculty in this exciting area of research, including
underrepresented groups. There will be numerous networking opportunities
generated through this award that will stimulate scientific and technical
discussion with and amongst younger generation engineers and scientists and
opportunities to mingle with senior investigators. Specific broad impact
enhancements to previous NEMB meetings, and other meetings include: more
unstructured time for interactions between students and faculty; the opportunity
for fast-track publications (special issues in numerous journals - one per
track); an array of topical workshops including one on early career development,
one on translation of nanotechnology out of the University; and a panel
discussion on the changing landscape of scientific publication at the
nanoengineering-biomedical interface. This award is being made jointly by five
Programs: (1) Biomedical Engineering, (2) Biophotonics, (3) Fluid Dynamics, (4)
Particulate and Multiphase Processes, and (5) Thermal Transport Processes, all
in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Division in
the Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This congress will bring
together leading experts in biology, medicine, nano-materials, and engineering
so as to review experimental methods, synthetic methods, results, models,
computations, analyses and innovative methodologies for sensing, quantifying,
diagnosing and treating medical disorders for improved healthcare using
engineering approaches. The combination of engineering and biology with a strong
focus in medicine will be a hallmark of the planned event. To achieve this the
investigators will actively involve a large community of participants, and
provide an exciting forum to exemplify the intellectual merit of biosensing,
biotransport, biomechanics and other bioengineering in the solution of pressing
problems in biology and medicine. Specific research tracks include: (1) nano-
imaging and nano-photonics; (2) nano-therapeutics; (3) nano and microfluidics;
(4) nano-to-macro: multiscale modeling; (5) nanotoxicology and public health in
the environment; and (6) biomimetic materials and nanoscale analysis of living
systems. The funding from this proposal will support registration fees for the
best student participants, provide funding for student awards (oral and poster
presentations), support invited keynote speakers and fund didactic workshops.
These activities will provide many opportunities for young researchers to
broaden the impact of NEMB 2015. Further outcomes will include the website
(http://www.asmeconferences.org/NEMB2015/), online accessible abstracts,
selected plenary talks (webcast online), and podcasts of interviews with
participants.