* 1461584
* When Team Diversity Facilitates Performance: Understanding and Overcoming Fractured Behavioral Patterns
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Eden King, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 01/31/2018
* USD 495,767.00

Diversity within American society - and the teams that work within it - is a
reality. The question, then, is how to leverage team diversity toward team
goals. Common wisdom behind the "business case for diversity" purports that
diversity is a resource that enhances team success. Social science findings,
however, suggest that diversity can instead yield stifled and conflictual team
process that undermines team outcomes. These detrimental effects are pronounced
when diverse attributes align in meaningful ways; like cracks in the surface of
the earth, subgroup divisions - faultlines - can emerge that restrain
performance. The emergent problem is how to prevent and overcome the fractured
behavioral dynamics of faultlines to allow team diversity to be effectively
leveraged toward effective performance.

The goal of this set of studies is to explore the conditions under which
diversity facilitates rather than hinders team performance. It is anticipated
that the promise of diversity can be achieved (and pitfalls avoided) in
conditions under which dysfunctional, fractured behavioral patterns are
prevented. Drawing from theories that explain the challenges and opportunities
of team diversity, the current studies explore three conditions that may enable
the benefits of diversity: high levels of team identification, pro-diversity
values, and social connectedness. Overall, this work will shape scholarly
discourse and organizational practice regarding when and how members' diverse
characteristics can facilitate team performance.

Intellectual Merit: This work will meaningfully contribute to organizational
science by identifying factors that inhibit and facilitate quality performance
in diverse teams. It will shift the simplistic lens of diversity as a
unidimensional feature of teams toward an approach that emphasizes the complex
behavioral patterns that can emerge when team members' characteristics coincide.
To do this, the current studies will examine diversity from a more
multidimensional viewpoint: team faultlines. In addition, the studies will use
the newly available technology of sociometric sensors to examine how diversity
faultlines manifest themselves in subtle ways in the social interactions of team
members. This will allow the current researchers to: (1) address equivocal
findings about the effects of team diversity, (2) challenge the dominant
assumption that faultlines necessarily exist when demographic categories align,
(3) explore the complex behavioral manifestations generated by faultlines, and
finally (4) examine conditions under which the effects of faultlines can be
attenuated. These advancements will shape scholarly understanding about the ways
in which team diversity can positively and negatively impact performance.

Broader Impacts: This research will have broad-reaching impact on both science
and society. Indeed, the theoretical bases and empirical findings of this
research will provide a unique explanation for previous equivocal conclusions
about team diversity. Moreover, this research will transform the way scholars
approach team diversity by focusing on the particular patterns of behavior that
constrain performance. Indeed, the unique methodological approach, which brings
the power of "bigger data" from sociometric sensors to the study of team
dynamics, will spur new insights and research paradigms. The broader impacts
further extend to individuals, organizations, and society. Individuals may gain
new insights into interpersonal dynamics and the subtle behavioral patterns that
reinforce intergroup biases. This work will also identify (and empirically
assess in experimental and field contexts) moderating conditions that
organizations can shape to maximize the potential of workforce diversity.
Ultimately, the simultaneous proliferation of team-based organizational systems
and demographic diversity yields the potential for exceptional team outcomes.
The findings of this work are thus timely and instructive for enhancing team
effectiveness and resolving faultlines in the many contexts where diverse teams
work toward shared goals.