* 1461492
* Reconstructing Language Change and Variation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Peter Norquest, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2016
* USD 109,175.00

People have long been fascinated with spoken language, one of the most salient
traits that defines human beings as unique. Language, by its very nature, is
prone to change for both cognitive and social reasons. The study of language
variation -- how and why it changes, and the fact that an earlier form of the
language can be reconstructed based on evidence from its daughters -- is
therefore a primary way to understand the cultural history of its speakers.
Since the principles of variation, change, and reconstruction methodology can be
applied to any group of related languages, the insight gleaned from studying one
particular language family can be extrapolated to all others around the globe.
When combined with the increasingly rapid advances being made in human language
technology, this knowledge is crucial to facilitating American understanding of
other cultures, developing new language-based technologies, and remaining
technologically competitive in an increasingly interconnected
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is the reconstruction of
the Kam-Sui branch of the Kra-Dai language phylum of Southeast Asia, a region in
which the Principle Investigator, Dr. Peter Norquest (University of Arizona),
has extensive experience. Recent publications, primarily by native and Chinese
fieldworkers, make this an attainable goal in a way that has not been possible
previously. The research will build on the already completed reconstructions of
two sister branches, Proto Tai and Proto Hlai, explicating the historical
relationships between them and allowing the inference of demographic expansions
in prehistory. It comprises a significant step toward completing a top-level
reconstruction of Proto Kra-Dai, which will in turn allow testing the Austro-Tai
hypothesis, which postulates a genetic relationship between Austronesian and
Kra-Dai. Since the nature of the relationships between the five primary language
phyla of Southeast Asia has been a longstanding topic of debate amongst
historical linguists, this project will also benefit scholars working on the
other three language phyla of the region (Sino-Tibetan, Austroasiatic, and
Hmong-Mien), as historical contact will be made amenable to a more refined
analysis than has previously been possible. The commitment by the Center for
Research on Computational Linguistics (CRCL) to grant advance access to their
Kam-Sui database will enable the goals of this project to be rapidly achieved;
the reconstructions resulting from this project will then be merged into a more
extensive online repository to be made available to the public via the online
interface at sealang.net. Both the reconstructions and the practical and
theoretical insights gleaned from the project will be released in a series of
publications.