* 1461615
* The Geopolitics of Trauma: The Role of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder in Admission and Resettlement of Iraqi Refugees in the U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Anna Secor, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 12/31/2019
* USD 474,613.00

This project examines how refugee resettlement practices and experiences rework
the trauma of war and violence to create new geopolitical connections between
Iraq and the United States. With over two million Iraqis displaced from their
country by the recent war, Iraqis have been one of the top three refugee
populations resettled in the U.S. in the past decade. Refugees are increasingly
defined and cared for through a medical diagnosis of Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD), but the role that the medicalization of trauma through the PTSD
paradigm plays in refugee admission, resettlement, and well-being is not well
known. Research findings from multi-sited research in the U.S. and in refugee
screening/admissions sites in Jordan and Turkey will yield new insights into the
uneven geography of mental health screening and treatment that will be useful
for shaping admission and resettlement processes. These findings will also be
helpful to health practitioners attending to the critical needs of refugees and
interested in developing intercultural approaches to PTSD. A better
understanding of how both service providers and Iraqi refugees engage with the
PTSD framework and its implications will enhance U.S. national security and
fulfill a humanitarian responsibility for the well-being of the displaced. This
study contributes to knowledge of geopolitics and the public health of immigrant
and minority populations, and will enhance the participation of underrepresented
minorities in research by including training for a postdoctoral fellow and two
graduate research assistants.

This project pursues three specific aims: 1) to determine the role that the PTSD
paradigm plays in the overseas mental health screening and admission of Iraqi
refugees; 2) to assess how the PTSD paradigm influences the administration of
resettlement once refugees arrive in the U.S.; and 3) to examine how Iraqi
refugees experience and interpret the process of resettlement and especially
mental health screening, diagnosis, and treatment, and analyze how these
experiences vary geographically and by age, gender, education, and time of
resettlement. Using in-depth qualitative methods, the research first establishes
insights into the workings of mental health screening in the admission and
exclusion of refugees in contemporary refugee resettlement practices overseas.
Second, the investigators expect to find that the medicalization of trauma as
PTSD inserts refugees into their new, post-resettlement lives in a particular
way, calling forth specific understandings of what a refugee, the past, and
well-being are. Third, the research will reveal how refugees themselves
experience screening processes, service providers, and treatment from the point
of application to settlement in different places in the U.S. Examining the role
of the PTSD paradigm across multiple sites and spaces along the refugee
resettlement trajectory will trace out a geopolitics of trauma that challenges
assumptions about the scale and fixity of geopolitical relations.