* 1461031
* REU Site: Summer Academy in Sustainable Manufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2019
* USD 370,642.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Wayne State
University (WSU) focuses on offering unique summer research experiences in the
challenging field of sustainable manufacturing to local and national
undergraduate students, especially underrepresented minorities, from two and
four-year institutions. This REU Site resides in the Southeastern Michigan
Manufacturing Community, which has recently been selected by the Obama
Administration as one of the first 12 manufacturing communities under the
national Investing in Manufacturing Communities Partnership (IMCP) inititative.
The objective of this program is to introduce undergraduate students to the
forefront of sustainable manufacturing research and to provide students with the
skills and pathways to pursue four-year and graduate programs so they can become
knowledgeable and capable engineers in the manufacturing industry of the future.
The program addresses NSF national priority areas of advanced manufacturing and
sustainability and is designed to guide students to participate in inter-
disciplinary undergraduate research projects under the co-supervision of a group
of well-accomplished faculty mentors from WSU Engineering Departments. This
breadth in expertise will enable the Site to address challenging issue in
advanced manufacturing while providing a deep understanding of the broader
impacts of sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU program will offer a
10-week intensive summer research and professional development/training
experience, for a total of 30 students, over a three year period. Research
projects will include: 1) nanocoating and lightweight materials and
manufacturing, 2) energy storage materials, batteries, and inversion devices,
3)remanufacturing and sustainability assessment, and 4) chemical-energy-water-
nexus. The program will include individual research projects with faculty
research mentors, research skill seminars, local manufacturing plant visits,
lecture series on the fundamentals of engineering sustainability, discussion
sessions, and a research symposium intended to cultivate dialogue skills. These
activities will ensure that REU Site students obtain the skills necessary to
succeed in future sustainable manufacturing or other STEM academic careers and
activities.