* 1461499
* Synthetic Multiferroic Oxides Prepared by Gel Collection
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Stephen O'Brien, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 522,265.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Multiferroics represent an outstanding 21st century
challenge toward next generation electronics, due to the exciting prospect of
combining magnetism and electrical polarization in a single compound with true
spin-charge coupling. Combining both properties is very exciting scientifically
in terms of the devices that might ultimately be designed, in logic circuits or
spintronics, furthering the quest for the ultimate memory device for computing.
The challenge is to find new materials that can show spin-charge coupling of
meaningful magnitude, closer to room temperature. This project applies an
innovative green chemical synthetic technique developed by the researcher, Gel
Collection, to the discovery of novel oxide compounds that exhibit multiferroic
properties, synthetic multiferroic oxides. This project is experimental in
nature, supported by scientific theory; new material discoveries may spark more
theory. The project trains graduate students in materials chemistry and
nanotechnology, through synthesis, structure characterization and in the
measurement, interpretation and crossover of electricity and magnetism. Select
undergraduate students in the chemistry program on-campus are also trained. The
project promotes diversity and broadens participation of underrepresented groups
in materials science, through a peer-learning program between the City College
of New York and a local high school, both minority-serving institutions. The
project includes an elementary school visitation program within the New York
City public school system, with introductory exploratory kits in STEM aimed at
grades K through 5.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Progress in
multiferroics has been limited by physical restrictions on the co-existence of
magnetic or electrical polarization vector fields in a single compound, and the
magnitude of magnetoelectric coupling. Presently, there are real opportunities,
theoretically and experimentally, for placing lower constraints on this
coexistence. The impact of this research is the deployment of a low temperature
chemical synthesis technique effective for making new materials that are
multiferroic and/or high dielectric in nature. The project relies on a solution
processing approach, based on precursor coordination chemistry, sol-gel and
nanochemistry that offers routes to new complex oxides of previously unexplored
compositions and stoichiometry. The procedure is considered green, due to the
complete consumption of reactant precursors and use of non-toxic solvents, which
are recycled. The project researchers prepare and characterize novel complex
oxides, such as Ba-Ti-Mn-O hollandites, study the structure-property
relationship through a combination of structural (X-ray crystallography,
electron microscopy, companion analytics), spectroscopic (Infra-red, Raman,
X-ray photoelectron) and ferroic (impedance, magnetic, ferroelectric)
characterization techniques. Seeking and detecting potential magnetoelectric
coupling in novel multiferroic complex oxides is an underlying, long term
challenge, with many important research and education goals along the way.