* 1461121
* REU Site: NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates in Computer Vision
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Mubarak Shah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 04/30/2018
* USD 517,241.00

This project represents a continuation of a Research Experience for
Undergraduates site in Computer Vision which has operated successfully at the
University of Central Florida for the past twenty-seven years. Approximately two
hundred and seventy undergraduate students from sixty five institutions all over
the country have participated in this program over the years. Each year,
students will participate in a 12-week duration full-time Summer program. In
past years, a substantial fraction of participants have been able to prepare a
paper for submission to a refereed conference, have the paper accepted and then
attend the conference to present the paper. The program will build these skills
in participants: ability to write complex computer programs; ability to
communicate orally about a research problem; ability to present one's project
via technology such as PowerPoint; ability to do a poster presentation about the
project, and answer questions; ability to think about computer vision issues in
real life problems; ability to do initial reading of a research paper in
computer vision; ability to contribute to discussion of a vision problem; and
ability to embark on applying to graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research emphasizes development of new
algorithms for solving scientific problems in visual geo-localization and
segmentation, object detection, multi-target tracking, activity and event
recognition. It advances both theory and practice; in mathematical modeling and
analysis of difficult vision problems and developing algorithms, while at the
same time building real systems for demonstrating those solutions in real life
situations. The educational model employed by this site includes round-the-clock
mentoring by a team that includes a professor and a graduate student; a
streamlined short course that lets participants start their research projects
sooner; daily meetings with mentors to plan activities throughout the day;
training in MatLab for quick turnaround of research ideas. Participants take the
short course on fundamentals of computer vision, match themselves to a project
topic that they most desire, and spend sufficient time in focused research. Some
possible research projects include: Location-Aware Semantic Segmentation; Multi-
target Tracking with Social Behavior, Model, Human Action Recognition etc. After
summer, students then can opt for follow-through over the year by working with
the professors to write a technical report on their project, to prepare for the
GREs and to apply to graduate programs.