* 1461240
* REU Site: Training in Redox Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Julie Stone, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 262,914.00

This REU Site award to the University of Nebraska, located in Lincoln, NE, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2015-
2017. This award is supported by the Division of Biological Infrastructure in
the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Division of Chemistry in the
Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences. The program focuses on redox
biology, which involves oxidation-reduction linked biological reactions, redox
signaling and regulation, and cellular defense mechanisms that minimize
oxidative damage/stress. The summer program will enable students to explore
fundamental redox processes related to biotechnology and the environment. REU
participants will conduct individual research projects under the guidance of a
faculty mentor in the Redox Biology Center. The mentors offer a breadth of
multidisciplinary approaches and share a common goal of understanding critical
redox-active processes. Students will receive experimental training in a variety
of areas including molecular biology, microbiology, biochemistry, biophysical
chemistry, and protein crystallography, and will utilize state-of-the-art
equipment and facilities. Students will attend journal club meetings, career
development seminars, lunch discussion groups, and social activities to enhance
their cohort experience. The program will conclude with students presenting
their research findings at a campus-wide poster session. Information about the
program will be assessed by various means, including use of an REU common
assessment tool and tracking the career paths of former participants.
Participant selection will be made by faculty and will be based on academic
achievements, research interests, and career goals. Students at smaller
institutions with limited research opportunities and those from underrepresented
groups are encouraged to apply. Participants receive a stipend, full room and
board, and travel assistance.

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences. The goal of the training program is to involve
undergraduate students in broad-based research and significantly impact their
career decisions.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://redoxbiologycenter.unl.edu/summer, or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Donald Becker at dbecker3@unl.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Julie Stone at
jstone2@unl.edu).