* 1461469
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Rational Inattention: Theory and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* David Dillenberger, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2018
* USD 150,891.00

Models of rational inattention have proved to be useful in understanding many
economic phenomena, such as price and investment stickiness, asymmetric response
of consumption to income shocks, and coordination failure. The proposed research
will provide a new tool to analyze and interpret these - as well as other issues
that pertain to economic agents' limitations on the ability to process
information - via a new class of dynamic rational inattention models that have a
recursive form. The key component in these models is an Infinite Horizon
Attention Constraint (IHAC), which captures the intertemporal trade-off in
acquiring information. An IHAC specifies what type of information is affordable
today, and how the choice of what to learn today affects the possible choices of
information tomorrow and in the future. The IHAC is universal in a well-defined
sense and yet it - as well as all the other parameters of the model, such as
state dependent utilities and the anticipated evolution of beliefs over states -
can be uniquely identified from choice behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the
proposed research will characterize axiomatically the types of behavior that can
be described by the model. Second, it will develop applications of the model
that generate new theoretical predictions, both in the realm of individual
decision making and in the context of strategic interactions, and in different
areas, ranging from macro-economic phenomena to the explanation of evidence
collected by psychologists and economists in laboratory experiments. For
example, the model can capture notions such as expertise and fatigue in
acquiring information and gives rise to new behavioral phenomena such as
familiarity bias. It will also generate new insights about policies that might
ameliorate inefficient attention choices. The relevance of this issue is
underscored by the current debate about the role exhausted attention seems to
play in trapping people in poverty (see Mani et. al. 2013 and Mullainathan and
Shafir, 2013).