* 1461138
* Geometric Methods for Graph Partitioning
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Braxton Osting, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2016
* USD 79,000.00

The proposed activity is to develop and analyze new computational methods for a
graph partitioning problem based on the Beltrami energy. This problem has
diverse applications in machine learning and image analysis (medical, satellite,
and material). For example, a clear need for such methods in imaging has been
identified by collaborators at the California NanoSystems Institute, where the
proposed work will directly impact fundamental research in nano science and
foster the understanding of amyloid beta sheets. Such amyloids are associated
with the pathology of more than 20 serious human diseases including Alzheimer's
and other neurodegenerative diseases. Thanks to the multidisciplinary nature of
the activity, awareness and literacy outside one's field will also be mutually
fostered for all involved parties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs, together with
their students and collaborators, will seek new methods that combine variational
arguments with ideas from geometry and partial differential equations in order
to extend and overcome the limitations of existing methods. The research has
three goals. The first goal concerns fundamental theoretical questions raised by
the proposed model: analyze the existence, uniqueness, and properties of the
minimizers of the variational problems; establish a generalized isoperimetric
inequality related to the Beltrami functional in the continuum; and explore
relations to existing theorems and conjectures about optimal partitions. A graph
analogue of the Beltrami energy is formulated and is the foundation for a graph
partitioning objective. The PIs have identified a relaxation of this objective
and propose an in-depth study of a provably convergent rearrangement method for
its solution. The second goal addresses the important computational and
numerical aspects of the proposed graph partitioning model. An efficient
optimization strategy is key for the framework to be usable in practical
applications. Here, promising primal-dual methods from convex optimization will
be utilized, as well as other competitive state-of-the-art methods. To develop
the most efficient solution method, it will be crucial to explore the
similarities to other models, including those for non-negative matrix
factorization and those related to motion by mean curvature. The third goal is
to address concrete, real-world problems and to engage the developed algorithms
in practical applications of societal importance.