* 1461506
* Collaborative Research: Integrated City Sustainability:  Administrative Apparatus for Overcoming Collective Dilemmas of Agency Fragmentation
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Christopher Hawkins, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 04/30/2018
* USD 70,584.00

Nontechnical Description of Significance and
Importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Local governments face complex crosscutting
policy issues that transcend traditional administrative silos organized around
function. When a single issue or objective crosses multiple independent units,
collective action and coordination problems can arise from fragmented authority.
Local sustainability is a broad and complex issue and provides an ideal lens
through which to study these organizational challenges. Despite the widespread
adoption of sustainability goals by local governments, an administrative
apparatus to coordinate their implementation is lacking or inconsistent in many
communities. This research examines the impact that different administrative
arrangements have on policy efforts and outcomes and assesses the institutional
structures necessary to facilitate the success of local sustainability efforts.
Functional coordination and collective action problems within a single
government are similar to institutional collective action problems that arise
from fragmented governmental authority within metropolitan areas. In both cases,
the connectedness of services, objectives, and resource systems produces
positive and negative externalities. Resolution of these dilemmas requires
additional resources and expertise, as well as the development of administrative
structures to integrate decision-making. This work intends to initiate a general
theory of institutional collective action that encompasses administrative
dilemmas within as well as between organizations. It proceeds in two stages:
First, it will collect quantitative data on administrative institutions via
surveys administered to local government officials. Second, eight cities will be
selected for in-depth analysis based on characterizations developed from their
survey responses. An analytic narratives approach and social network analysis
will be applied to explore the mechanisms available for overcoming functional
collective action dilemmas in local sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
functional coordination has long been a concern within public administration,
these issues are not emphasized in contemporary policy theories. Little is known
about how the design of administrative mechanisms influences organizational
ability to integrate decisions and resolve functional collective action
problems. Even less is known about how administrative mechanisms affect policy
outputs and outcomes at the organizational level. Through an exploration of city
sustainability policy, this research will initiate a theory of functional
collective action that extends institutional collective action research beyond
its current focus on horizontal and vertical fragmentation among independent
governments. Findings will provide insight to address the common problem of
"fuzzy boundaries," whereby the lack of clear lines of responsibility for
tackling complex policy issues necessitates more coordinated efforts. This
research will systemically identify the strengths and weaknesses associated with
different mechanisms for overcoming functional collective action and enable
municipalities to make more informed choices and minimize administrative
dilemmas within as well as between organizations. The results of this analysis
are expected to be of applied value to local government practitioners.
Additionally, the empirical survey data collected from this research will
contribute to the broader study of urban governance and policy in the US and
enable researchers to better examine sustainability and local government
administration questions.