* 1461868
* Combining Genomics, Remote Sensing, and Geospatial Modeling to Understand Adaptation to Growing Season Length in Balsam Poplar
* BIO,IOS
* 08/17/2014,12/31/2017
* Cathlyn Davis, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 12/31/2017
* USD 1,147,443.00

PI: Stephen Keller (University of Vermont &amp; State Agricultural
College)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Andrew Elmore, Matthew Fitzpatrick, David
Nelson, and Cathlyn Stylinski (University of Maryland Center for Environmental
Science, Frostburg, MD)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key Collaborator: Raju
Soolanayakanahally (Agriculture and Agri-Food,
Canada)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Translating genomic information into knowledge of
environmental adaptation and prediction of performance under field conditions
are core challenges facing plant biologists. The goal of this project is to
associate genome-wide diversity to functional plant phenotypes using high-
throughput phenotyping under field conditions and new analytical tools in balsam
poplar, Populus balsamifera, a keystone tree species. This project will provide
cross-disciplinary training in the latest techniques in ecological genomics,
remote sensing, and spatial modeling to undergraduate and graduate students.
Minority and first-generation undergraduate students will be recruited through
partnerships with Frostburg State University's McNair Program and other
organizations. Public outreach to rural communities will be conducted through a
multi-faceted science program centered on engaging the public in the science of
genomics, plant phenology, and climate change, in collaboration with the
National Phenology Network (www.usanpn.org/). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop and integrate tools from genomics, remote sensing, and geospatial
modeling to study the genetic basis of climate adaptation in Populus
balsamifera, balsam poplar. Sampling will be focused on balsam poplar's southern
range edge in order to study the physiological adaptations of populations to the
warmest, earliest onset growing seasons within its geographic range. Genome-wide
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data will be generated for 600 poplar
genotypes and used to perform genome scans for local adaptation and association
mapping for phenology, growth, and water use efficiency traits. Regions of the
genome associated with climate adaptation will be used to predict field
performance using an independent sample of genotypes and an innovative remote
sensing approach to measure phenology. New spatial analytical methods will be
developed to characterize the associations between genomic variation and
environmental gradients of climate and growing season length, and to visualize
the landscape surface of adaptive variation under both current and projected
climates. Genomic sequence data will be publically available through NCBI's
sequence read archive and DOE's Knowledgebase. SNP genotypes, phenotypic traits,
and remotely sensed phenology data will be publically accessible through Data
DRYAD (www.datadryad.org). A software package in landscape genomics will be
developed for the R project for statistical computing, and publically accessible
through the Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN: http://cran.r-project.org/).
Finally, new germplasm and associated genomic and phenotypic results will be
available upon request.