* 1461124
* REU Site:  Undergraduate Research and Mentoring - Using the Lake Erie Sensor Network to Study Land-Lake Ecological Linkages
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Jeanine Refsnider, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 324,811.00

This REU Site award to the University of Toledo's Lake Erie Center, located in
Toledo, OH, will support the training of 10 students per year for 9 weeks during
the summers of 2015- 2017. This REU builds science research skills through
multi-disciplinary independent projects addressing key environmental challenges
of land-water ecosystems (including harmful algal blooms, invasive species, and
climate change) partnering academia, agencies, public sectors, and industry.
This Lake Erie Center REU experience gives fellows an opportunity to work in the
areas of environmental biology, geospatial technologies, and civil engineering,
all linked via a Land-Lake Sensor Network. Tiered mentoring teams partner each
fellow with a professor, a Ph.D. graduate student, and an agency scientist,
networked within an Environmental Science Learning Community. All will receive
ethics/responsible conduct of research training. Fellows gain formative skills
to: (1) ask scientific questions and develop testable hypotheses, (2) master
science terminology, tools, and techniques, (3) design and conduct original
experiments, (4) build working partnerships, (5) analyze and synthesize data,
and (6) present, publish, and communicate research. Online application
information is available at the program website listed below.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students who are
underrepresented minorities, first generation college students, women, veterans,
or from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained for the
science and engineering careers of tomorrow. Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences, and a website, publications, and workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division
of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used
to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are required to
be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the
NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://www.utoledo.edu/nsm/lec/REU.html, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Stepien at
carol.stepien@utoledo.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Czajkowski at
kevin.czajkowski@utoledo.edu).