* 1461365
* Classifying Categorization Using State Trace Analysis and Hierarchical Bayesian Modeling
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Michael Kalish, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 02/28/2018
* USD 364,030.00

Humans must categorize the world in order to understand it. Categories like
healthy versus poisonous, valuable versus overpriced, or even apples versus
oranges coordinate our thinking and guide our actions in the world. In line with
their centrality in cognition, current theories of categorization and category
learning are numerous and diverse. The goal of this research project is to
gather together these diverse theories and subject them to direct comparison
using new and innovative statistical theories, computer implementations, and
experimental designs. This project aims to serve Socrate's goal of carving
nature at its joints by finding out why different people, at different times,
learn different kinds of categories in different ways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has many potential scientific and practical
ramifications. In particular, the techniques to be developed are directly
relevant to research in the psychology of memory, judgment, and decision-making.
More broadly, knowing if different category types are reliably different in the
way they are learned, or if people are reliably different in the way they learn
categories, will allow development of programs to help people learn difficult
categories (like cancerous vs benign radiographs) more quickly and accurately.