* 1461716
* Meeting: International Travel for Students and Postdocs to attend the 13th Congress of the International Society for Developmental and Comparative Immunology; Spain, June 28, 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* L Courtney Smith, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* rollie clem
* 04/30/2016
* USD 20,727.00

Congresses of the International Society for Developmental and Comparative
Immunology (ISDCI) are held every three years in different parts of the world.
These meetings are relatively small with 260-400 attendees, of which students
and postdocs comprise 35-40%. The warm collegiality that pervades ISDCI meetings
encourages students and postdocs to talk to the leaders in the field and to
other scientists with similar interests. The meeting provides young researchers
with opportunities to initiate collaborations and seek out mentors for advanced
degrees, which strengthens the field of developmental and comparative
immunology. This award supports travel of US students and postdoctoral
researchers to attend the 13th Congress of ISDCI to present their research and
to take advantage of these opportunities to interact with other comparative
immunologists. Recipients of the travel awards will include women and
individuals from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparative
immunology research has led to significant discoveries that have enhanced the
broader field of general immunology, and in some ways resulted in directional
changes. Examples include discovery in the fruit fly Drosophila of protein
receptors that detect pathogens in all animals and plants; applications that are
used today for analyzing gene function and for editing or correcting genes were
based on research on anti-pathogen responses in plants and round worms and the
adaptive immune responses of bacteria to viruses. These approaches may be added
to the arsenal of potential therapeutics in the future, potentially to correct
genes that are the basis of congenital abnormalities, or to excise retroviruses
from human genomes, an approach that is potentially important to an HIV cure.
ISDCI is the only international society of immunologists whose primary interests
are developmental and/or comparative in nature; members investigate immune
functions in a wide range of organisms. The ISDCI fills an important niche
within the larger field of immunology, and addresses topics that are not
generally included in meetings focused on biomedical immunology, such as host-
microbe interactions, and immunity in plants, fishes and marine mammals. The
goals of the 13th Congress are to communicate new ideas and results for the
field of developmental and comparative immunology, and to provide opportunities
for the young members to present their research and to interact with others in
the field.