* 1461746
* The Rollout of Market-Based Environmental Management
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Morgan Robertson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 12/31/2019
* USD 314,795.00

This project will analyze the introduction of market-based conservation
policies, particularly habitat banking, in the EU as a test-case for the global
feasibility of such approaches. Market-based conservation is a significant part
of the international environmental policy toolkit, as well as a key component of
calls for global market coordination and trade harmonization. While market-based
approaches to conservation have been in play in the U.S. for nearly 40 years,
the advent of such approaches in the EU has sparked great debate. The EU thus
presents a critical test case for the global feasibility of market-based
approaches to biodiversity conservation. The success or failure of EU attempts
to regulate the environment using habitat banking will speak to the potential of
markets and the obstacles in the way of global economic integration. The project
will contribute to current policy debates, as its findings will be both timely
and highly relevant to ongoing policy development in regions currently
attempting to implement market-based environmental management. Thus, in addition
to academic articles, the researchers plan to prepare a variety of policy
documents to disseminate project results, as well as presenting at policy
conferences in the EU and US, and in ongoing webinar series on habitat banking
and other tools of market-based conservation. In addition, graduate student
training will be an important aspect of the proposed research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine the rollout of market-based
environmental conservation in the EU through comparative analysis of three early
adopter EU member states: Germany, Spain, and the UK. The research will consist
of: a) interviews with staff at the European Commission, and at German, Spanish
and British national and regional environmental agencies, NGOs, and consulting
firms, as well as with environmental scientists and habitat banking
entrepreneurs; b) discourse analysis of popular media, technical reports, peer
review literature, and policies on habitat banking in the EU; c) a Q-method
quantitative study of the different subject-positions occupied by central
actors; d) participant observation at policy conferences and policymaking venues
within the EU and member states' governments; and e) a comparative analysis of
the process of developing and using the ecological metrics by which habitat
credits are assessed in each member state. This will be the first comparative
study of market-based biodiversity conservation in the EU, and the only one by
researchers deeply familiar with the US program on which the EU approach is
modeled. By examining what is arguably the best case scenario for harmonized
international markets in ecosystem services, the proposed research would provide
an important contribution to debates over whether the full, or even partial,
financialization of nature is actually possible.