* 1461431
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining Sequence of Contextualized Items in Science
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Min Li, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2017
* USD 15,994.00

Student performance on science tests often is substantially influenced by the
context of individual test items. This doctoral dissertation research project
will systematically describe the sequence patterns used in science test-item
contexts and obtain empirical evidence on how the sequence patterns of
contextual information supports or hinders student performance on science tests.
Contextual information includes supplemental information, such as a vignette or
selected background facts that precede or follow a test item. The project will
address three gaps in the literature on contextualized items by providing: a
consistent theory-based framework for selecting test-item characteristics to be
studied; new knowledge about how student performance is influenced by specific
elements or features of the test items; and better understanding of subgroups of
students and their performance to advance knowledge about how to achieve
consistently equitable testing. In particular, this project will produce both
theory and empirical evidence regarding how the sequence of contextual
information can be attributed to differential performance between English
language learners (ELL) and non-ELL groups. Findings from the ELL and non-ELL
comparisons will lead to important improvements in how items are developed to
ensure test fairness. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, the
project will enable a promising student to establish a strong, independent
research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's design and data analyses
will be framed by three research questions: (1) How is student performance
associated with different dimensions of the sequence of contextual information
for science test items? (2) Controlling for different levels of linguistic
complexity in contexts, how is the contextual sequence linked to science
performance of ELLs and non-ELLs? (3) How do different dimensions of sequence of
context influence how students interpret and respond to tasks? The project will
include multiple facets of inquiry, including psychometrics, test-item creation,
misconceptions, and cognitive diagnostic assessment. The project will generate
item-development guidelines based on dimensions of sequence of contextual
information. Items resulting from this process will evoke students' stored
knowledge relevant to the content and/or process skills being assessed. The
newly developed science items then will be field tested with a diverse
population of eighth graders. A range of psychometric and statistical procedures
will be applied to student test scores. This activity will include both think-
aloud and eye-tracking student cognitive interviews, with quantitative and
qualitative analyses of the cognitive interview data.