* 1461038
* REU Site: Discoveries in Bioimaging
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Stephen Boppart, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2019
* USD 360,000.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site
"Discoveries in Bioimaging" at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
(UIUC) will provide a state-of-the-art, interdisciplinary research environment
in bioimaging to inspire and train undergraduates from under-represented
demographics in engineering to encourage their transition to graduate degree
programs. Throughout the educational process, visuals are a powerful means to
clearly convey complex ideas and to stimulate curiosity and interest. Likewise,
investigations in the biological and medical sciences invariably require clear
pictures of cells, tissues, and organs to discover mechanisms of life and to
detect and understand the complex pathological processes of disease. The
unifying link between bioscience, discovery, and bioimaging will be the
inspirational centerpiece for the new REU site. Students who take part in this
REU program will gain an intimate familiarity with how biological discoveries
directly arise from imaging, and gain an advanced skillset in state-of-the-art
imaging technologies and interdisciplinary research that they can carry with
them to graduate school. They will be exposed to the vast breadth of bioimaging
techniques and applications while simultaneously focusing on a specific project
at the forefront of biology and medical science. Furthermore by implementing
literature-supported mentorship and training strategies, this program will
directly address pipeline leaks for the transition of under-represented groups
to engineering graduate degree programs. Those who choose to not pursue graduate
studies will still be enriched with technical skills, professionalism, and
career-readiness. The attributes of our program, both those that are successful,
or perhaps ineffective, will be constantly assessed and refined, and findings
will be disseminated to the public through publications in educational
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the support from the NSF Division of Engineering Education and Centers, the REU
Site will be dedicated to inspiring and training undergraduates in STEM fields
through a summer experience in bioimaging research. The goal is to create a
coherent interdisciplinary program centered on the visualization of biology and
medical science at all scales in which students develop a network of role
models, mentors, and peers to support and encourage their transition to graduate
school. Undergraduates finishing their freshman, sophomore, and junior years in
a variety of STEM disciplines will be recruited with special efforts directed
toward females and under-represented minorities, especially those at minority-
serving institutions and small colleges with limited research opportunities. In
addition, highly motivated community college students who are en route to 4-year
colleges and universities, will be included. Students will begin this 10-week
summer program with a 5-day "Bioimaging Bootcamp" to provide foundational
knowledge in biology, imaging, and microscopy through lectures, demonstrations,
lab activities, and tours, in conjunction with social introductions. Over the
next nine weeks, students will engage in intensive research projects in imaging
and biological visualization, closely mentored by a faculty member and graduate
student, with assistance from an experienced UIUC undergraduate. All research
projects, ranging from imaging single molecules using fluorescence microscopy to
tracking cell dynamics in the skin of live animals, will have three essential
elements: (1) imaging and/or microscopy, (2) an application directed toward
biological or medical sciences, and (3) an analytical or computational
component. Students will share experiences with their cohort through biweekly
social activities, attend research seminars and professional development
sessions, and interact with participants in other REUs on campus to expand their
network. Summer achievements will culminate in the submission of an abstract to
the Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) Annual Fall Meeting, where they will
reconvene in the fall for continued education and career-enriching
opportunities.