* 1461296
* REU SITE: Sustainable Wireless Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Besma Smida, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 01/31/2020
* USD 323,864.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at Purdue University Calumet. Undergraduate students recruited from across
the nation will participate in summer research projects focused on sustainable
wireless communications. The research involves exploration of topics related to
the almost pervasive use of devices such as smart phones and tablets that rely
on wireless networks to communicate. The increasing use of these devices and
applications is outstripping the capacity of the underlying network
infrastructures. To accommodate the rising demand for ubiquitous high-speed
data, researchers will need to design sustainable wireless networks that can
function in the presence of the many challenges raised by the nature of wireless
communications. This REU experience should help develop a group of computing
professionals who can develop future communication systems that will be
reliable, efficient, and sustainable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
projects span a variety of topics under the umbrella of sustainable wireless
communications including spectrum-efficient wireless communication by means of
reflected power, energy-efficient data dissemination in wireless sensor
networks, adaptive backbone-based routing in delay tolerant wireless networks,
adaptive network recovery from excessive network failure, and sustainable
networks under intentional attacks. The program will target students from under-
represented minorities and students from institutions that do not offer Ph.D
degrees. The host institution, Purdue University Calumet, is a predominantly
undergraduate institution with many students in the target group. Through hands-
on projects and experiments, the program will provide students with an authentic
environment to investigate effective solutions to real-world problems involving
wireless communication technologies. The research activities coupled with other
professional development opportunities all help achieve the project goal of
inspiring students to pursue advance educational opportunities and professional
careers in computer and information science.