* 1461698
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: STEMS: STatistic Emerging Memory Simulator
* CSE,CCF
* 08/16/2014,06/30/2016
* Yuan Xie, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 06/30/2016
* USD 130,451.00

Emerging memory technologies such as Magnetoresistive random-access memory
(MRAM), Phase-change memory (PCRAM), and Resistive random-access memory (RRAM)
are being explored as potential alternatives for future computing systems.
However, traditional memory design methodologies are not sufficient to address
probabilistic behaviors, which are caused by process variations and the
intrinsic randomness in the physical mechanisms (e.g., thermal fluctuations) of
these emerging technologies.

The objective of this research is to develop a design methodology called
STatistical Emerging Memory Simulator (STEMS) for circuit/architecture designs
with such emerging memory technologies. The intellectual merits include the
following: (1) developing a generic statistical characterization formalism to
link the emerging memory cell design specifications with design variables,
process variations and environmental fluctuations, (2) deriving a variation-
aware compact memory cell model to fulfill the demands of the statistical design
optimizations at cell and array levels, and (3) investigating a statistical
memory design methodology to explore the tradeoffs among memory structure,
implementation cost, and design specifications for various system requirements.
The proposed research will fundamentally change the design methodologies for
future memory technologies, initiate an innovative direction in memory designs,
and optimize and balance the new design characteristics of emerging memories
under architectural considerations, inspiring the transition of design
philosophy from the deterministic era to the probabilistic era. The proposed
techniques provide a complementary perspective to the existing probabilistic
system and architectural research while emphasizing the yield and probabilistic
properties of memory designs.

This project will facilitate further advances and wider adoption of the emerging
memory technologies by the semiconductor industry. Innovations in design methods
and memory modeling will have an impact on the way in which semiconductor memory
chips are designed and fabricated. Undergraduate and graduate students involved
in this research will be trained for the next-generation semiconductor industry
workforce.