* 1461495
* Collaborative Research: The Bipartite Temporal Event Network (BiTEN) Model
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Bailey Fosdick, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 104,397.00

This research project will develop a powerful and flexible statistical modeling
framework that facilitates the analysis of complex network data. This model,
called the bipartite temporal event network (BiTEN) model, will allow
researchers to tease apart finely grained temporal dynamics along with
properties of network structure, spatial geography, and any given set attributes
that describe actors and/or their relationships. Across a variety of
disciplines, situations arise in which actors (e.g., individuals, organizations,
states, etc.) form ties to entities (e.g., products, corporations, treaties).
International environmental treaty ratification is an example of a complex
process through which states connect to treaties via the decision to ratify. The
questions surrounding treaty ratification lie at the heart of a science of
networks and specifically speak to the phenomena of diffusion, contagion, and
behavioral cascades. Understanding this process is critical to making progress
on issues ranging from global warming to arms control. The researchers will
apply this method to a number of substantive questions, including treaty
ratification, the onset of war, transnational terrorism, the creation of
legislation, consumer behavior, and peer influence among students. They also
will develop and disseminate free and open source statistical software.

The researchers will develop a temporal process for the modeling of network
dependencies that can accommodate the vital actor- and relationship- level
effects. The statistical challenge in this project stems from the fact that the
structure in which the actors tie to the entities affects subsequent ties. That
is, the structure of the network of relationships may drive its own evolution --
a phenomena familiar in network science. The researchers will develop two
estimation strategies for the model: a Bayesian approach and a maximum
likelihood approach. The models developed will reliably estimate what portions
of a phenomenon are driven by latent state network structure, actor attributes,
relational attributes, spatial geography, and temporal dynamics. The models also
will leverage all of these dynamics to probabilistically predict link formation.