* 1461275
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Renewable Energy
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Charles Stone, IV, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL PART: Each summer the REU Site will invite nine undergraduate
students and one secondary school teacher to Colorado School of Mines (CSM) to
perform cutting-edge research in renewable energy. These highly
interdisciplinary studies are open to all undergraduate students majoring in
engineering, materials science, chemistry, physics, mathematics, and computer
science. The secondary school teacher will be active in math, science, or
preparatory engineering classes. Students will participate in a 10-week effort,
while the teacher will be immersed in a synchronous 5-week program that blends a
research experience with a curriculum development expectation. All participants
will work directly with CSM faculty mentors and scientific staff from the nearby
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) and the on-campus Renewable Energy
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (REMRSEC). As the nation's
primary laboratory for renewable energy and energy efficiency research and
development, NREL partners with REMRSEC to continuously develop undergraduate
students' skills, knowledge, and interests in renewable energy with the purpose
of creating a pipeline that supports its future research strands and employment
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART: The project will provide CSM
graduate students the opportunity to assist faculty mentors in the design and
delivery of research projects suitable for undergraduate students and secondary
school teachers. Projects include modeling electrical charge transport in
quantum dot structures, characterizing the performance of novel fuel cells,
improving wind turbine designs, investigating hydrogen gas storage techniques,
developing low cost but highly efficient thin film solar cells, and synthesizing
lithium ion batteries. In addition to their research pursuits, participants will
be immersed in experiential education activities that include field trips,
hands-on laboratory tours, professional development sessions, and weekly
technical seminars with renewable energy themes. At the end of the summer, all
participants will share their results at a formal scientific Poster Session with
participants from neighboring research programs. Students who produce
significant research results will be encouraged to publish their work in
scientific journals and/or present their studies at scientific conferences. The
teacher will share his or her results with district teachers at the Colorado
Science Conference for Professional Development held each November in downtown
Denver or at a National Science Teachers Association conference.