* 1461231
* REU Site: Engineering Applications of Extreme Ultra-Violet (EUV) Laser Light
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Stephen Leone, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2018
* USD 335,572.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:

The Extreme Ultraviolet Engineering Research Center (EUV ERC), a partnership
between Colorado State University (CSU), the University of Colorado, Boulder (CU
Boulder), the University of California, Berkeley (UC Berkeley) and 20 corporate
affiliates, will provide summer research internships to 30 undergraduate
students from colleges and universities across the United States through a
3-year Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) grant from the National
Science Foundation (NSF) [Division of Engineering Education EEC-1461231].
Students who are accepted into the program will participate at one of the 3
campuses in a 10-week program that involves conducting research in a cutting-
edge engineering project, attending scientific seminars and industry tours, and
presenting their results. The Center recognizes the importance of students in
academic research to be able to interact and appreciate the industrial culture.
As a result, a goal of this grant is to leverage these partnerships to enable
alumni REU interns to be placed into industry internships. The Center also has
active partnerships with minority serving institutions and is committed to
providing opportunities for students from underrepresented minority groups. The
Center will broaden participation by joining efforts with, Professor Willie
Rockwood of Morehouse College, a Historically Black College/Univ. (HBCU), who
has a >10 year history of working with the Center and is co-PI of this grant.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:

Light in the EUV region of the spectrum (wavelengths approximately 5 - 50 nm) is
the key enabling technology of critical importance to the semiconductor industry
and national economy. The EUV ERC will provide summer research internships that
involve EUV science and technology topics such as laser systems, nanoscience
(quantum dots), electronic (printed board) circuit design, photonic techniques
(ellipsometry, phase shifting interferometry and both ambient condition and low-
temperature vacuum spectroscopy), optics design (Brewster's Angle plate beam
splitter), lithography (essential to next generation computer processor
manufacturing), chemistry and material science (photo resists), and high voltage
systems. Titles of possible projects include: Nanoscale resolution mass-
microscope by EUV laser ablation mass spectrometry; Photoelectron dynamics using
high harmonic EUV light; and, the Design and construction of a new vacuum
chamber test bed for characterizing magnetic materials at the nano-scale with
ultrafast time resolution.

The Center has an active partnership with Industries in the development of EUV-
technologies that derive from research conducted at the Center. The Center
recognizes the importance of students in academic research to be able to
interact and appreciate the industrial culture. As a result, a goal of this
grant is to leverage these partnerships to enable alumni REU interns to be
placed into industry internships.