* 1461297
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Next-generation Plant Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Howard Judelson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2021
* USD 662,147.00

This REU Site award to the Center for Plant Cell Biology (CEPCEB) of University
of California at Riverside (UCR), CA, will support the training of 12 students
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2015 to 2019. The CEPCEB-REU program provides
authentic research experiences in "next-generation" technologies investigating
the cell biology of plants and plant pathogens. Program participants get exposed
to innovative experimental techniques and benefit from state-of-the-art
genomics, bioinformatics, microscopy and proteomics facilities. CEPCEB supports
interdisciplinary studies and encompasses 45 faculty from 12 UCR departments.
The CEPCEB-REU targets a broad range of students from both two- and four-year
colleges, including institutions that offer limited research opportunities or
serve groups traditionally underrepresented in the sciences. A committee of
three CEPCEB members selects program participants. While GPAs are considered,
each student's entire record and enthusiasm for research are considered.
Participating undergraduates live on campus and receive a stipend. Each student
works on an independent research project mentored by an experienced researcher
and/or the PI of a CEPCEB lab. Students also participate in several workshops
and present their work at a symposium. Workshops include introductory sessions
into concepts and methods of contemporary cell biology as well as coverage of
additional topics, such as technical science writing, bio-ethics, responsible
conduct of research, and preparation for graduate school. The program is
evaluated on an annual basis using a common assessment tool for REU site
programs, and the career outcomes of participants are tracked.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 60 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the
program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present
the results of their work at scientific conferences. The CEPCEB REU will help to
prepare the next generation of scientists to meet the challenges of producing
food, fiber, and plant-derived fuels for mankind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by
visiting http://cepceb.ucr.edu/reu/ or by contacting the PI, Dr. Thomas Eulgem
(thomas.eulgem@ucr.edu; 951-827-7740), or the co-PI Dr. Howard Judelson
(howard.judelson@ucr.edu; 951-827-4199).