* 1461007
* REU Site: Plant Biology and Conservation Research Experiences for Undergraduates--From Genes to Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Jeremie Fant, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 330,222.00

This REU Site award to the Chicago Botanic Garden (Glencoe, IL) will support the
training of 10 students over 10-week periods during the summers of 2015-2017.
This REU Site's focus is on plant biology and conservation, spanning from
genomic to ecosystem levels. Mentors are drawn from the Garden, Northwestern
University, and partner institutions. Mentors' diverse areas of expertise enable
students to conduct research on a variety of topics, including evolution,
pollination, conservation, genetics, invasive species, soil science, and
restoration ecology. Students participate in professional-development
activities; field trips; and weekly discussions addressing topics like ethics,
graduate school, and scientific communication. The REU program is integrated
into a near-peer training continuum: participants are paired with graduate
student co-mentors and high school mentees. Target participants include students
from groups underrepresented in the sciences, those who are the first in their
family to attend college, non-traditional students, veterans, and students who
lack extensive research opportunities at their home institutions. Students are
recruited nationally and are selected based on their academic record, statement,
letter of recommendation, potential to benefit from the experience, interviews
with prospective mentors, and program goals. It is anticipated that a total of
30 students, primarily from groups underrepresented in the sciences and schools
with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. In
addition, the Garden hosts affiliated interns who add to the diverse research
community experienced by REU participants. Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. All participants will present their findings at a large, multiple-
institution symposium. A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for
Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students are tracked to evaluate the effects of this research
experience on their future academic and career paths. Information about the
program is assessed through follow-up surveys, including use of an REU common
assessment tool. More information is available by visiting http://www.cbgreu.org
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Jeremie Fant at jfant@chicagobotanic.org) or co-PI
(Dr. Daniel Larkin at dlarkin@chicagobotanic.org).