* 1461148
* REU Site: Modeling and Industrial Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Hien Tran, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 03/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

The REU program at North Carolina State University aims to get more
undergraduates interested in pursuing academic and nonacademic careers in
mathematics. The program does this by giving the students the opportunity to
work on applied research problems in a supportive, collaborative environment
that is part of a vibrant research department with strong collaboration with
industry and government laboratories. The program combines a strong commitment
to outreach, well thought-out programs for students, and a long-standing
dedication to diversity in the mathematics work force. The interdisciplinary
nature of the REU program attracts students who do not necessarily think of
themselves as primarily interested in mathematics (some are double majors, or
have math minors). Through this summer experience students learn the power of
mathematical models, potentially interesting them in careers in the mathematical
sciences.

In this REU program students are exposed to challenging and exciting real-world
problems arising in industrial and government laboratory research. This
experience benefits its participants in ways not possible with traditional
coursework. Students learn valuable techniques of applied mathematics and learn
how to work in teams to accomplish common objectives. The complexity and open-
endedness of the problems provides a challenge that makes learning new
techniques worthwhile. The fact that there may be no ready-made structures or
body of results to cover the final problem formulation only compounds the
excitement. REU students see the value placed on their work by those outside the
University, in the "real world" of business and industry.