* 1461753
* The role of uncertainty in waveguide perturbations on midlatitude predictability with DOWNSTREAM
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Ryan Torn, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 318,277.00

The principal investigator of this proposal will assess whether changes to the
structure of the jet stream that occur in conjunction with the development of
cyclones are significant sources of weather forecast errors further downstream.
These events can result in poorly forecast extreme weather events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to the future US workforce
through the training of a graduate student in state-of-the-art approaches to
predictability, data assimilation, and synoptic/mesoscale meteorology. A
successful project will develop understanding that can lead to improved weather
forecasts, and in turn provide greater lead time for warnings and reduced loss
of life and property due to certain mid-latitude extreme weather
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to evaluate the
hypothesis that waveguide perturbations associated with midlatitude cyclones and
the extratropical transition of tropical cyclones (ET) are an important source
of downstream forecast errors. The first phase of this proposal involves
evaluating this hypothesis by comparing the downstream predictability following
the development of midlatitude cyclones and ET and comparing it to a
predictability climatology using 31 years of ensemble forecasts from the NOAA
Earth System Research Laboratory 2nd generation reforecast project. Moreover,
this study will evaluate hypotheses regarding the predictability of midlatitude
vs. ET cyclones and how this predictability varies depending on the magnitude of
the waveguide perturbation. In addition, this study will evaluate hypotheses
related to how uncertainty in the outflow and thermodynamic profile in the
vicinity of waveguide perturbations impact the downstream predictability. The
role of the outflow on the downstream state will be evaluated by comparing the
sensitivity of forecast metrics related to the downstream state to the outflow
against the sensitivity of the forecast metrics to other aspects of the state.
The role of the outflow will be confirmed by performing a series of perturbed
initial condition experiments where aspects of the initial-time outflow
properties are modified, and then evaluating the impact on the downstream state.