* 1461529
* RAPID: Monitoring the glacial-outburst flood (jökulhlaup) resulting from the eruption of Barðarbunga Volcano, Iceland
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2016
* John McNeill, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 10/31/2016
* USD 25,735.00

a) A non-technical description of the project's broader significance and
importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glacial outburst floods ("jökuhlhaup" in
Icelandic) can occur when a volcanic eruption occurs under an ice mass. The
surge of water and debris that results can be catastrophic for anything in its
path. These events, although relatively rare in most parts of the world, are
familiar occurrences in Iceland. This RAPID project will investigate the
characteristics of a glacial outburst flood that may result from the eruption of
the Baðarbunga volcano. Information derived from this investigation may provide
the tools for warning local communities about the timing and size of the flood.
The data will be incorporated into a hydrologic model that could be used to
predict the effects of large floods in other settings. In addition, the field
measurements could help constrain the magnitude of flooding that created
observed features on the surface of the planet Mars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b) A
technical description of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
monitor the onset and duration of a jökuhlhaup in a well-studied channel in
interior Iceland. The investigators will measure water flow, water chemistry,
and sediment transport in order to generate a hydrograph of the event. The water
chemistry will also provide insight into the mechanisms that generate the
jökuhlhaup. The project will also monitor the landscape conditions around the
eruptive centers and the outburst flood channel. A graduate student and an
undergraduate will be involved in the field effort.