* 1461355
* Structural Equation Modeling with a Small Number of Observations (N) and a Large Number of Variables (p)
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Ke-Hai Yuan, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 349,998.00

This research project will develop structural equation modeling (SEM)
methodology that can be applied to data with a small number of observations (N)
and a large number of variables (p). The new methods will broaden the
applicability of SEM to important areas of research where the number of
observations may be quite small, such as data from hard-to-reach populations.
Data and methods for data analysis are key to advancing science. SEM is used by
many disciplines, including psychology, education, sociology, management, health
sciences, and medicine. Existing SEM methodology requires the number of
observations to be proportional to the square of the number of variables.
However, it may be difficult to collect the large number of observations
required by SEM to reach reliable conclusions. The new methodology is expected
to yield reliable results when N is either larger than 30 or two times the
number of variables. The research has the potential to both improve data
analyses and reduce data collection costs. The methods will be implemented in
freely available, user-friendly software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With small N
and/or large p, existing methods for SEM face four major practical issues: (1)
near singular sample covariance matrices and the related issue of nonconvergence
in parameter estimation; (2) inefficient parameter estimates with non-normal
data; (3) unreliable model test statistics; and (4) inaccurate standard errors.
The project will address the first issue by adding a proper diagonal matrix to
the sample covariance matrix or the ridge method, an approach that has been
shown to be effective. The other issues will be addressed by a new method termed
empirical modeling, in which the empirical behavior of a test statistic/standard
error is modeled under a variety of conditions. By combining empirical modeling
and the ridge method, the project is expected to produce efficient parameter
estimates and reliable model inference.