* 1461347
* International Workshop on Comparing Ice Nucleation Measuring Systems 2014 (ICIS 2014) #3
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Daniel Cziczo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2017
* USD 194,014.00

This project is the second part of a three-part workshop to improve scientific
knowledge related to developing a better understanding of the atmospheric
formation of ice particles. This workshop will take place at Aerosol Interaction
and Dynamics in the Atmosphere (AIDA) at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
the world's foremost facility for producing ice clouds in a controlled setting.
There is currently a poor understanding of the composition and concentration of
ice-nucleating particles in the atmosphere and of the relationship between ice
particles and clouds. This workshop will address the measurement of ice
nucleating particle number density by co-locating and comparing different
instruments making these measurements. Because ice nucleation largely controls
precipitation, this work could provide major benefits for society by enabling
better predictions of rain and snowfall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 1 of the
workshop took place in November 2014 at AIDA where several instruments that
measure particle composition were tested and compared with each other in the
laboratory. Part 3 will take place at the Desert Research Institute's Storm Peak
Laboratory, a high elevation site not subject to local emissions, where
measurements from ice-nucleating instruments will be compared at a field site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop focuses on: (1) the microphysics of how
particles nucleate ice, (2) the number of ice forming particle as a function of
atmospheric properties such as temperature and relative humidity, (3) the
atmospheric distribution of ice forming particles and (4) the role of
anthropogenic activities in producing or changing the behavior of ice forming
particles. The project could provide a breakthrough in ice-nucleating particle
measurement technology and in the understanding of ice-nucleating processes.