* 1461162
* REU Site:  Wireless Technologies for Health Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* John Lach, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 03/31/2020
* USD 299,077.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:

This REU Site effort will bring 10 undergraduate students, primarily at the end
of their first or second year, to the University of Virginia for an eight-week,
cohesive, actively mentored, summer research experience. It is designed to
promote the professional, social, and cognitive development of these students,
to encourage them to consider careers in engineering, and to help create a more
diverse workforce. In order to ensure a diverse applicant body, recruitment
efforts will be focused on HBCU's, women's colleges, institutions for
individuals with disabilities, and institutions with less than very high
research capabilities (i.e. community colleges, liberal arts colleges). This REU
Site has the potential to engage students in the quest to address one of the key
challenges of the 21st century: improving the quality of health care while
making it more accessible and affordable. In addition, this REU Site will help
create a more diverse workforce in science and engineering, providing women,
underrepresented minority students, and persons with disabilities formative
research experiences and connecting them to the social and professional networks
as pathways for careers in these fields. The Wireless Health REU Site will
expand the students' scientific knowledge and, more generally, teach students
how to frame problems, design experiments, work collaboratively, make
observations, draw appropriate conclusions, and communicate their results to
others.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:

The Wireless Health REU Site, with support from NSF's Division of Engineering
Education and Centers, will host ten rising second and third year undergraduate
students at the University of Virginia for an intensive eight-week research
program focused on the interdisciplinary field of wireless technologies for
health applications. Drawing on advances in wireless networks, integrated
circuits, sensing, signal processing, communications, data mining, and
databases, Wireless Health technologies will enable continuous, longitudinal,
remote monitoring for health and wellness applications, ranging from early
disease diagnosis and aging-in-place support to chronic care and general
wellness management. REU participants will participate in multi-platform
learning, including online coursework and a lab skills "bootcamp", before they
engage in cutting edge research projects designed and actively-mentored by
faculty, postdoctoral scholars, and graduate student mentors. Over the three
years, students will work collectively to develop a body sensor network testbed
that spans technology from lower-level device designs to higher-level networking
protocols. Projects will be coordinated with overarching yearly themes to build
cohort cohesion and allow for more sophisticated collaborations as follows: Year
1- Home Health Monitoring Systems; Year 2- Smartphone Based Sensors; and Year 3-
Health Related Behavior Modifications. In addition to research activities,
undergraduate participants will take part in a professional development series,
journal club, and field trips to areas where wireless health technologies are
being developed and used in the real world. The culmination of this experience
is a symposium where each student presents oral and poster presentations of his
or her research findings. This REU aims to provide a cohesive research and
career enhancement experience for students at a strategic point in their
undergraduate careers in order to develop a more diversified and prepared for
21st century engineering workforce.