* 1461372
* SEEDS - Opening Diverse Doors to Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Teresa Mourad, Ecological Society of America
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2020
* USD 597,643.00

The Ecological Society of America (ESA) represents over 10,000 members committed
to a broad and deep understanding of life on Earth. In 1996, ESA launched the
first phase of a new program, called Strategies for Ecology Education, Diversity
and Sustainability (SEEDS), intentionally designed to retain underrepresented
minority undergraduate students in the field of ecology through intensive
mentoring at the individual and small group levels. Since then SEEDS has grown
and expanded to include field trips to ecological research sites, a leadership
workshop, a research fellowship program, and partnerships with other
organizations and networks. Over 500 minority students have been served by SEEDS
over the years. The current project is Phase IV of SEEDS and is based on results
of an independent program evaluation in 2014. In this phase a set of structured
workshops and conferences will be integrated into a sequence of activities that
build upon previous student experiences and a designed support infrastructure.
Three dimensions of experience and support, personal, cultural and
institutional, are interwoven during and between proposed program activities.
SEEDS students will work with mentors to identify opportunities in five areas
that will help them advance in science careers: research experiences, skills
workshops, presentations at scientific meetings, community projects, and
completed LinkedIn profiles and active participation in social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEEDS ecology field experiences serve primarily
freshmen and sophomores or those who have no prior research background. In this
way, students are introduced to ecology earlier in their undergraduate careers
and motivated to consider the wide variety of research and career options
available. Travel awards to ESA annual meetings support more advanced students
who aspire to careers in ecology by more fully integrating them into the large
family of professional ecologists. New dimensions in Phase IV include increased
support for the development of SEEDS chapters at institutions across the U.S.,
formal partnerships with specific field-based research organizations and
networks, and longer-term mentoring of individual SEEDS students. SEEDS is a
cohesive, focused and future-looking program, critically important for enhancing
the participation of under-represented groups where agency support, and real
progress, has historically been weak.