* 1461362
* CAREER: Understanding Stellar Forges: The Properties and the Physics of Formation of Cosmic Dust
* MPS,AST
* 06/13/2014,05/31/2018
* Davide Lazzati, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda French
* 05/31/2018
* USD 470,801.00

Dust is a minor component of the interstellar medium but plays a major role in
the evolution of the universe and on our capability to observe it. Dr. Lazzati
and his group will combine analytical and numerical techniques to study dust
particles of all sizes, from the smallest macromolecules and clusters up to
micron-sized crystalline and amorphous solids. In the first part of the project
structural and optical properties of small dust grains will be computed with
density functional theory techniques. Atomic and molecular clusters with up to
1000 atoms will be studied. In the second part models of dust nucleation will be
improved by developing a kinetic theory that includes realistic atomic
structures, relaxes the assumption of thermal equilibrium, and includes
quantization of energy exchanges. Finally, dust yields from stellar atmospheres
and winds, supernovae, and AGN outflows will be computed. This project will
paint a clearer picture of cosmic dust formation and has the potential to
provide the identification of the carriers of the diffuse interstellar bands and
of the 2175 Angstrom feature. The optical properties of dust clusters will be an
invaluable ingredient for radiation transfer models in galaxies, star formation,
and even for atmospheric studies, since soot and carbonaceous cosmic dust share
many similarities.

The results of the research will be disseminated to the public through a
collaboration between the PI and the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences.
Dr. Lazzati and museum staff will develop interactive English and Spanish
programs for K-12 students and the general public on the evolution of elements
and dust in the universe. The programs will eventually be converted into videos
that can be shown in museums and schools around the country. Accompanying
instructional materials for educators and teachers will be developed. The
bilingual character of the activities will be exploited to foster a broader
participation of the Hispanic/Latino community in STEM careers. High-school and
undergraduate students from underprivileged backgrounds will also join the PI's
group for summer research projects.