* 1461535
* Bayesian Optimization for Exploratory Experimentation in the Behavioral Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Michael Mozer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2019
* USD 402,275.00

This research project will develop an exploratory experimentation methodology
for human behavioral research that will allow cognitive scientists to
efficiently identify optimal conditions -- those leading to the most robust
learning, the fastest performance, the fewest errors, the best decisions and
choices. The tools to be developed will allow scientists to answer questions
they cannot currently address due to the massive data collection effort
required. To understand and predict human behavior, scientists typically perform
controlled experiments that compare a small, carefully chosen set of
experimental conditions. For example, in designing instructional software, a
comparison might be made between two techniques for teaching students. The
finding that one technique obtains reliably better outcomes has both practical
and theoretical implications. However, this result does not answer the question
one often wishes to ask: what is the very best possible technique? The
methodology to be developed will allow scientists to evaluate many experimental
conditions with only a few participants, in contrast to the traditional
controlled experiment which evaluates only a few conditions each with many
participants. A key product of the project will be black-box software that
researchers in various disciplines of the cognitive sciences can use to apply
exploratory experimentation to problems in their own field. Experimental studies
also will be conducted to demonstrate the breadth of the approach in domains
including: concept acquisition, color aesthetics, formal instruction, and the
design of usable and engaging software.

The project will extend Bayesian optimization methods to human experimental
research. Bayesian optimization has long been used in the geostatistics
community for inferring unobserved properties (e.g., oil reserves below the
earth's surface) from costly measurements (e.g., drilling tests). In the current
project, the "landscapes" being explored are defined over possible conditions
(e.g., training strategies), the unobserved properties are internal cognitive
states of the human observer, and the measurements are obtained via behavioral
evaluations (e.g., assessments of learning). To apply Bayesian optimization
methods to a range of human experimental research, mathematical models will be
developed for multiple behavioral response measures, including choice, ranking,
rating, latency, and free recall. The exploratory nature of the approach
requires heuristics for sequentially selecting experimental conditions to obtain
maximally informative data given prior observations. Various heuristics will be
evaluated in the context of behavioral research.