* 1461260
* REU Site: BigDataX: From Theory to Practice in Big Data Computing at Extreme Scales
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Ioan Raicu, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 02/28/2018
* USD 288,000.00

This award establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site
at Illinois Institute of Technology and the University of Chicago. The site,
which is named BigDataX, focuses on undergraduate research in both the theory
and practice of big data computing at extreme scales. BigDataX includes a
diverse group of 8 undergraduate students and 4 mentors spread out over the two
institutions. Students will conduct research in the area of big data and how it
will address issues related to the design, analysis, and implementation of run-
time systems and storage systems to support big data applications. This work
includes making extreme scale computing more tractable, touching every branch of
computing in high-end computing and datacenters. These advancements will impact
scientific discovery and economic development at the national level, and they
will strengthen a wide range of research activities enabling efficient access,
processing, storage, and sharing of valuable scientific data from many
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this award is to promote
a data-centric view of scientific and technical computing, at the intersection
of distributed systems theory and practice. The project team has identified
various data-intensive applications from many disciplines such as astronomy,
bioinformatics, medical imaging, that demonstrate characteristics of big-data
applications. This work focuses on the design, implementation, and optimization
of runtime systems to support parallel programming systems for both Many-Task
Computing and High-Performance Computing. The work centers on distributed
scheduling, dynamic provisioning, improved fault tolerance, and support for
heterogeneous computing. To better support big data applications, the team is
exploring distributed file systems and improvements to a variety of critical
components such as metadata management, I/O access pattern coalescing,
distributed provenance as well as exploring novel interfaces into distributed
storage systems. This work involves real applications, real data, and real
testbeds ranging from small clusters at IIT and UChicago, supercomputers at
Argonne National Laboratory, to the Amazon AWS cloud.