* 1461557
* GOALI: An Electrochemical Atomic Layer Deposition Process for Scalable Nanomanufacturing of On-chip Copper-based Interconnects
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Rohan Akolkar, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Advanced nanoelectronic circuits in microprocessors and memory devices utilize
current-carrying copper interconnects. In modern devices, interconnect widths
routinely approach a few tens of nanometers. However, the need for high
interconnect packing density in high-performance computing drives a commensurate
shrinking in the interconnect width in accordance with Moore's law. By the year
2020, interconnect widths are expected to shrink well below ten nanometers. A
critical hurdle in driving such aggressive interconnect size reduction is the
unavailability of an interconnect fabrication process with the following
attributes: (i) Unprecedented atomic-level control needed to manipulate
materials at the nanometer scale or below; and (ii) Ease of scale-up and
integration with large-area substrates yielding reliable, low-cost
manufacturability. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) Program award will explore a novel approach towards nano-scale
interconnect fabrication with the aforementioned attributes. This is critical
for safeguarding Moore's law and for ensuring that the US semiconductor industry
continues to maintain technological leadership in advanced nanoelectronics. This
research will have broad impacts not just in the field of nanoelectronics, but
also in many other areas central to the US economy and society, such as advanced
energy systems and environmental remediation. In addition to enabling
breakthroughs in scalable nanomanufacturing, this research will provide
experiential engineering education and professional development to the next
generation of scientists and engineers highly sought after by the US
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to study a novel
electrochemical atomic layer deposition (e-ALD) process for the scalable
nanomanufacturing of copper and copper-alloy interconnects. In spite of its
enormous potential, state-of-the-art electrochemical atomic layer deposition of
copper has not reached commercial viability primarily due to its low throughput,
use of toxic metals, such as lead, and its inability to fabricate specific
copper-alloys of relevance to nanoelectronic applications. To overcome these
barriers, a 'one-step' lead-free electrochemical atomic layer deposition process
will be investigated. Through fundamental characterization of the interplay
between the electrode potential and the electrolyte chemistry, and through use
of novel, environmentally benign electrolyte components, one-step deposition of
copper and copper-alloy nano-films will be achieved. The project will eliminate
a key technological roadblock in industrial-scale implementation of
electrochemical atomic layer deposition technology for the metallization of
nano-scale copper interconnects. An inter-disciplinary team of academic and
industrial scientists will collaborate on the research through the exchange of
knowledge in cutting-edge electrochemistry and advanced nanoelectronics.