* 1461192
* REU Site: BME Community of Undergraduate Research Scholars for Cancer (BME CUReS Cancer)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Mia Markey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2018
* USD 287,684.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An underlying theme of
the current project is that CUReS Cancer Scholars will make contributions
towards fundamental understanding of the physical principles of cancer
development, prevention, and treatment during their summer experience, but more
importantly, will go on in their careers to function in multi-disciplinary teams
of researchers from disparate fields in medicine, biological science, physical
science, engineering, and healthcare fields to advance human health. This
ability is a hallmark of Biomedical Engineering and will positively impact
Scholars' respective scientific fields as well as the health of our society.
Increasing the number of PhDs from underrepresented groups is also a critical
step toward increasing minority role models, in turn making the academic
engineering culture more appealing to underrepresented minorities and women. A
key feature of this REU site is the development of a partnership with Texas
4000, a non-profit organization that cultivates student leaders and engages
communities in the fight against cancer. The partnership with the Texas 4000
will increase public awareness of cancer research, in particular how physical
science and engineering positively impact
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific theme of the "BME Community of Undergraduate Research Scholars for
Cancer (BME CUReS Cancer)," REU Site is leveraging Biomedical Engineering to
Open a New Frontier in Oncology. This project is supported by the Division of
Engineering Education and Centers for three summers, for 10 weeks each summer,
from late May to early August. The focus of this experience is rising juniors,
particularly students from groups traditionally underrepresented in engineering.
BME CUReS Cancer Scholars are able to choose a project of appropriate scope from
36 different labs representing a wide range of research topics pertinent to
cancer research, such as biomaterials, drug delivery, optical imaging,
ultrasound, and artificial intelligence in medicine. This topics were selected
based on a 2008 National Cancer Institute meeting where a number of barriers to
achieving progress in cancer research were identified. The result of the meeting
was a series of "strategic actions" that represent scientific challenges that
need to be addressed. Following the NCI Meeting Report of 2008 it is becoming
more broadly recognized that understanding how the range of physical laws and
principles governing the behavior of all matter are operative in cancer at every
scale will be critical to understanding and controlling cancer. Cancer is a
disease of complexity and engineering principles in particular are developed to
study, model, and solve complex problems. Hence, Biomedical Engineering is
uniquely poised to make a significant intellectual contribution. These critical
lines of investigation are used to organize our community of cancer Scholars
towards shared goals and synergistic activities. The intellectual merit of this
project is in addressing these key challenges in cancer research using an
engineering approach.