* 1461099
* REU Site: Intensive mentored Research Experiences for Undergraduates in psychology and neuroscience at an urban public college
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Deborah Walder, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2018
* USD 331,682.00

This project is supported under the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program, which is an NSF-wide program although each Directorate
administers its own REU Site competition. This program supports active research
participation by undergraduate students in an effort to introduce them to
scientific research so as to encourage their continued engagement in the
nation's scientific research and development enterprise. REU projects involve
students in meaningful ways in ongoing research programs or in research projects
designed especially for the purpose. The REU program is a major contributor to
the NSF's goal of developing a diverse, internationally competitive, and
globally-engaged science and engineering workforce. The Social, Behavioral and
Economic (SBE) sciences Directorate awarded this REU Site grant to the Brooklyn
College (BC) in the City University of New York (CUNY); it is a renewal of an
ongoing REU Site at this location. The objective of the project is to immerse
diverse students in innovative research in psychology and neuroscience. The REU
Program aims to advance scientific discovery for the scientific and broader
communities while promoting mentoring, learning, and professional development
by: (1) increasing participation of students from underrepresented groups
(primarily women, racial minorities, first-generation college students) in
neuroscience research; (2) guiding students through the scientific process, from
generation of research questions to communication of results; (3) immersing
students in didactics that highlight the relevance and applied value of their
laboratory work; (4) enhancing students' competitiveness for graduate school and
professional positions; and (5) boosting the research competence of local high
school teachers with downstream positive learning effects for their students.
This REU Program also enables faculty members to supervise talented individuals
who might otherwise miss out on mentored laboratory and professional development
experiences, and contributes to the training and advancement of the next
generation of psychologists and neuroscientists.

The central (scientific) component of this REU Program is a semester-long
laboratory immersion, under the supervision of Psychology Department faculty
mentors, which results in a completed research project. REU students are exposed
to a variety of behavioral, neuroscientific, and computational methods to
execute their projects. High quality research and the integration of
psychological theory with the design, execution, and interpretation of
neuroscientific data are emphasized. Ten students are selected annually for
mentored research projects, especially undergraduates at ethnic-minority
serving, public two-year and four-year institutions in the New York metropolitan
area. Students attend weekly didactics: a neuroscience seminar that dually
focuses on neuroscience principles/research methods and professional issues; a
journal club that familiarizes students with scientific literature in modern
neuroscience through learning to select, read, and critically analyze original
research papers; and a statistical methods seminar that emphasizes data
analysis, statistical reasoning, and presenting research findings in academic
contexts. Students also undergo intensive neuroethics training. As a capstone
experience, students present a poster at the BC Science Research Day, where they
compete for awards based on the quality of their work and ability to communicate
their findings. In addition, the project has a RET (Research Experiences for
Teachers) component, which provides local high school teachers with coursework
in research methods, mentored laboratory experience, and professional
development opportunities to enhance their neuroscience literacy and raise the
level of science education in local high schools.