* 1461519
* Stem 2020-Dine College
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2023
* Mark Bauer, Dine College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,951,361.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will inform the body of knowledge about the
importance and conduct of undergraduate research experiences in recruiting and
retaining underrepresented individuals into STEM studies, and preparing the next
generation of STEM professionals. The connection of faculty to research, which
connects students to culturally and geographically relevant research, is an
important step in engaging students who are more likely to pursue advanced
degrees. For those students entering the workforce directly from a tribal
college, it is equally important that they have a well-defined skill set in
mathematics, science, and technology for entry into the STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dine' College will implement several new degrees or
certificates in relevant STEM fields. These are: a Bachelor of Science degree in
environmental science (the college currently offers an AS degree, which would be
expanded with upper division coursework and additional faculty); Bachelor of
Arts degrees in math and science secondary education; an Associate of Science
degree in pre-engineering; and certification programs in natural resources/GIS
and in computer technology. The intellectual merit of the proposed work is found
in the expertise of the key leaders, the impressive faculty credentials that
will be brought to bear on the degree and program development, and the alignment
of the project goals with STEM workforce opportunities and the goals of the
nation and the college. Additionally, the project evaluation plan will provide
insight into effective strategies for community colleges that seek to strengthen
instructional capacity in STEM.