* 1461468
* CAREER: Examining the role of context in the mathematical learning of young children
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Amy Parks, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 11/30/2016
* USD 93,424.00

This project involves a longitudinal, ethnographic study of children's
mathematical performances from preschool to first grade in both formal classroom
settings and informal settings at school and home. The proposed site for the
study is a small, predominately African-American pk-12 school. The study seeks
to identify opportunities for mathematical learning by young children across
multiple contexts, to map varied performances of mathematical competence by
young children, to chart changes in young children's mathematical performance
over time, and to design and assess the impact of case studies for teacher
education that explore young children's mathematical competencies. Research
questions focus on mathematical opportunities for learning in various contexts,
children's development of knowledge, skills, and dispositions over time, the
characteristics of competent mathematical performances, and the role of case
studies in helping beginning teachers to understand young minority children's
mathematical thinking. Data collected will include video tapes of classroom
activities, written fieldnotes of formal and informal settings, student work,
parent focus group transcripts, and children's interview performances. Analysis
will involve both thematic coding and construction of case studies. The
overarching goal of this project is to transform the ways that researchers think
about and study the mathematical learning of young minority children as well as
the quality of schooling these children experience.