* 1461281
* REU site: Research Experience for Community College Students (RECCS) in Critical Zone Science
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Anne Gold, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 04/30/2018
* USD 335,000.00

The Research Experience for Community College Students (RECCS) in Critical Zone
Science will engage ten Colorado community college students each summer in
research projects on environmental sciences and will guide them from the project
definition through its execution and final presentation to the scientific
community. These students often have diverse backgrounds with respect to race,
ethnicity, age, and income level, and they may be first-generation college
students, veterans or, in Colorado, come from rural areas. Targeting diverse and
non-traditional students in their first years of college will have a strong
formative aspect with respect to career choices. The research environment of
RECCS is designed to provide several layers of mentoring by scientists,
professional development trainers and RECCS staff, as well as peer-group
interaction, to instill a sense of belonging to the student cohorts. This
structure will ensure that participants receive the support they need to succeed
in their projects and to gain confidence in their scientific abilities and
academic skills. The engagement of students from different community colleges
will have a ripple effect on the students around them, hopefully inspiring other
community college students to pursue science internships and other research
experiences. Providing research opportunities and professional development
training to community college students will help create a pipeline for students
to move on to four-year colleges and possibly graduate school, which will
increase the diversity of the STEM workforce. The success of the program will be
measured through pre and post student interviews and surveys, including an
annual reflection survey of program alumni. The impact of the program on the
mentors will be assessed using a post-survey. Formative feedback will be
collected throughout the program.