* 1461314
* Geography of Air Pollution: Tree Rings as Spatial and Temporal Proxies for Atmospheric Mercury Concentrations
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Mae Gustin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 12/31/2018
* USD 199,185.00

This research project will explore the use of tree rings as a monitor of mercury
air pollution over time and the relationship between mercury concentrations in
the atmosphere and mercury concentrations in tree rings. The project will seek
to enhance basic understanding of air pollution processes by overcoming the fact
that data on mercury air pollution is spatially discontinuous, that it covers
only short time periods, and that it is collected sporadically. Furthermore,
data collection using instruments is expensive and is biased towards locations
of particular interest to environmental regulators. Because trees incorporate
atmospheric pollutants like mercury in their woody biomass, the science of tree-
ring chemistry (dendrochemistry) holds great promise for developing well-
replicated air-quality datasets that are continuous and allow for a spatially
detailed reconstruction of long-term trends associated with environmental change
and industrial activity. The project will test the efficacy of using tree rings
to measure mercury air pollution, thereby expanding knowledge about the utility
of tree rings as a monitor of atmospheric mercury. Such knowledge will
facilitate future research relating variations in tree-ring mercury
concentrations to industrial practices and land-use changes at local, regional,
and global scales. Such knowledge will have a range of positive broader impacts.
The project will improve capabilities to use analysis of tree rings as a means
of monitoring atmospheric mercury, thereby providing new information and
insights for those seeking to reduce atmospheric mercury. Information, insights,
and approaches developed during the conduct of the project also will be
displayed in museum exhibits focusing on air pollution, mercury, and
dendrochemistry. The project will provide exciting education and training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, and both the
investigators and students will work with elementary school teachers to assist
in the development of hands-on science learning units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will explore the utility of mercury dendrochemistry, and they will
calibrate the relationship between mercury concentrations in tree rings and in
the atmosphere using a series of field and laboratory experiments. They also
will resample trees that had been sampled previously for mercury concentration
in tree rings. They will test a number of hypotheses to assess the degree to
which tree-ring concentrations can be applied as proxies for atmospheric mercury
concentrations across space and time. They will seek to determine the
consistency of environmental atmospheric mercury by testing whether tree-ring
mercury concentrations are good indicators of atmospheric mercury pollution.
They will explore consistency over time by testing whether tree-ring mercury
concentrations are stable across years because translocation and chemical
degradation are minimal). They will assess whether there is consistency within
populations by testing whether trees of the same species at the same site record
similar mercury concentrations in tree rings, and they will examine consistency
among species by testing whether species-specific differences in the functional
relationship between atmospheric and tree-ring mercury concentrations can be
corrected through calibration equations. The investigators will employ
manipulative experimentation through which tree saplings (whole plants) and
xylem tissues are exposed to known mercury concentrations under controlled
conditions. They also will engage in field observational studies in which trees
are cored repeatedly at annual intervals at locations where atmospheric mercury
is or has been measured directly as well as manipulative field experiments
involving potted saplings where whole plants are harvested. The project
therefore will quantify the reliability of tree-ring mercury data and refine
approaches for sampling, calibration, and extrapolation.