* 1461773
* A Geomorphic and Ecological Analysis of Using Mosses for Controlling Stream Bank Erosion
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Dale Vitt, Western Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 11/30/2020
* USD 312,478.00

This research project will examine the degree to which mosses may serve as an
alternative for stream bank stabilization in environments where there has been
limited success by other riparian vegetation. Stream bank erosion often results
in the loss of valuable land resources and a degradation of environmental
quality because stream sediment and nutrient loads increase while water quality
gets reduced. Stream bank erosion also affects infrastructure, such as roads,
bridges, and buildings, by impacting their very foundations. Riparian vegetation
plays both hydrological and mechanical functions on stream banks by increasing
the tensile strength of soils and intercepting surface runoff and precipitation
to potentially reduce bank failure. Perennial herbs and woody plants, including
shrubs, are the two major vegetation types that traditionally have been used to
help control stream bank erosion, because their deep root systems promote bank
stability and reduce the rates of bank erosion. This project will evaluate the
ecological condition of mosses and their effects on soil characteristics and
bank erosion in different experimental settings. Project findings will provide
new perspectives regarding how the presence or absence of moss carpets affects
soil pressure and consequently the rates of bank erosion. The project will
contribute new understanding about integrated relationships among fluvial
geomorphology, riparian vegetation, ecosystem restoration, and biogeomorphology.
Project results will provide information and insights that will assist decision
makers, governmental agencies, and resource managers in adopting effective and
sustainable approaches to stream bank stabilization. They also will be useful to
those engaged in restoration activities by providing perspectives about
alternative approaches to stabilize stream banks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will focus on analysis of the effectiveness of mosses for stream
bank stabilization through a comparative analysis for study areas in the
Chesapeake Bay and Upper Mississippi River watersheds. They will analyze
biogeomorphic relationships and feedbacks between mosses and stream banks
through a series of in situ and laboratory experiments over a three-year time
frame. The experiments will survey multiple sites using terrestrial LiDAR,
traditional geomorphic methods, and bioecological techniques. Geospatial data
for the study areas, including digital elevation models (DEMs), satellite
imagery, stream network, and land cover, will be integrated with information
from field surveys for a detailed biogeomorphic analysis. Project findings will
provide new perspectives about stream bank stabilization projects and the
understanding of relationships between riparian vegetation and fluvial
geomorphology for similar environmental conditions.