* 1461345
* Creating Woodlands: Integrating Land-Use Practices and New Savanna Models
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Paul Laris, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 11/30/2020
* USD 249,634.00

This research project will focus on determining the mechanisms through which
everyday land-management practices create conditions conducive to the
establishment and growth of highly valued trees in savannah environments. The
project also will seek to improve capabilities for predicting how shifts in
management practices will impact future environments. Savannas long have posed a
conundrum for scientists, with uncertainty remaining regarding how trees and
grasses coexist in the same parkland landscapes and what factors prevent one
vegetation form from dominating the other. This project will address fundamental
questions of savanna science pertaining to competition between grasses and trees
at different life-cycle phases in a mesic savanna. It will integrate new
theories of disequilibrium ecology and human land-use practices to determine the
long-term impacts of human actions on tree establishment and growth in
parklands, and it will provide valuable historical data about how parklands form
over time. The project will enhance understanding of how savanna parklands are
created through human-environment interactions, thereby providing critical
information for foresters and land managers seeking to improve parkland
management and to reverse trends that have seen the parklands decline. The
project will inform the development of models of carbon sequestration, and it
will provide information to improve economic livelihoods for those who rely on
savannah environments, especially the products of highly valued trees, for their
well-being. The project also will help assess the use of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs, often known as drones) as an inexpensive means for gathering
data at local scales in the study area and in other parts of the world.

Explaining the mechanisms that determine the ratio of trees to grasses within
landscapes has long been of interest to geographers, ecologists, and others
interested in the basic functioning and distribution of the Earth's ecosystems.
Recent scientific developments have increased the importance of this task,
because in mesic areas that receive intermediate amounts of rainfall, both
forests and savannas persist, which indicates that savanna is a different stated
from a tropical forest. These alternative states cover vast areas, including
large parts of Africa as well as parts of the Americas. Tree cover now is
thought to be largely determined by fire and other disturbance regimes,
including human land management. This project will consist of a focused case
study of the role of human practices in determining disturbance regimes in
savannas where people set nearly all fires and are responsible for rotational
agriculture and animal grazing. The investigators will work in the western
African nation of Mali. The investigators will test hypotheses that manipulation
of woody environments has been both conscious and unconscious in savanna and
that it has been a factor in the selection of specific valued tree species, such
as shea trees (Vitellaria paradoxa), which yield a fruit that consists of a
nutritious pulp and an oil-rich seed from which shea butter can be processed.
The investigators will pursue three interconnected sets of activities. They will
conduct field experiments to test the hypothesis that specific human practices
differentially affect specific tree species at different times in the lives of
the trees. They will analyze a natural experiment, combining field and remote
sensing methods to test the hypothesis that disturbance history determines
current vegetation cover more so than biophysical conditions, and they will
conduct ethnographic research to learn how people occupying savannas understand
human-plant interactions and dynamics.