* 1461057
* New REU Site: Landscape Ecology and Ecosystem Dynamics: Integrating Terrestrial and Aquatic Perspectives
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Stephen Bollens, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2018
* USD 268,768.00

This REU Site award to Washington State University Vancouver (WSUV), located in
Vancouver, WA, will support the training of 8 students for 9 weeks during each
summer from 2015-2017, within the School of the Environment. The scientific
themes are landscape ecology and ecosystem dynamics, contrasting terrestrial and
aquatic systems within the Columbia River Basin (CRB). The CRB extends across
Washington state and serves as a 'living laboratory' within which to explore how
biotic and abiotic factors shape ecosystem form and function. Each summer
experience is designed to engage undergraduates in high-quality research and
improve skills in scientific inquiry and communication, promote collaboration
and the responsible conduct of research, and provide meaningful professional
development and social opportunities. The WSUV REU site is targeted specifically
toward talented undergraduates who are 'place bound' within the Vancouver,
WA/Portland, OR metropolitan area, and attend one of the region's 4-year and
2-year colleges. This REU site also considers applicants from across the US, and
works with every accepted student to secure summer housing. Students who have
completed at least one year of undergraduate study may apply online through the
WSUV REU website noted below.

It is anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences. More specifically, this REU project promotes
participation of highly qualified undergraduate students who are typically
excluded from immersive summer research experiences due only to their inability
to leave home for extended periods.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) is
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are
required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email
sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://vancouver.wsu.edu/reu or by contacting the PI (Dr. Gretchen Rollwagen-
Bollens, rollboll@vancouver.wsu.edu).