* 1461491
* "Improved Methodologies for Field Experiments:  Maximizing Statistical Power While Promoting Replication."
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Anderson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 459,953.00

This project proposes new methods for analyzing data from randomized controlled
trials (RCTs), which are now increasingly used in some areas of economics and
other social sciences. Researchers often want to use an RCT to test multiple
different hypotheses. However, carrying out this kind of data analysis requires
careful consideration of statistical issues; in particular, there is a chance
that using the same data to run multiple different statistical analyses will
increase the chance of false positives. As a result, economists conducting RCTs
are increasingly specifying pre-analysis plans; that is, they are specifying how
they plan to analyze the data before beginning the analysis. These plans,
however, do limit researchers' ability to reuse data and learn from the data
before beginning the statistical analysis. The research team will develop a
potential mechanism for researchers to learn from the data without specifying
every hypothesis in advance. They will use concepts from machine-learning as
well as probability theory to provide a better framework for how to maximize
power within a given RCT experiment. The results could therefore improve data
analysis in important ways.

The research team has evidence that in practice preanalysis plans include tests
for many, even hundreds, of hypotheses. As a result current preanalysis plan
designs are likely to be underpowered for many effects of economic interest. The
team will extend and apply techniques from biostatistics, including gatekeeping,
sequential testing, and FDR control to the design of preanalysis plans. They
will also develop a split-sample approach in which researchers conduct
exploratory analysis on one part of the data set, and, using estimates from that
part of the data combined with theory over likely mechanisms, refine their
hypotheses before registering a subset of hypotheses to be tested on the
remaining part of the data.