* 1461094
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Research in Discrete Mathematical and Computational Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Katherine St. John, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2018
* USD 230,602.00

The Lehman College REU program on interdisciplinary undergraduate research in
discrete mathematical and computational biology is an academic year research
experience for undergraduate students early in their college experiences. The
program will be run at Lehman College of the City University of New York, a
designated Minority Serving and Hispanic Serving Institution located in the
Bronx, New York. Students will be drawn from the greater New York metropolitan
area, which has a population of 18.9 million and has over a million college
students. At least half of the student participants will be recruited from
academic institutions where research opportunities in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) are limited, including two-year colleges.
Large numbers of students enter college planning to study science but exit with
degrees in other fields. Many factors have been cited for the attrition,
including the larger workloads for science majors and the pull of grade
inflation of the non-sciences. Involvement in scientific research early in the
undergraduate experience has been suggested as a way to increase retention,
especially for groups historically underrepresented in the sciences. We aim to
reach students early in their college career -- at a critical transition point
where many choose non-scientific majors -- and provide a supportive environment
to make progress on challenging, open research problems. While traditionally REU
programs have focused on upper division students the summer before their final
year of college, our program will recruit ten students at earlier stages in
their college career and run during the academic year. The goals of this program
are to involve students early in a dynamic research program, show how research
can be integrated into their lives, and encourage the students to pursue future
research opportunities. The program is designed to complement the academic
schedules of the local community and four-year colleges with all-day on-site
meetings on Fridays during the fall semester and an intensive program during the
January intersession.

The intellectual focus of this undergraduate research program is on a simple,
but extremely powerful, model: a "tree" or acyclic graph. Mathematical tree
structures are ubiquitous in biology and computer science, used in such diverse
fields as evolutionary biology to computer science. The simplicity of the
structure yields many open problems at the intersection of biology, computing,
and mathematics that are approachable by strong students. The program is
structured to build students' competence and independence in research and
problem solving activities. The cohort of students will consist mostly of second
year students: many will have little experience of working on open research
projects, collaborating with others, and communicating scientific ideas. As
such, the program assumes no past experience (other than success in early STEM
courses that emphasize problem solving skills) and builds a framework that moves
students towards independence. The program structure offers a mix of instruction
in technical skills (such as the use of LaTeX, technical writing, and poster
design) and academic topics (that will provide additional tools for tackling the
open research challenges) as well as a framework to encourage the development of
interpersonal skills (such as the responsible conduct of research, collegial
interactions, and successful collaborative skills).