* 1461385
* Workshops in Geometric Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Frederick Tinsley, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2019
* USD 50,166.00

This grant is to fund the 32nd annual Workshop in Geometric Topology, to be
hosted at Texas Christian University in Fort Worth, Texas, June 25-27, 2015, as
well as the 33rd and 34th workshops in 2016 and 2017, to be hosted by Colorado
College and Brigham Young University. Such mathematics workshops provide an
opportunity for mathematicians working in a certain subfield, in this case
geometric topology, to meet, interact, and share their research through both
official lecture presentations and informal discussions. Grant funds will be
utilized primarily to support the travel and attendance costs of conference
participants, particularly graduate students, young Ph.D.s, and other
researchers without their own sources of funding.&lt;br/&gt;The field of
geometric topology, broadly speaking, is the study of spatial configuration,
both in the physical universe and of abstract "spaces" that can model real-life
phenomena. For example, a topologist might study how a physical string or
protein strand is knotted in the real three-dimensional world, or he or she
might study the abstract space of positions that a machine could inhabit,
allowing for an arbitrary number of parameters that describe the positions of
various components. Research in this field can vary from the highly abstract to
more concrete applications supported by those abstract underpinnings. Modern
applications of topology occur in such diverse areas as robot motion planning,
data analysis, image processing, sensor networks, and mathematical
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of these Workshops in
Geometric Topology is to provide mathematicians in geometric topology (and, more
recently, the closely related field of geometric group theory) who have active
research programs, but limited support, an opportunity to discuss their work
with others in the field. Another important goal is to expand the interests of
the participants by having a nationally-recognized expert discuss an important
area of current interest. A third goal is to provide a serious but informal
research atmosphere in which graduate students can meet and learn from others in
the field. At each workshop, participants will have the opportunity to attend
three lectures given by a principal speakers chosen for his or her top-tier
research credentials and superb expository abilities. The principal speaker at
the 32nd annual Workshop will be the internationally-renowned Wolfgang LÃ¼ck of
the University of Bonn and the Hausdorff Research Institute for Mathematics; he
will provide introductory talks about L2-Betti numbers and the Farrell-Jones
Conjecture and then a talk about applications to 3-manifolds. The other workshop
participants will be invited to share their own work by giving short talks in a
congenial environment, and important time will be provided for informal
discussion and interaction among participants and with the principal speaker.
Overall, the workshops will provide opportunities for geometric topologists to
interact and share ideas, leading to possible research collaborations. The
workshops will be advertised nationally. Graduate students and members of
underrepresented groups will be given top priority for funding and will be
particularly encouraged to attend and to speak. The website for the 32nd annual
workshop can be found at http://faculty.tcu.edu/gfriedman/GTW2015/