* 1461534
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian State-Space Models for Behavioral Time Series Data
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Hernando Ombao, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 159,991.00

This research project will develop novel statistical models and inferential
methods for the analysis of multi-domain behavioral data and time series with
complex temporal and dependence structures. This research has the potential to
advance the knowledge on the neural underpinnings of human and animal behavior.
Neuroscience studies often involve the analysis and integration of data from
different domains, such as behavioral and neural-derived data. The focus of this
project will be on developing statistical methods for studying temporal data
derived from functional magnetic resonance imagining (fMRI) and local field
potentials, such as neural-derived brain signals. These methods also are
applicable to other types of brain signals, such as electroencephalograms and
magnetoencephalograms. These statistical approaches will integrate data from
different domains and could be used by behavioral scientists to directly test
for associations between decision making and brain response. The statistical
tools that will be developed in this project are general and could be used to
advance knowledge in other fields that collect temporal data with complex
structure, such as sociology (network modeling), environmental sciences,
linguistics, and signal processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop Bayesian state-space models for activation and connectivity in fMRI
data. These models will be used to simultaneously estimate the hemodynamic
behavior in local areas of the brain and to estimate inter-dependence between
brain regions in a network, while taking into account variations across subjects
and differences across experimental conditions. The Bayesian state-space models
and related inferential tools then will be extended to consider associations
between the neural-derived brain signals and behavioral data under the context
of behavioral experiments. Bayesian state-space models for brain connectivity
using electrophysiological signals also will be developed. To deal with high
computational demands for inference resulting from increased model complexity
and massive data, the methods will be implemented using parallel computing.