* 1461590
* Understanding Fire-Human Dynamics Along a Forest-Steppe Ecotone
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Cathy Whitlock, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2021
* USD 375,000.00

This research project contributes new knowledge and develops new approaches for
understanding fire as a globally significant process, which has long been
influenced by climate and humans. Because fire is an important natural
disturbance, alterations of fire regimes can have significant impacts on
vulnerable ecosystems. The investigators will develop new strategies to advance
research about past human-environment dynamics from landscape to regional
scales. The project will provide new perspectives, information, insights, and
approaches to advance basic understanding of recent fires as well as long-term
fire trends in the U.S. and globally. The project also will provide important
insights about ecosystem resilience that can inform conservation and resource
management of fragile ecoregions in various parts of the world. Project results
will enhance the capacity of public agencies to better understand impacts of
fire and to develop more effective preventive and mitigation
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use new ecosystems modeling
approaches to analyze paleoecological and archeological data in order to
identify human-related burning activities. It will examine the environmental
consequences of fire and assess the biophysical feedbacks of such fires. The
investigators will focus on the late Holocene period to gain a better
understanding of the controls of fire at a time when climate variability was
high and human populations were growing and expanding in the southern
hemisphere. They will conduct analyses to answer three main questions: (1) What
is the nature of past and present fire regimes driven by climate and vegetation
conditions? (2) What are the ecological consequences of different land-use
practices that require fire? (3) What are the potential vegetation feedbacks
that may have reinforced deliberate burning strategies? The proposed data-model
framework will help to identify the importance of changes in human land use and
slowly varying drivers in climate, and they will help enhance understanding of
climate variability and vegetation feedbacks in the mid-latitudes. The
interdisciplinary approach will improve current qualitative paleoecological and
archeological reconstructions, and it will complement insights gained from
ecological research underway in the U.S. and internationally.