* 1461963
* BDD: Human-Centered Situational Awareness Platform for Disaster Response and Recovery
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Cyrus Shahabi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2019
* USD 299,976.00

Efficient and thorough data collection and its timely analysis are critical to
any disaster response and recovery system in order to save people's lives during
disasters. However, access to comprehensive data in disaster areas and their
quick analysis to transform the data to actionable knowledge are major data
science challenges. Moreover, the effective presentation of the collected
knowledge to human decision-makers is an open problem. In this project, these
challenges of data collection, analysis and presentation are collectively
referred to as 'Situational Awareness', and are studied by a collaborative team
of data scientists from the University of Southern California (USC) in United
States and the National Institute of Informatics (NII) in
Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of this project is to devise
effective techniques for comprehensive data collection. The challenge is that
during disaster the availability of information is spatially biased and some
areas are not well covered by available information. Towards this end, USC's
spatial crowdsourcing platform, dubbed MediaQ, is utilized to collect pictures
and videos on-demand from mobile devices of people in the vicinity of the
disaster areas to facilitate effective collection, orchestration and aggregation
of information. The second objective is to develop efficient methods for
organizing and analyzing incoming data streams for human decision makers, given
the challenges of volume and variety of unstructured data whose veracity is
unknown. The collaborative US-Japan team takes advantage of their combined
expertise in developing Spatial-Temporal-Thematic analytics engines and
Geospatial Image Filtering Tools to meet this objective. Finally, for an
effective presentation of the knowledge to human stakeholders, NII's DiVE
virtual environment engine is used to facilitate seamless presentation and
communication for both onsite (humans in the field) and offsite (disaster
managers at the center) stakeholders.