* 1461470
* Empirical Assessment of Respondent Driven Sampling from Total Survey Error Perspectives
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Elliott, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 549,999.00

This research project will provide an empirical investigation into the realities
of respondent driven sampling (RDS) data collection. RDS is a new method for
sampling rare or hidden populations. The method starts with the members of the
target population and traces their social networks as well as the networks of
those to whom they are connected. Although this method is growing in popularity,
there is a scarcity of publicly available RDS datasets. As a result,
methodological assessments of RDS are very limited. This research project will
conduct a theory-drive methodological assessment of RDS. The project will
provide a platform to develop design features for RDS studies that minimize
potential errors and violations of critical assumptions. By developing
appropriate inference strategies, rare or hidden populations will be more fully
represented in the data collected by RDS methods. Absent these types of
examinations, behavioral and social science data collected through RDS runs the
risk of mischaracterizing rare or hidden populations in unknown ways. To the
extent that these data inform public policies, rare or hidden populations may
benefit from this research. New datasets will be generated and made publicly
available to promote methodological research beyond this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will conduct an empirical
assessment RDS within the Total Survey Error (TSE) framework. TSE is a framework
in survey methodology that allows for the systematic examination of errors. This
project seeks to improve current RDS data collection and inference practices by
examining sampling productivity, error properties, and replicability. The
investigators will collect data on two rare populations in Los Angeles County
for which external probability-based sample data are available. The probably-
based data will be used as "gold standards" against which estimates from the RDS
collected data will be compared, providing a unique opportunity to assess RDS
not only as a sampling method but also as a data collection method. The data
sets will empirically inform a simulation study that will examine the effects of
various network structures and response propensities on sampling productivity
and inferential errors. The project is supported by the Methodology,
Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical
agencies as part of a joint activity to support research on survey and
statistical methodology.