* 1461301
* REU Site: Conservation Science in Hawaiian Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Rebecca Ostertag, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2018
* USD 356,159.00

This REU Site award to University of Hawaii at Hilo, located in Hilo, HI, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2015-2017. This program supports multidisciplinary research in the areas of
population ecology, climate change, and management of natural resources. UHH's
research community and its partners have developed rigorous research programs to
address these issues and increase student interest, awareness and training in
conservation and environmental science. Students, predominately from groups
underrepresented and underserved in STEM, will work with a diverse team of
faculty mentors on projects focused on conservation biology and how invasive
species, climate change, and degraded ecosystems pose significant threats to the
state's fragile ecosystem and represent serious environmental challenges. In
addition to research, students are exposed to weekly seminars, workshops, and
other advanced professional development and training protocols that (1)
supplement their existing academic training (such as ethical and responsible
conduct of research) and (2) increase their preparedness to engage in
conservation science research. The primary focus will be on attracting students
with a passion for the environment and nurturing the confidence, skill set and
ability to effect positive change and pursue a viable career in this field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the
program. Students will learn how research is conducted and will be mentored
toward increased independence as the program progresses. Many will present the
results of their work at scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common
web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are required to be
tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the
NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://hilo.hawaii.edu/uhintern, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Ostertag at
ostertag@hawaii.edu) or the co-PI (Ms. Puniwai at npuniwai@hawaii.edu).