* 1461479
* Woksape Kici Woitinze - Support for Knowledge
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2023
* Merle Brave, Oglala Lakota College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,509,445.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will inform the body of knowledge about the
importance and conduct of pre-college and undergraduate research experiences in
recruiting and retaining underrepresented individuals into STEM studies, and
preparing the next generation of STEM professionals. The connection of students
to research is an important step in retaining students who are more likely to
pursue advanced degrees. For those students entering the workforce directly from
a tribal college it is equally important that they have a well-defined skill set
in mathematics, science, and technology for entry into the STEM workforce. The
project also advances objectives of the STEM+Computing Partnerships program
through its multidisciplinary STEM research on teaching and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific activities are to: engage K-12
students through science fairs, bridge high school graduates through a shared
research activity with a K-12 science teacher-mentor, develop decentralized
mathematics and scientific-writing learning communities, continue high-quality
undergraduate research, develop discovery-based physics and ethnomathematics
enrichment activities for mathematics courses, and provide for student and
faculty scientific dissemination of discipline specific and educational findings
through publishing in peer-reviewed journals. The improvements in STEM
recruiting, retention, persistence, and completion that will be realized through
these strategies will be sustained through programmatic improvements and
departmental alignment with Oglala Lakota's strategic plan and enrollment
management plan. Woksapi Kici Woitinze strengthens STEM education and
undergraduate research through: 1) design, adaptation and assessment of
innovative educational strategies to increase the capacity and effectiveness of
the college to attract, retain, and educate students in STEM, graduate students
prepared to pursue further study at the baccalaureate or graduate level, or to
join the STEM workforce; 2) dissemination of successful educational models and
methods for STEM education in a primarily Native American, poverty level, female
community within a decentralized Tribal College campus setting; and 3) advancing
scientific understanding in areas relevant to the Oglala Tribal Nation
including: the effects of climate variability on the ecology of midwestern
rangeland steams, advances in sustainable housing, biofuels and medicinal plant
extract processing, air and water quality analysis, the conservation status and
genetics of box turtles and the health and behavior of bison, and descriptions
of the stratigraphy Eocene and Miocene aged terrestrial deposits and fossils by
researching and publishing on these items in peer-reviewed journals with
academic and tribal program collaborators.