* 1461039
* REU Site: The Science of Language &amp; The Language of Science
* SBE,SMA
* 02/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Laura Wagner, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2018
* USD 422,977.00

This project is supported under the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program, which is an NSF-wide program although each Directorate
administers its own REU Site competition. This program supports active research
participation by undergraduate students in an effort to introduce them to
scientific research so as to encourage their continued engagement in the
nation's scientific research and development enterprise. REU projects involve
students in meaningful ways in ongoing research programs or in research projects
designed especially for the purpose. The REU program is a major contributor to
the NSF's goal of developing a diverse, internationally competitive, and
globally-engaged science and engineering workforce. The Social, Behavioral and
Economic (SBE) sciences Directorate awarded this REU Site grant to Ohio State
University in order to facilitate undergraduate students' exposure to research
on various topics in the science of linguistics as well as science
communications. This project utilizes a unique laboratory where students are
trained in substantive research skills and the accessible communication of
science. The results from these projects will significantly advance our
understanding about how language is used in a social context; how children learn
to use language in context; and how language understanding is integrated with
other aspects of cognition, such as attention and memory. This REU site also
helps create researchers who communicate effectively, particularly to the public
and to policy-makers, a critical need for maintaining a healthy long-term
societal commitment to good science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Language Sciences
Research Lab is a glass-enclosed space within a premier science museum. The
language sciences research conducted in the lab constitutes cutting-edge work at
the intersection of rigorous linguistic analysis, social interaction, and
cognitive processing. The lab hosts an innovative undergraduate course on
informal science education, using interactive educational activities about the
language sciences. The program includes classroom training in linguistics and
psychology and in informal science education. Students' practicum time includes
traditional research activities and hand-on experience on the museum floor
interacting with the public. In the lab, Ohio State faculty and students conduct
linguistic experiments, inviting museum visitors to participate in and learn
about the research. The PIs provide an integrated experience that trains
students in both missions of the lab: how to conduct language science research
and how to communicate with the public about science. The REU site expands the
population from the Ohio State Columbus campus students to students from
regional campus and community colleges who might not otherwise be able to be
involved. Students are recruited from the Ohio region and with a target
population of students primarily from the regional campuses of Ohio State;
unlike the main campus of OSU, these campuses have an open enrollment policy and
attract a diverse student body; and also from local 2-year community colleges in
the area, particularly Columbus State.