* 1461552
* Patents, Cartographic Inventors, and a New Perspective for Map History
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Mark Monmonier, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 01/31/2019
* USD 68,363.00

Map historians and others who study the sources, processes, and outcomes of
cartographic creativity traditionally have looked to maps and other
manifestations of geographic information that have been copyrighted or presented
in literature that can be catalogued. Far less common has been the use of
patents to record inventions that have changed the ways in which maps are
produced and portrayed. This project will analyze the role of the patents system
in stimulating and recording cartographic creativity. The investigators will
examine inventors as well as inventions, and it will focus on the technological,
social, and intellectual context in which new map products and new techniques
for making or using maps were deemed sufficiently original and non-obvious to
warrant patent protection. The project will provide a complementary perspective
to the literature dominated by academic and government cartographers. The
project will yield new information and insights about those forms of
cartographic innovation that have been patented. Project outcomes will include a
biographical directory of cartographic inventors and their patents that the
investigator and others can use to explore the personal and social motives of
cartographic innovators, their contacts with other inventors, and the temporal
context and impact of their inventions. The project therefore will stimulate
fundamental thinking in map history, the history of sciences, geographer, and
other scholarly fields. Another outcome of the project is expected to be a book
accessible to lay readers examining this understudied aspect of creativity and
innovation. The project will provide education and training experience for a
graduate student. Data gathered during the conduct of the project will be
deposited with the Geography and Map Division of the U.S. Library of Congress
and other collections that will assist in the online dissemination of these
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will expand upon two pilot studies. One
pilot examined the diverse types of map-related U.S. patents awarded between
1840 and 2012 that were classified as "Printed matter--map" or "Printed matter--
indexed maps." The other pilot studied the education, employment, and
residential histories of two inventors and their efforts to exploit their
patents. During the conduct of this project, the investigators will broaden the
database to include other arenas of cartographic creativity, in particular map-
related inventions assigned to the "Education and Demonstration" category. The
principal research approach to be used in the conduct of this project is
examination of "Big Microdata," a collective term for newspaper, bibliographic,
and patents databases as well as individual-level archival population records
like those provided online by Ancestry.com and Familysearch.org, which integrate
information from city directories, pre-1950 Census schedules, and the diverse
vital and public records used by genealogical researchers. In addition to
broadening the scope of historical scholarship about mapping to include the
systematic analysis of many little-known innovators, the investigators will
provide an evidence-based critique of the concepts of utility, novelty, and
patentability; the effectiveness of the patents system in maintaining standards
of originality and non-obviousness. They also will examine the value of a
monopoly right in stimulating creative endeavors, and they will explore
information flows among inventors and the Theory of Multiples, whereby
discoveries by two or more innovators suggest that many inventions might be
seen, in retrospect, as an inevitable consequence of need or related technology.
As a final part of this project, the investigators will evaluate the usefulness
and limitations of Big Microdata as a research tool, and they will assess
triangulation strategies for coping with transcription and coding errors.