* 1461911
* Multiscale Interaction between Deep Convection, African Easterly Waves, and Kelvin Waves over the Atlantic, Africa and the Indian Ocean
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Ademe Mekonnen, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 02/28/2019
* USD 441,297.00

This project focuses on an investigation of the multiscale interaction between
African easterly waves (AEWs), Kelvin waves and different types of deep
convection over the Atlantic Ocean, Africa and the Indian Ocean. The effort will
focus on three research areas: (i) the initiation of AEWs and their role on
convective activity, (ii) the impact of different types of deep convection on
maintenance, structure and propagation characteristics of AEWs, and (iii) the
Kelvin wave variability, including its interaction with AEWs. A novel way of
investigating wave-convection interactions and presenting comprehensive analysis
of different types of deep convection will be studied. Heretofore-unrecognized
changes in convective system organization, i.e., switching of one type of deep
convection to another, will be identified as playing a key role in initiating
wave activity. The plan includes use of multiple datasets: satellite-based
observations from the International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project,
Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission Multi-satellite Precipitation Analysis, and
high-resolution reanalysis data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following key
scientific questions will be addressed: (1) How does one type of deep convection
transition to another type? What are the mechanisms that determine this
transition? What is the role of diurnal cycle and high terrain in the transition
process? (2) How do AEWs and associated convection vary across regions of high
terrain in Africa? How does AEW-genesis vary in time? What is the impact of MCSs
on AEWs? (3) How do Kelvin waves interact with AEWs and what determines this
interaction? (4) What is the role of Kelvin wave activity on different types of
deep convection?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal has also important
educational impacts. This research will help increase the involvement of
students from underrepresented groups and will enhance the graduate atmospheric
science program at North Carolina A&amp;T State University, a minority serving
institution.