* 1461435
* Statistical Methods for Causal Inference in Geographic Regression Discontinuity Designs
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Luke Miratrix, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2020
* USD 330,000.00

This research project will develop methods to improve understanding of estimates
from geographically referenced observational studies. These methods will enable
researchers to accurately assess uncertainty for this class of problems, thereby
reducing the chance of over-confident or potentially misleading results being
presented to the public. When one is faced with geographically referenced data,
such as those collected by population registries or satellite imagery, attempts
to infer causal relationships between treatments and outcomes often are thwarted
by the complex underlying spatial structure. For example, one might wish to
estimate the influence of flooding on anxiety by comparing units in the flood
zone to units outside the flood zone. However, underlying, unmeasured, and
geographically varying characteristics, such as socio-economic status, may
confound this relationship. Common approaches to these problems often
substantially underestimate uncertainty, have serious issues of bias, or rely on
very strong modeling assumptions, potentially leading to erroneous conclusions
and findings. This project will address these issues by developing methods that
adequately characterize and model spatial variation in the context of causal
inference. The researchers also will develop and release software for analysis,
and they will host a workshop focusing on this topic. This research project
bridges the fields of causality and spatial statistics and offers a unified
framework for inferring causal relationships in spatially referenced data. The
researchers will extend the regression discontinuity design framework, where
units just above and below some cut-point that determines treatment are compared
to infer a causal relationship. For example, one might compare those on either
side of a high-water mark in a flood, with the assumption that due to their
geographic proximity, such units, other than having experienced flooding, are
similar. However, unlike classic regression discontinuity, here the boundary is
a line rather than a point, which substantially complicates analysis. The
project will create and evaluate flexible tools to handle these complications
and demonstrate how to use these tools in real-world contexts. The project's
most significant theoretical contribution will be to fit the slope of the
response surface with respect to the boundary rather than the response surface
itself, which allows for appropriate extrapolation. This enhancement, coupled
with the flexible nature of fitting surfaces using spatial tools, will allow for
the preservation of effective random assignment of units across a treatment
boundary. It also will allow for causal inference with relatively few and weak
modeling assumptions, something that is critical in an observational data
context.