* 1461393
* CNH: Collaborative Research: Modeling the Dynamics of Harmful Algal Blooms, Human Communities, and Policy Choices Along the Florida Gulf Coast
* GEO,GEO
* 07/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Barbara Kirkpatrick, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2016
* USD 157,742.00

Project Abstract Around the world, harmful algal blooms (HABs) in the marine
environment are an increasing threat to human health and coastal ecosystems.
This research will examine the choices and effectiveness of policies for
mitigating the economic and public health effects of blooms of the harmful alga,
Karenia brevis, along Florida's Gulf of Mexico coast. The project team will
develop a modeling framework comprising statistical models of the dynamics of
nature and human demographics, environmental exposure-response models, cost-
minimization models, and a policy-simulation model that connects these
submodels. An Education Program will be implemented to evaluate education and
outreach tools that have been designed to minimize exposure to risks. The
research will focus on the following: (1) modeling the relationship between
nutrient loadings and the frequency, spread, intensity, and duration of HABs in
the eastern Gulf of Mexico; (2) clarifying the changing patterns of short- and
long-term human population distributions along the Florida Gulf Coast; (3)
specifying the connection between HABs as marine hazards (exposures) and human
respiratory ailments (responses); (4) inputing the economic costs of illnesses
associated with respiratory ailments; (5) demonstrating feasible ways of
communicating risks to the public and implementing mitigation policies; (6)
comparing the costs of implementing combinations of existing and prospective
policies; and (7) characterizing the array of coupling phenomena (time lags,
thresholds, feedback loops, surprises, etc.) that comprise the dynamic
interactions between nature and humans in the HABs context. The project is
expected to yield insights into a form of dynamic coupling between nature and
humans that heretofore has not been studied in depth, one in which policy
choices must be made about the relative usefulness of attempts to control either
nature or human behavior, or both, in order to reduce harm.

This research project will enhance our understanding of how the dynamic
interactions between natural and human systems influence and inform society's
choice of public policies for mitigating the economic and public health effects
of marine harmful algal blooms (HABs). The coupled natural-human system of HABs
and increasing coastal populations on the Florida Gulf Coast appear to exhibit
many of the classic characteristics of dynamic coupled systems, such as
feedbacks, thresholds, surprises, and legacy effects. A better understanding of
these characteristics can potentially lead to public policies that are better
organized, more informed, less costly, and more effective. The knowledge gained
will inform researchers studying other coupled natural-human systems, thereby
opening up other lines of research into coastal and aquatic regions affected by
natural hazards around the world.