* 1461630
* Collaborative proposal: A multimodal tactile sensor skin designed to reduce the cognitive burden on the user of a prosthetic hand
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Veronica Santos, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 175,015.00

PI: Santos, Veronica J. and Posner, Jonathan D. Proposal Number: 1264444 &
1264046

Intellectual Merit: Whether a prosthetic hand is a simple body-powered hook or
an advanced anthropomorphic device, it will only be useful and desirable to an
amputee if it improves quality of life and is intuitive to control. A prosthesis
will be rejected if it poses too great of a cognitive burden on the user. One
way to simultaneously reduce the cognitive burden on the user and enhance the
functionality of the user to focus on high-level commands as opposed to low-
level details that may be frustrating to control or even impossible to control
given the "language barrier" between human and machine because of different
timescales and resolutions of control. Amputees could be empowered with
prostheses having autonomous, local reflex algorithms akin to short latency grip
reflexes observed in humans, and even suites of basic behavioral building blocks
that are critical for activities of daily living. The only way for a semi-
autonomous system to gain the trust of its operator is through reliable,
context-dependent performance. Such context-aware performance will require
information about forceful interactions between the prosthetic hand and everyday
objects in unstructured environments that can only be obtained through touch.
The great number and dynamic range of tactile mechanoreceptors in the human hand
(17000 tactile sensors total, 2000 in each fingertip) highlight the importance
of rich multimodal tactile feedback for grasp and dexterous manipulation.
Unfortunately, many tactile sensor designs have focused on detection of normal
forces alone, which are necessary but not sufficient for reliable artificial
grasp. What is sorely needed is a multimodal tactile sensor that can detect
additional important features of finger-object interactions such as shear force,
vibration, and slip direction. This proposal aims to strengthen the ability of
an artificial hand to perform automated behaviors reliably by detecting,
processing, and utilizing rich, real-time information about finger-object
interactions with an innovative multimodal tactile sensor skin. This sensor
system is transformative because it will reduce the cognitive burden on an
amputee and will provide a foundation for paradigm-shifting advancements for
automating complex behaviors by artificial hands and providing a conscious
perception of touch through sensory feedback to the user. The long-term research
objective of this proposal is to reduce the cognitive burden on the user of an
upper extremity prosthesis. The following contributions to artificial hand
systems are proposed: Research Goal 1) Design, model, fabricate, and test a
flexible, multimodal tactile sensor skin system for artificial fingertips using
a multilayer microfluidic architecture; Research Goal 2) Establish functional
relationships between finger-object interactions and tactile sensor skin data
for use in autonomous grip control algorithms; and Research Goal 3) Integrate
the tactile sensor skin data into grip control algorithms and evaluate
effectiveness for reducing the cognitive burden on prosthesis users.

Broader Impacts: The proposed translational research could enhance the
functional capabilities of artificial, robotic manipulators intended for
unstructured, unsafe, or limited-access environments (prosthetic,
rehabilitative, assistive, space, underwater, military, rescue, surgery). The
proposed work could play a critical role in improving the quality of life for
end-users of prosthetic and assistive devices. Specific benefits to end-users of
prosthetic devices include: automation of complex prosthesis behaviors, rich
artificial sensory feedback, and "smart socket liners" for monitoring user
safety and comfort.

Contributions to elementary school, undergraduate, and graduate-level education
are proposed: Education Goal 1) Develop hands-on instructional modules for
teaching elementary school students about sensors using low-cost materials, and
deploy them locally for the benefit of students underrepresented in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics fields; Education Goal 2) Enhance
undergraduate-level course titled Sensors and Controls and graduate-level course
titled "Robotics" with a sensors module; and Education Goal 3) Promote
interdisciplinary undergraduate research opportunities via internships related
to the development, testing, and application of sensors.