* 1461292
* REU Site: Regional Atmospheric Chemistry: State-of-the-art Measurement and Modeling in the Pacific Northwest
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Shelley Pressley, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2018
* USD 326,910.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program will educate early
researchers in the exciting field of atmospheric chemistry, air quality and
climate change. Students ranging from freshman to seniors will gain hands-on
experience in research related to the field of atmospheric chemistry, and the
program promotes the idea of interdisciplinary and collaborative research to
encourage the participants to remain in a STEM discipline and pursue graduate
school opportunities. The program will also broaden the diversity of
participants to involve underrepresented students in engineering and science,
including students from community colleges that do not have an opportunity to
participate in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding complex atmospheric
chemical processes requires simultaneous measurements from numerous instruments,
and sophisticated numerical models to bring the data together into a coherent
scientific product. This makes atmospheric chemistry an ideal topic for
introducing undergraduates to the scientific linkage between measurements and
modeling and to the collaborative nature of environmental research. Goals for
the program include developing technical expertise in science and engineering
areas within the context of atmospheric chemistry, and engaging students in
authentic research activities that lead to scientific publications and
presentations; helping students understand the broad scope of atmospheric
research so they understand how their research fits within the broader societal
context of climate change; developing oral and written communication skills;
providing opportunities for students to learn about career and graduate school
options; recruiting a diverse set of student participants; and providing
opportunities for participants to engage in productive and meaningful social
interactions with faculty and graduate students so that participants will
develop positive and productive beliefs about STEM fields and graduate school.
Ten students will be recruited each summer, targeting underrepresented
communities in the Pacific Northwest. Workshops during the 9.5-week program,
will train students in atmospheric chemistry, measurement and modeling
techniques, data interpretation, and scientific communication. In parallel with
these workshops, students will be trained on the specific research tools
required for their individual research projects with faculty and graduate
student mentors. The students will form part of a larger community of scholars
on campus and showcase their research during a final campus wide poster session.