* 1461152
* REU Site: Integrated Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Xin Zhang, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2019
* USD 410,757.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomanufacturing
research is an emerging interdisciplinary area at the intersection of
nanotechnology and fabrication. Nanotechnology seeks to develop and synthesize
systems that manipulate, measure or control physical processes at the nanoscale,
while integrated nanomanufacturing incorporates nanofabrication and materials
research. The Boston University (BU) REU Site in Integrated Nanomanufacturing
will bring ten undergraduate students from universities and two-year colleges to
engage in summer research in more than 30 potential interdisciplinary labs in
Nanotechnology, Electrical and Computer, Biomedical, Materials Science, and/or
Mechanical Engineering at the Boston University Charles River campus. The REU
Site will offer an interdisciplinary and transformative experience to students
from varying engineering disciplines that reflect the diversity of the BU
mentors in Integrated Nanomanufacturing. The program's target is to recruit at
least 50% of the 10 participants from underrepresented minorities and at least
50% female participants. Training female and underrepresented minorities from
universities that have limited STEM research capabilities for graduate studies
will provide the largest impact to diversifying future role models in
nanotechnology. Participants will be immersed in research while simultaneously
gaining an education in the proper techniques for research via mentored training
from faculty and graduate students with clear learning goals agreed upon at the
start of the program. The REU site program will be organized into various
training sessions, hands-on cleanroom activities, scientific research in
appointed laboratories and seminars for undergraduate research students. The
Boston University NSF REU Site in Integrated Nanomanufacturing will provide a
program with the aim of educating a diverse group of the next generation of
engineers in nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will be mentored and coached
through a unique problem-based research experience, from basic skills building
to open-ended discovery, with a focus on developing research independence.
Through the mentored training, participants will also engage in a training
program of nanotechnology content, skills development, and career preparation
with a focus on interdisciplinary engineering topics. Participants will also be
immersed in a positive research culture in the mentor's laboratories and through
the research mentoring training program that favorably shapes the mentee's and
mentor's awareness, confidence and understanding of research, graduate school
and other STEM career choices. Students will participate in mentored discovery,
engineering of new devices, and fabrication at the nanoscale level to explore
optical and integrated nanoscale systems, while developing critical skills,
awareness and confidence necessary to advance along their career pathways in
academics and research. Through this site, students will gain the opportunity to
share their work with the research community at BU through presentations and to
also submit to national conferences or co-author publications based on their
research. Three thematic research areas will serve as the foundation for this
REU Site: 1) Materials synthesis and characterization, 2) Combination photonic
and electronic nanostructures, and 3) Integration of nanosystems that generate,
sense, and manipulate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will emphasize the
participation of underrepresented minority students, including novices (first
and second year undergraduates) to establish primarily racial and ethnic, but
also institutional, technical, and experiential diversity among the participants
and to seed greater diversity in the national graduate student applicant pool.
Recruiting will utilize strong existing relationships BU has with historically
Black colleges and Universities (HBCU's) and Hispanic serving institutions
(HSI's). Recruiting for this NSF REU site will also be concentrated on two-year
colleges as well as four-year colleges that lack graduate research in STEM. As
part of the REU site goals, a minimum of 50% of ten participants will be from
colleges where graduate research opportunities in STEM are unavailable with a
minimum of 50% underrepresented minorities and 50% female participants to be
recruited. Undergraduate students who are veterans of the U.S. Armed Services
will also be encouraged to apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF REU site
Integrated Nanomanufacturing has been funded by the National Science Foundation
Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC).