* 1461886
* BDD: Disaster Preparation and Response via Big Data Analysis and Robust Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Huan Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 03/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Disasters are events with dire consequences, requiring multiple-agency responses
and resources beyond the capability of a single community. Natural disasters,
such as the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake, can threaten the lives of many
people and cause inordinate economic losses. Communication is critical to
disaster preparation, response, and recovery, but may be damaged during the
disaster. In this project, researchers from the US and Japan study novel
approaches to disaster preparation, response and recovery using survivable
communication networks and big data analysis of social media data. This
collaborative effort involves expertise in disaster research, social media
mining and big data analysis, network science, wireless communications, and
machine learning, to examine resilient network architecture and algorithms, data
collection and analysis before the disaster, and decision making and information
dissemination during the disaster. The resilient network incorporates both wired
and wireless communications to deal with multiple disaster-induced failures,
aiming for efficient algorithms serving emergency applications. State-of-the-art
data collection and analysis techniques will help build an important knowledge
base in proactive preparation for disasters. Real time decision making and
information dissemination during a disaster can assist disaster response and
recovery effectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to
provide valuable guidance for disaster preparation, response, and recovery for
both the US and Japan, and spearhead a new research direction in survivable
communication network design and big data analysis. This project provides a
conducive environment to further research collaboration of big data analysis and
disaster relief between the US and Japan. Graduate students will be jointly
trained in this international research project to actively collaborate in
carrying out the proposed research tasks. Special efforts will be made to engage
minority students and underrepresented groups.