* 1461546
* The Navajo Technical University Pathways to STEM Careers Project
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2023
* Jason Arviso, Navajo Technical University
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,996,671.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will inform the body of knowledge about the
importance and conduct of pre-college and undergraduate research and educational
experiences in recruiting and retaining underrepresented individuals into STEM
studies, and preparing the next generation of STEM professionals. The connection
of faculty to research and thereby the students to culturally and locally
relevant research is an important step in graduating students who are more
likely to pursue advanced degrees. For those students entering the workforce
directly from a tribal college it is equally important that they have a well-
defined skill set in mathematics, science, and technology for entry into the
STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Navajo Technical University Pathways
to STEM Careers Project is designed to strengthen the university's E-Learning
capabilities by: providing resources to deliver such instruction; developing a
pre-engineering certificate and curriculum designed for such instruction, to
enable American Indian students from remote areas and high schools in New
Mexico, Arizona, Utah, and Colorado to pursue engineering studies; providing an
academic ladder to an engineering degree for those students; and researching the
effectiveness of E-Learning with Navajo, Pueblo, and Ute students. The project
also provides resources to engage engineering students at Navajo Technical
University, working with professional support, with students working toward the
pre-engineering certificate.