* 1461006
* Research Experience for Undergraduates Site on Sustainable Land and Water Resources--A Community-Based Participatory Research Experience for Undergraduates
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Diana Dalbotten, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 04/30/2019
* USD 886,387.00

The PIs have been granted an NSF award to implement an REU Site focused on
Sustainable Land and Water Resources. The goal of this REU Site will be to
introduce undergraduate students to key elements of research on land and water
resources essential to improving management practices, with a focus on
Community-Based Participatory Research (CBPR) and diverse interdisciplinary
research teams. Students, divided into three teams, will conduct research that
integrates Earth-surface dynamics, geology, hydrology and other disciplines.
Research teams will be hosted by two Native American communities (Confederated
Salish Kootenai Tribes and Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa) and the
University of Minnesota to work on projects developed in collaboration with the
tribes' resource management divisions. This REU Site will incorporate an
interdisciplinary team-oriented approach that emphasizes quantitative and
predictive methods, CBPR, indigenous research methods, and traditional
ecological knowledge. The REU Site will encourage participation by
underrepresented students and students who are unsure about how they fit into
the world of science to pursue STEM careers. The PIs expect that at least 75% of
the participants will be from groups underrepresented in STEM and 50% will be
women. Approximately half of the participants will be students who would not
otherwise participate in undergraduate research, such as non-traditional
students (which includes parents, married students, and older students). The REU
Site also will encourage veterans and students with disabilities to apply.
Participants will enhance the diversity of the future geoscience workforce; for
example, 20 students from the previous REU Site have received degrees in the
geosciences. Of these, 9 are in graduate school, 6 have transferred from their
2-year program to a 4-year STEM program, and 5 are working in the geosciences or
a related field. The other 31 participants are still undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site will develop a new paradigm for
undergraduate research incorporating place-based and community-based
participatory research. The PIs are building knowledge on increasing
participation in REUs by the non-traditional students and students from groups
underrepresented in STEM. The PIs have developed a proven, structured,
scaffolded method of teaching science research and writing, which takes students
who may have never written a technical research paper and provides them the
skills and support needed to routinely deliver high quality intellectual outputs
and increase their intellectual self-confidence in the process. The mentoring
plan for the REU Site is focused on helping mentors to: a) prepare to mentor
highly diverse teams of students; b) support mentors to deal with the
expectations, issues and challenges that arise when you are mentoring teams that
have a large number of nontraditional students; and c) help mentors get
acculturated to conducting research on tribal lands and with Native people. The
students, faculty, graduate and post-doctoral mentors, tribal professionals and
other community members will be intimately engaged in CBPR, developing projects
that will inherently support tribal resource management goals. Results will be
disseminated to tribal authorities and community members as well as the broader
scientific community. Outcomes of this REU research paradigm will concurrently
establish a legacy of broader scientific capacity within reservation communities
and provide pathways to scientific discoveries with a shared foundation of trust
and respect.