* 1461277
* REU Site:   Advancing Space Science through Undergraduate Research Experience (ASSURE) at University of California (UC) Berkeley
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Laura Peticolas, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2018
* USD 369,681.00

The Space Sciences Laboratory at UC Berkeley seeks to increase the number of
minority students in STEM careers through the establishment an NSF REU site to
serve first-generation students from Minority Serving Institutions, in
particular Community Colleges. The Advancing Space Science through Undergraduate
Research Experiences (ASSURE) program will provide authentic research
opportunities for first-generation students with limited or no access to STEM
research opportunities. Students will work in a multi-tiered mentoring
environment, with research mentors, coordinator mentors and peer mentors to
conduct cutting edge research in the areas of space science and engineering.
Topics students will explore research on include solar physics, planetary
science, cosmochemistry, astronomy, space-instrument design and manufacturing,
instrument calibration and orbital dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National
Research Council?s decadal survey of solar and space physics raised concerns
about the number of scientists in this field of research. Declining enrollments
in relevant departments have led to a reduction in the availability of courses
in solar and space physics which threatens the pipeline of future researchers in
this field. This REU Site will serve as a mechanism to encourage careers in
solar and space physics, particularly among minority students. Student
participants will spend 10 weeks at SSL at UC-Berkeley where they will be
provided research, leadership and role-modelling opportunities. The students
will gain professional role-models at SSL, and they themselves will become role
models for the next generation of students by conducting outreach after their
summer experiences. SSL is suited to provide a unique REU experience, as SSL has
the capacity to design, build, test, communicate with, and analyze data from
satellites. Participants will have continued mentoring after the summer program,
and will be able to present their research results at the American Geophysical
Union meeting. The PI leading this program has been trained in, and has
experience in the area of culturally sensitive science education and outreach.