* 1461496
* Avifauna Persistence and Vulnerabilities: Island Biogeography Across Long Time Scales
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2019
* David Steadman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 10/31/2019
* USD 373,914.00

Changes in climate and in other natural environmental factors as well as human-
related land-use changes have had some of the greatest impacts on biodiversity.
With the goal of enhancing understanding of historic biogeography, this research
project will investigate questions about the persistence versus loss of species
under a variety of climate-induced conditions and human-caused environmental
change. The project will develop new insights regarding how species and
ecosystems respond to the direct and indirect effects of changes in climate,
including warmer temperatures and rising sea levels. A deeper understanding of
species responses to the past effects of climate and other global changes will
improve capabilities to forecast the impacts of future changes. Project results
will contribute to scientific understanding of how global changes affect
ecosystems and the services they provide to humans. The findings will help
inform policy makers, governmental agencies, and resource administrators as they
assess appropriate courses of action to mitigate effects of future climate
change. This project also will strengthen international research collaborations
among U.S. and Caribbean scientists and institutions.

Using islands as microcosms for understanding human interactions with the
environment, this project will analyze species traits of land-bird communities
in terms of their resilience versus vulnerability from multiple contexts. It
will combine data about paleontology, radiocarbon chronology, paleoclimate, and
modern plant and animal communities to develop a rigorous model of long-term
biotic change. Species-level identifications of fossils will portray changes in
species communities, which will be evaluated in light of their specific life-
history traits, such as climatic niche, habitat preference, feeding guild, and
range attributes (widespread vs. endemic). An innovative form of species
distribution modeling will be used to characterize the climatically suitable
habitat or "climate envelope" for each species and develop quantitative,
empirical, predictive models of species-environment relationships. Project
findings will provide new perspectives about the relationships among
contemporary species distributions and climate (and other environmental
predictors). They also will permit the investigators to "hindcast" species
distributions in previous time periods. Given wide-spread concerns about ongoing
and future impacts of natural environmental and human-related changes on
biogeography and biodiversity, this project will provide data-rich context and
validation for research investigations that previously have tended to rely on
modeling and projections.