* 1461056
* REU Site: Building digital tools to support endangered languages and preserve environmental knowledge in Mexico, Micronesia, and Navajo Nation
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* K Harrison, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 04/30/2019
* USD 399,661.00

This project is supported under the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program, which is an NSF-wide program although each Directorate
administers its own REU Site competition. This program supports active research
participation by undergraduate students in an effort to introduce them to
scientific research so as to encourage their continued engagement in the
nation's scientific research and development enterprise. REU projects involve
students in meaningful ways in ongoing research programs or in research projects
designed especially for the purpose. The REU program is a major contributor to
the NSF's goal of developing a diverse, internationally competitive, and
globally-engaged science and engineering workforce. The Social, Behavioral and
Economic (SBE) sciences Directorate awarded this REU Site grant to Swarthmore
College to provide undergraduate students with intensive training in community-
based collaborative language documentation. The project builds bridges between
indigenous linguists in the US academic community, Mexico, Micronesia, and the
Navajo Nation, with collaborative research that benefits all parties. It helps
uncover deep connections between languages and landscapes by documenting the
knowledge base about the natural world found in endangered languages. The
resulting linguistic materials support local communities' language
revitalization efforts. They will also be a resource to the broader scientific
community seeking to understand language complexity, diversity and
universals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site recruits a diverse group of
twelve undergraduate students of Linguistics. The project begins with a two-week
intensive, hands-on training session on current best practice for recording
languages (or areas of grammar within languages) that have not yet been
adequately documented. Students learn directly from professional linguists and
indigenous language experts how endangered languages are being modernized,
digitized, and expanded into new technological domains. In weeks three and four,
students participate in a two-week field practicum. Working in teams led by
indigenous language experts, students help record basic and specialized lexica,
folk taxonomies, toponyms, and ethno-biological nomenclature. They explore and
help document the rich knowledge base in each language that uniquely encodes the
natural environment (flora, fauna, weather, geography, etc.). They also learn
current best practices in sustaining indigenous languages and supporting global
language diversity. The program concludes with a one-week workshop, where
students reflect on their collaborative fieldwork and prepare presentations for
their respective home institutions. This REU Site project is co-funded by the
Documenting Endangered Languages program and also by the International Science
and Engineering Program.