* 1461202
* REU Site: Multifunctional Materials
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Dimitris Lagoudas, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2018
* USD 364,819.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Texas A&amp;M
University offers research experiences on various aspects of multiscale
experiments and modeling of material systems that exhibit multifunctional
properties to diverse and talented cohorts of students particularly from
predominantly undergraduate and minority serving institutions in Texas and the
Southwest. There is extensive materials research activity in the southwestern
United States, which serves exponentially growing sectors in energy, aerospace,
electronics and health. Advances in materials, particularly multifunctional
materials are critical to addressing the country's most challenging problems in
energy and environmental sustainability. The students' research projects have
meaningful and positive impacts on society by focusing on the theme of
multifunctional materials which supports a large number of applications related
to energy and sustainability, for which there are large job growth opportunities
for participants. The research products will benefit society broadly and the
project will help to recruit more students into materials science engineering,
an area where an increased and more diverse workforce is urgently
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site offers opportunities for undergraduate
students to engage in comprehensive research experiences on cutting-edge topics,
using state-of-the-art methods, which reinforce and strengthen their classroom
knowledge and encourage pursuit of graduate education. During the 10-week
experience the students perform research activities focusing on multiscale
experiments and modeling of material systems that exhibit multifunctional
properties. The modeling activities include molecular dynamics to continuum
scale constitutive modeling, optimization, advanced finite element-based
micromechanics, and macroscopic finite element modeling of applications. The
experimental activities include fabrication and characterization of shape memory
alloys, fibers, and polymers, as well as design and testing of Layer-by-Layer
polymer assemblies, optimized polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell systems,
and nastic material systems. Students will learn how research is conducted,
develop laboratory and modeling skills, and learn how to conduct design,
analysis, testing and optimization of multifunctional materials and components.
The students will collaborate with a faculty research mentor from the
multidisciplinary Department of Materials Science and Engineering along with a
trained graduate student mentor. They also will participate in a professional
development program that includes training in communications and research
methods skills, graduate school information sessions, and optional field trips
and tours. The students are provided with opportunities to present their
research results in a poster symposium held at the end of the summer and
participate in an REU Students Invent Experience in collaboration with the
"Aggies Invent" program - where industry partners from areas familiar to the
students will present ideas, and the REU students will build a prototype in 48
hours. The program will collaborate closely with TAMU's AGEP-T program and LSAMP
program as part of comprehensive recruitment plan to ensure a diverse and
talented applicant pool for the REU Site. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site is supported by the Department of
Defense ASSURE program in partnership with the NSF REU program.