* 1461305
* International Workshop on Comparing Ice Nucleation Measuring Systems 2014 (ICIS 2014)
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Daniel Cziczo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2015
* USD 49,915.00

This effort will support US researchers to participate in a workshop that will
bring together an international group of atmospheric scientists who are experts
in conducting research on the relationship of ambient aerosol particles to the
formation of ice-containing clouds. The ability to accurately model aerosol-
cloud interactions is one of the largest uncertainties in predicting the Earth?s
climate. Participating US scientists include those from leading ice measurement
groups. One broader impact of this project is that it enables US scientists,
including their postdoctoral fellows and graduate students, to have access to an
exceptional state-of-the-art chamber facility for conducting research on air
pollution, weather, and climate. The AIDA chamber is unique due to the
combination of its size, temperature range, and comprehensive trace gas,
aerosol, and cloud instrumentation. The proposed workshop offers US scientists
an opportunity to evaluate the performance of their instruments in comparison
with other similar instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will take
place at the Aerosol Interaction and Dynamics in the Atmosphere (AIDA) at the
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology in Germany, the world?s foremost facility for
producing ice clouds in a controlled setting. Cloud and aerosol scientists from
universities, government laboratories, and private research institutes will
gather at AIDA for the purpose of comparing their state-of-the-art instruments
for characterizing ice-forming aerosol. The scientists will use the AIDA chamber
to nucleate ice on a variety of test aerosols of atmospheric relevance including
mineral dust, biological aerosol, metal oxides and soluble materials. A number
of individual mass spectrometers will be used to determine aerosol size and
composition. The results from each instrument will be compared with the results
obtained by the others. This activity will provide valuable information for
determining whether similarities and differences in laboratory and field data
are attributable to instrument performance or to aerosol variability.