* 1461175
* REU Site: A Regional Summer Research Program Integrating Deaf and Hearing Participants in Chemistry Research
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Gina MacDonald, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 318,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry Division and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities in the Mathematics and Physical Sciences Directorate at NSF are
funding Professor Kevin Caran and colleagues in the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at James Madison University (JMU) to host an REU site entitled 'A
Regional Summer Research Program Integrating Deaf and Hearing Participants in
Chemistry Research. This REU site provides research opportunities for regional,
and deaf and hard of hearing students. The students include those from JMU as
well as students from outside institutions that do not have extensive research
infrastructure. All undergraduate researchers have access to a range of research
opportunities in disciplines including biophysical, organic, environmental,
inorganic, and materials chemistry. Undergraduate interpreting students, working
under the direction of a professional interpreter, research topics relevant to
the challenges of interpreting in a scientific environment. All students
participate in hands-on research, seminars and research group meetings. Students
are exposed to good practice guidelines for writing papers and making scientific
presentations. These experiences are designed to help participating students
acquire valuable skill sets for future careers in the sciences. External faculty
participants from regional colleges both add to the program and presumably will
take elements of the research culture surrounding this program back to their
home institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deaf and hard of hearing students
perform research under the direction of a faculty mentor and have access to
professional interpreters and interpreting students who are fully integrated in
the research laboratory, seminars, and social activities. Deaf students gain
experience in a hearing environment that may help in their success after
completion of their four year degree. Hearing participants also gain experiences
that will help in their future success as they benefit from the diversity and
novel atmosphere provided by the program that results in a better understanding
of the unique challenges and skills of the deaf and hard of hearing
participants. The inclusion of student interpreters is expected to be mutually
beneficial and enhance the experience in the research laboratory with the goal
of promoting the pursuit of STEM careers by deaf students.