* 1461766
* Exploring Behavioral Impact of Public Transportation Infrastructure: A Longitudinal Quasi-Experimental Study in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Marlon Boarnet, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 11/30/2018
* USD 183,605.00

This project will analyze how public transportation systems influence the travel
behavior of individuals and the locational behavior of firms. In the past two
decades, the U.S. has invested vast amounts of capital in public transit and
transit-oriented development. To build more efficient transportation systems and
to leverage the investment already made, it is critical to understand how
transit improvements affect the behavior of individuals and firms. The
investigators will employ an innovative approach to understanding the behavioral
impact of transit investments by using census microdata to conduct a
longitudinal quasi-experimental analysis. The quasi-experimental analysis will
examine changes after new projects open in order to make better inferences about
the effect of transit infrastructure on behavior. The research will provide new
perspectives, information, insights, and approaches to transportation planning
and geography that differ from the previous reliance on models calibrated with
cross-sectional analysis. This project will enable more robust use of
longitudinal estimates based on documented behavioral change. Project results
and methods will enhance the capacity of public agencies to better understand
impacts of transportation infrastructure improvements. The project also will
open new doors to longitudinal panel analysis in social sciences through the use
of census microdata, which potentially are available for large samples
nationwide.

Building upon previous research in transportation planning, geography, and
economics, the investigators will conduct analyses of light rail transit (LRT)
systems to explore answers to two sets of questions: (1) How does a new LRT
system impact the commuting behavior of individuals, and does the impact on
commuting differ in magnitude across LRT corridors with different geographic,
demographic, and socioeconomic characteristics? (2) How does a new LRT system
influence the locational behavior of firms, and what are the characteristics of
new firms that are created or established firms that choose to move into LRT
corridors versus new firms that start or established firms that relocate in
sites beyond the corridors? Because improvements in transportation
infrastructure affects commuting behavior and firm location in complex ways, the
investigators will refine innovative methods, such as two-dimensional propensity
score matching, to construct a longitudinal quasi-experimental database. The
data and methods will allow them to investigate the behavior of individuals and
firms at a microscopic scale and reveal the causal relations among
transportation infrastructure, individual commuting, and firm location behavior.