* 1461249
* REU QUEST (Research Experience for Undergraduates in QUantitative Environmental Science and Technology)
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* James McNair, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 264,287.00

This REU Site award to Grand Valley State University, located in Muskegon,
Michigan, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2015-2017. The program emphasizes two themes: understanding
freshwater systems and their catchments, and applying quantitative methods in
research. Its main components are individual student-oriented research projects,
faculty mentoring, peer interactions, development of communication skills, and
development of quantitative skills. Students also will receive training in the
ethics of science and responsible conduct of research, use of library resources,
career planning, and resume writing. Research areas include lake and stream
metabolism, carbon and nutrient biogeochemistry, transformative/comparative
immunology of freshwater organisms, molecular ecology, fish population dynamics,
harmful algal blooms, environmental chemistry, remote sensing, watershed
analysis, and more. Research equipment available to students includes, for
example, a monitoring buoy on Muskegon Lake, flow cytometer, gene sequencer,
analytical instruments for environmental chemistry, and indoor mesocosm
facility. The summer program concludes with a research symposium where students
present their findings. Program success will be evaluated using both the BIO REU
common assessment tool and an external evaluator. The program is open to all
bright, adequately prepared undergraduates throughout the nation, with extra
emphasis on recruiting from groups underrepresented in the biological sciences.
Student applications are completed online at the website listed below and
include evidence of adequate academic preparation, an essay, and a faculty
letter of recommendation.

It is anticipated that over the 3-year period of the grant, a total of 30
students primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are
required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email
sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
www.gvsu.edu/wri/mcnair/reuquest or by contacting the PI (Dr. James McNair at
mcnairja@gvsu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Kevin Strychar at strychak@gvsu.edu).