* 1461565
* Collaborative Research: Community Recovery and Colorado's Extreme Floods of 2013: Policy Learning in the Context of Resources, Coalitions, and Political Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Elizabeth Albright, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 01/31/2019
* USD 185,513.00

Title: Collaborative Research: Community Recovery and Colorado?s Extreme Floods
of 2013: Policy Learning in the Context of Resources, Coalitions, and Political
Conditions &lt;br/&gt;PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;One of the most damaging
natural hazards, flooding annually causes billions of dollars in damage,
response, and recovery losses for U.S. communities. As populations increase in
flood prone areas, communities are becoming more vulnerable to floods. The
responsibility for flood management has shifted from the federal to the local
level and communities are now responsible for making decisions about if, how,
and where to rebuild. Because of their potentially recurring nature, floods
offer an opportunity for communities to learn from and adapt to these
experiences with the goal of increasing resiliency through reflection,
modification of former policies, and adoption of new policies. By following the
response to the September 2013 floods in Colorado communities, this study will
investigate how communities successfully learn from extreme events to increase
resilience and decrease vulnerability to future floods. The project seeks to
contribute to the fields of public policy and natural hazards research with the
following objectives: to advance knowledge of policy learning in the aftermath
of extreme events; to advance knowledge of disaster recovery, specifically as it
relates to the role that community processes, citizens, and other stakeholders
play in promoting long-term recovery and resilience; and to inform governments
of lessons from flood responses to the September 2013 floods, with the goal of
contributing to the effectiveness of governance in flood-affected
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will conduct longitudinal comparative
case studies of seven Colorado communities, located in Colorado?s three most
severely impacted counties from the September 2013 floods. This study will
follow communities through their recovery and planning process over a period of
three years. Four types of data will be used to examine flood recovery processes
and outcomes. First, in-depth interviews will be conducted of participants in
the planning and decision process of the community at three intervals during the
recovery process. Second, surveys will be conducted with a larger sample of
recovery process participants than those interviewed. Third, periodic surveys of
community residents will be conducted. Finally, documents related to flood
recovery and demographic data will also be gathered. Combined, these data will
enable both qualitative and quantitative analysis of recovery processes and
stakeholder participation, extent of damage, coalition beliefs and behavior,
political context, and resource availability in communities.