* 1461204
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Nuclear and Particle Physics at TUNL and Duke University
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Ayana Arce, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2019
* USD 406,539.00

This award will support the renewal of the Triangle Universities Nuclear
Laboratory (TUNL) and Duke University Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) Site with an international component at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland. TUNL
is a research consortium consisting of three major universities in the North
Carolina Triangle Area, Duke University, North Carolina State University and the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The program will provide
opportunities for students to participate in research on a broad range of topics
in nuclear and particle physics. Eight students will conduct research at TUNL,
and the other four will spend part of their summer at CERN working with the Duke
high-energy physics group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU summer program
provides undergraduate students with an active research experience for ten weeks
through participation in scientific investigations at the frontiers of nuclear
and particle physics. Each student is assigned a faculty mentor and is
integrated into a research group consisting of faculty, postdocs, graduate
students and other undergraduate students. Through active research, seminars,
lab tours, and discussion groups, the students are exposed to various aspects of
nuclear and particle physics research and their connections to other science
areas. Lecture and seminar topics are chosen to emphasize the nuclear and
particle physics research activities at TUNL and CERN, respectively. The
students will have opportunities to interact with world-renowned physicists,
learn about the most advanced theoretical concepts in the fields, and work with
state-of-the-art technologies used in these research areas.