* 1461422
* Analyzing Atmospheric Warming and Environmental Changes from High-Altitude Ice Cores
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Lonnie Thompson, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 08/31/2019
* USD 239,073.00

Historical evidence indicates that climate has contributed to the rise and fall
of civilizations. The evidence also suggests that early human activities, such
as land-use changes and biomass degradation, may have impacted climate. While
current scientific evidence indicates that human-emitted greenhouse gases are
contributing to the increase in temperatures across the globe, insights into
short-term regional changes are much more ambiguous. This research project will
focus on the reciprocal influence between atmospheric warming and environmental
changes in ecosystems and human society from the coldest time interval of the
Holocene (a period known as "the Little Ice Age") to the current warm period.
The project will provide new perspectives about the synergies between
atmospheric pollution and climate change, especially at higher elevations where
rapid glacial melting often occurs. The insights from this project will advance
basic understanding about relationships between the impacts of human-induced
atmospheric pollution on climate as well as factors that may lead to both the
amplification of atmospheric warming and the suppression of atmospheric
temperatures. Project results will help guide policy makers, governmental
agencies, and resource administrators in assessing appropriate courses of
action. This project also will strengthen international research collaborations
among U.S. and European scientists and institutions.

Four ice cores retrieved from the ice field atop Mt. Ortles, the highest
mountain in South Tyrol, Italy, reveal records of at least four centuries of
climatic and environmental history. These ice cores, which were extracted from
one of the most rapidly warming and environmentally impacted areas in the world,
offer a unique opportunity to investigate the interactions of strong regional
environmental variations and wider-ranging global climatic patterns. Using
isotopic analysis, trace elements ratios, mass spectrometry, and ion
chromatography, the investigators will seek answers to three core questions: (1)
Have temperatures increased at the high elevations over the past 400 years? (2)
What is the relationship between larger levels of human-generated aerosols and
increases in regional temperatures? (3) Do droughts and wet periods impact
atmospheric particulate content? Project findings will provide new perspectives
regarding the complex interactions among climate, human society, and ecosystems
as well as their intricate linkages bound by the fluxes of mass and energy.