* 1461407
* Summer Institute for Research Design in Cultural Anthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Johnson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 112,513.00

As anthropological research is inherently interdisciplinary and incorporates a
wide variety of research methods, effective preparation for STEM professional
work requires that students obtain an understanding of the concepts of research
design, data management in both qualitative and quantitative contexts, and
strategies of hypothesis testing. This program, which supplements the training
students receive in their home departments, has trained over 204 students from
58 different institutions to date. This training increases the competence of
students to do significant dissertation research projects and to become more
proficient professional scientists.

The Summer Institute for Research Design in Cultural Anthropology brings
together area experts and graduate students for intensive study of issues in
research design. The program provides students with a basic understanding of the
link between theory and scientific methodology in cultural anthropology that has
a strong STEM component, enhances their ability to produce a well-conceived and
written research proposal, and provides students with basic scientific research
knowledge and skills for solving a variety of research design problems. This
institute will advance science and STEM education and training in cultural
anthropology both now and well into the future by providing students with a
solid foundation in scientific research design and methods. Additionally, these
students will promote the scientific approach in cultural anthropology to future
generations as they themselves become the teachers. The primary objectives of
the institute are: 1.) To provide Ph.D. students in cultural anthropology with a
STEM experience that will improve their basic understanding of scientific
research design in cultural anthropology. 2.) To improve a student's ability to
design anthropological research that involve STEM informed methods of data
collection and analysis. 3.) To provide students with basic scientific research
knowledge and skills for solving a variety of research design problems in the
future. 4.) To promote and to expand the application of scientific research
design in cultural anthropology through the process of diffusion (i.e., the
students eventually becoming teachers themselves). Providing future professors
with training in scientific research design will help ensure the viability and
sustainability of scientific approaches and STEM learning in cultural
anthropology.