* 1461149
* REU Site: Software Safety: Research, Practice and a Path Forward
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Sook Kim, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 02/28/2019
* USD 404,802.00

Title: REU Site: Software Safety: Research, Practice and a Path
Forward&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software today plays a significant role in
controlling the behavior of many systems, including safety-critical
applications. A hazard realized directly or indirectly through a software's
operation can be very serious, resulting not only in monetary, time, or property
losses, but also in loss of life. In response to such challenges, students at
the REU Site at the University of Texas at Dallas, under close mentoring of
faculty members and industry practitioners, research how to produce safe
software more efficiently and effectively. The intellectual merits are that
results of this REU site provide a comprehensive picture of how software safety
can be achieved in a cost-effective way. Lessons learned help prevent similar
safety hazards from recurring. The project's broader significance and importance
are to provide students belonging either to underrepresented groups or to
universities that have only limited research opportunities, experience in
cutting-edge research in software safety, as well as a broadly applicable skill
set. This includes critical thinking, research methods, problem solving, and
oral and written communication, all of which are very important for academic and
professional success in science and technology research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The subject of this project is software safety. The project focuses
on evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of existing methodologies and current
practices for safety assurance, and investigates (a) how the introduction of
software safety requirements may affect the software lifecycle, and (b) how
software processes, methods and tool support should be adjusted accordingly. The
impact of the emerging IoT (Internet of Things), especially its scalability and
heterogeneity, on software safety is also examined. In addition to research, REU
students take field trips to industry sponsors, allowing them to speak directly
with practitioners to better understand how software safety is applied to real-
life applications. Workshops on technical writing and oral presentation are held
to improve students' proficiency in preparing and delivering technical reports.
Seminars on ethics and professional responsibility are given to ensure REU
students behave properly and respectfully. Videos and PowerPoint slides of
student presentations as well as lectures on software safety are posted at the
project's REU website.