* 1461237
* REU and RET Site in Physics at The University of Texas at Brownsville
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Mario Diaz, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 12/31/2018
* USD 395,000.00

This award supports the continuation of the Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site in Physics at the University of Texas Brownsville. The
site includes a Research Experience for Teachers (RET) component. The REU and
RET site will focus on research in frontier areas of phenomenological,
experimental and applied physics at state-of-the-art facilities. The goal is to
give students and teachers a research experience in the areas of gravitational
wave astronomy, optical astronomy, lasers and photonics, materials science,
and/or biophysics that will stimulate students' desire to become scientists and
give teachers a better understanding of the process of scientific research. The
REU and RET programs include a close mentoring and guidance system from the
faculty and program management team, fostering interaction and active
participation by students and teachers through seminars, lunch meetings,
colloquia, professional development workshops, outreach opportunities, and
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In gravitational wave astronomy participants
will be given a coherent unified view of the field and will learn the scientific
value of both the potential wealth of astrophysical information to be obtained
from this new astronomical window and the challenges posed in developing the
technological expertise necessary at the instrumental level in opening this new
window. In lasers and photonics they will learn of the challenges and promises
that this fast evolving discipline holds for new electronics. In biophysics
participants will be exposed to state-of-the-art techniques in single molecule
spectroscopy and in investigations of the role of amino acids in protein
structure and function. In materials science they will learn about
thermoelectric materials and their potential use for renewable energy.