* 1461248
* Nanotechnology REU with a Focus on Community Colleges
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Carolyn Nichol, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 10/31/2018
* USD 327,818.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;The Nanotechnology Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) with a Focus on Community Colleges at Rice
University will provide community college students in the Greater Houston area
with summer research internships in the field of nanotechnology. The program
aims to engage traditionally underrepresented students in the STEM fields by
recruiting from community colleges including those that are primarily minority
serving institutions. Through laboratory experiences and interactions with
faculty, post-docs, and student mentors at Rice University, REU participants
will be exposed to STEM research, applications, and careers. Studies show that
participation in undergraduate research supports the transition from two-year to
four-year colleges and provides a pathway to graduate school and research
careers. Students in this program will work on projects that involve real-world
applications in the field of energy, medicine, and environmental health. In
addition, the program provides considerable training and mentoring of these
students not only through the support of the participating Rice faculty, staff,
and students but through its strong infrastructure established to promote
diversity and student success. A main outcome of the program is to impact
students, who otherwise would not have considered STEM research or careers, with
enriching and transformative research experiences resulting in a more diverse
and expanded STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;The Nanotechnology Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) with a Focus on Community Colleges at Rice University will
provide ten community college students in the Greater Houston area with a ten-
week summer research internship in the field of nanotechnology. The program aims
to impact traditionally underrepresented students in the STEM fields who are
represented in significant numbers in the local community colleges. Through
laboratory experiences and interactions with faculty, post-docs, and student
mentors at Rice University, REU participants will be exposed to STEM research,
applications, and careers. Studies show that participation in undergraduate
research support the pathway to graduate school and research careers. In
addition, the program provides considerable training and mentoring of these
students not only through the support of the participating Rice faculty, staff,
and students but through its strong infrastructure established to promote
diversity and student success. Rice University has made demonstrable strides in
the field of nanotechnology with its extensive research facilities,
interdisciplinary collaboration, and landmark breakthroughs. This REU program
will provide opportunities for students to conduct research involving STEM
applications in energy, medicine, and environmental health. Nanotechnology is
multidisciplinary, and thus, the research usually brings together many fields of
engineering and science. Students will have various research areas for
participation that include: synthesis and characterization of new nanomaterials;
air and water purification; photonics and plasmonics; medical imaging,
diagnoses, and treatment; and clean energy.