* 1461157
* REU Site: Advancing California Community College Students Through Engineering Research
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Bokor, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2019
* USD 359,893.00

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROJECT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The federal government
has forecasted that over the next decade the U.S. economy will need
approximately one million more technical professionals than are being produced
at the current rate. Increasing the retention of science and engineering majors
from 40% to 50% alone would generate three-quarters of the targeted one million
additional STEM degrees. The Transfer-to-Excellence Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (TTE REU) program of the University of California, Berkeley (UC
Berkeley) supports retention in STEM fields by offering hands-on research
opportunities in nanotechnology, biotechnology, and robotics to increase the
confidence and persistence of community college students in their pursuit of
science and engineering education and ultimately technical careers. The
program's three research areas have been chosen because they are economically-
salient, offer many exciting research opportunities, and will resonate with
community college students. The nine-week program brings 10 students per year
from California Community Colleges (CCC), the largest community college system
in the U.S., to UC Berkeley, where engineering faculty will host students in
their world-class research laboratories and mentor them in their own research
projects. TTE REU participants will also be trained in research protocol,
laboratory safety, scientific ethics, and science communications. The program
also provides students with transfer advising, and academic and professional
development activities to better prepare them to complete a B.S. degree, pursue
graduate studies, and succeed in a technical
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Transfer-to-Excellence Research Experiences for Undergraduates (TTE REU) program
of the University of California, Berkeley (UC Berkeley) aims to: 1) increase the
number of community college students, particularly women and underrepresented
minority students, who receive baccalaureate degrees in science and engineering;
and 2) expand and diversify the pipeline of future graduate school students. To
accomplish these objectives, the TTE REU program builds the research capacity of
a diverse body of community college students through hands-on research in
nanotechnology, biotechnology, and robotics and encourages them to continue
their science and engineering studies and pursue STEM careers. Through generous
support from the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) of the
National Science Foundation, REU Site award EEC-1461157, students from
California Community Colleges (CCC), the largest community college system in the
U.S., will engage in leading-edge research, hosted and advised by the
engineering faculty at UC Berkeley. The TTE REU program is integrated with the
Center for Energy Efficient Electronics Science an NSF Science and Technology
Center based at UC Berkeley. The program enables its CCC students to participate
in: 1) nanotechnology research on novel nanomaterials, innovative device
concepts, and improving device performance in electronics, optoelectronics and
sensors; 2) biotechnology research that advances the underlying science and
enhances the research tools for advanced biofuels and bio-based chemicals
production; and 3) robotics research on how robots can adapt to their
environment and human-in-the-loop systems such as autonomous vehicles and tele-
healthcare monitoring that integrate sensing, actuation, and control. In
collaboration with UC Berkeley's Transfer Alliance Project, the TTE REU program
provides academic advising and enrichment programs that prepare community
colleges students to be competitive transfer applicants to 4-year colleges. The
individualized academic and transfer advising continues for one academic year
following the completion of the TTE REU.