* 1461686
* Globalization and the Impacts of Emergent Commodity Networks on Local Economic and Cultural Geographies
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Caroline Faria, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 10/31/2018
* USD 203,190.00

This project will investigate the rapid globalization of emergent economic
markets over the last fifteen years. The research will examine both the primary
drivers of this process and the impacts on local economies, communities and
individuals. The project complements and extends existing scholarship on
globalization in three key ways. First, the project moves beyond a traditional
focus on major global north corporations as key economic drivers of
globalization to analyze the operations of small to mid-sized manufacturers,
traders, and consumers based in the global south. Second, the project focuses on
emerging ties between countries that are largely independent of Western Europe
and North America. Third, the project develops an innovative and transferable
methodological framework for analyzing the ties between transnational macro
economic and political processes and everyday experiences, actions and
reactions. Project results will be disseminated in field site locations in the
Gulf and East Africa, and in the US. These findings may be used in local,
regional and international government economic policy planning, by actors in the
small, mid-sized and larger private sector, and by the wider public. The project
may thus support future development of the entrepreneurial sector in these
locales, promoting partnerships between academia and industry and improving
socio-economic well being. The project also develops and strengthens ties
between educational establishments, students and faculty based in the US, the
Gulf Region and East Africa, promoting US-International institutional
collaboration. The research engages US-based minority undergraduate and graduate
students currently underrepresented in STEM disciplines in collaborative
research and co-authorship, enhancing efforts to diversify geographical
education and research. Given the grounded focus of the project, it also has
potential to promote increased public engagement in the geographical sciences
and draw minorities and women into the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has three objectives: 1. to examine the spatial, socio-cultural, economic and
ideological transformations in and drivers of African-Middle Eastern ties over
the last 15 years; 2. to interrogate the poorly understood "social life" of
commodities globally traded outside of Western Europe and North America,
including the way these new circuits of global connection are shaped by varied
power relations; and 3. to better understand the social-cultural and economic
impacts of heightened market integration on local and regional economic markets,
communities and individuals. An innovative transnational, relational methodology
is utilized in this project. This brings feminist and postcolonial perspectives
to bear on traditional commodity chain analyses in economic geography, revealing
macro-micro power-laden operations of globalization that are often overlooked.
Through a mixture of interviews, observation, surveys, and both visual-textual
and material object-based analysis, and an empirical focus on Dubai and Uganda,
key sites of African-Gulf connection, the project will shed new light on the
significant role of the global south in contemporary processes of globalization.