* 1462759
* Theoretical Foundations and Algorithms for Geometric Interfaceability in Virtual Product Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Horea Ilies, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2021
* USD 440,000.00

The ability to measure how well objects "fit together" is a key task in
engineering design and manufacturing as well as in the broad scientific arena
whenever the behavior and function of a system is dependent on proper geometric
alignment. For example, assembly planning from macro to nanoscale, layout
optimization and packaging, design for human variability, synthesis and self-
assembly of nano-machines, novel drug design, comparative shape analysis (shape
similarity), as well as personalized medicine and medical devices are all
applications in which the system's behavior and function depends on the proper
geometric alignment of individual components. Unfortunately, the existing
approaches that attempt to measure the quality of fit between geometric
interfaces are based on application-specific heuristics and are restricted to
simple geometric entities. This research will develop a generic framework for
geometric interfaceability in virtual product development aimed at quantifying
and interpreting how well objects of arbitrary geometric complexity fit
together. This new framework will stimulate critical new avenues of
interdisciplinary research involving engineering, computer science, and human
computer interaction with far reaching implications, and will provide an ideal
vehicle for developing novel and attractive educational, recruiting, and
outreach activities based on the connection of this research with popular puzzle
games. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop theoretical foundations
and algorithms for geometric interfaceability that would: (1) quantify and
interpret shape complementarity and similarity of the geometric interfaces of
arbitrary geometric complexity in terms of a novel implicit and space-continuous
complex function, called the Skeletal Density Function (SDF); (2) provide the
framework for automatically detecting key "features" that contribute to proper
alignment or assembly as well as geometric constraints, and (3) provide
algorithmic infrastructure for supporting major application domains in
engineering design and manufacturing. Specifically, this research will generate
the first generic and mathematically robust metric aimed at producing a
qualitative and quantitative description of complementarity of geometric
interfaces. Importantly, this approach completely avoids the heuristic recipes
and manual intervention common in existing methods.