* 1462343
* Collaborative Research: Battery Electrode Fabrication through Innovative Powder based Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Heng Pan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 03/31/2018
* USD 149,999.00

Lithium-ion batteries are one of the most widely used batteries due to their
high energy density, long cycle life, and low self-discharge. With the rapid
development of portable electronics, electrical vehicles, and grid systems,
lithium-ion batteries will be more widely employed. However, current slurry
based battery electrode manufacturing is costly, preventing wide applications of
lithium-ion batteries. The organic solvent typically used in the slurry can be
expensive. In addition, a time-consuming and energy-intensive drying procedure
has to be employed. The evaporated solvent also needs to be recovered in order
to prevent potential environmental pollution. Therefore, it is desirable to have
solvent-free battery manufacturing processes. This award supports fundamental
research to form the knowledge base for development of solvent-free battery
manufacturing processes. Results from this research will enhance the U.S.
competence in energy manufacturing industry and benefit the society by providing
energy storage solutions.

A major technical challenge in developing solvent-free battery manufacturing
processes is to homogeneously disperse battery materials including active
materials, conductive additives, and binder materials. This research aims to
provide the new knowledge needed to overcome this challenge: (1) interfacial
properties of the battery materials, (2) binder distribution characteristics
during battery powder mixing, and (3) molten binder wettability and spreading
kinetics on other materials during binder melting. The research team will
perform multi-scale simulations (molecular dynamics at nanometer scale, finite
difference modeling at micrometer scale, and discrete element modeling at
micrometer to millimeter scales) to predict interfacial properties, binder
spatial distribution after mixing, and molten binder spreading characteristics
and surface coverages. Simulation results will be verified by surface energy
measurements of dry powders and scanning electron microscopic observations of
binder distributions after the powder mixing and binder melting steps
respectively.