* 1462080
* Predicting the Lifetime of Polymer Pipes in Corrosive Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Susan Mantell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 04/30/2019
* USD 393,252.00

Low cost polymers are increasingly used for civil infrastructure applications
such as pipes for water and natural gas delivery, corrugated drainage pipes,
sanitation pipes, and geomembranes. In these applications, the combination of
mechanical loading and environmental conditions can accelerate degradation of
the polymer and lead to crack formation and propagation referred to as stress
corrosion cracking (SCC). The main feature of SCC is the evolution of multiple
small cracks with failure ultimately occurring when one of these cracks
propagates. The lifetime of polymer components can vary significantly due to the
randomness of mechanical and transport properties of polymer materials. In this
project, a numerical model will be developed that combines the fracture behavior
with the diffusion of the liquid environment and subsequent degradation of the
polymer. A series of experiments will be performed in which the mechanical
properties of the polymer are characterized as a function of polymer
degradation. The statistical variation in these properties is the cornerstone
for predicting the variability in polymer lifetime. This research will advance
our understanding of probabilistic SCC in polymers. In addition, it will provide
engineers a scientific method to design polymer pipes for a prescribed failure
risk, which will improve the structural reliability of pipes used for civil
infrastructure applications. The educational plan includes activities targeted
for a range of constituents at various levels of expertise: a high school camp
that utilizes a web-based tool for pipe design, webinars for polymer industry
professionals, and university courses for undergraduates and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As compared to existing approaches for design of polymer
components, which are primarily based on a deterministic framework, this
research is anchored by a probabilistic framework. By including the effects of
uncertainties in various material properties (i.e., mechanical properties,
chemical diffusivity and molecular weight), the model can capture the overall
stochastic response of polymers in a corrosive environment. This research will
lead to the following important results: 1) a stochastic chemo-mechanical model
for SCC in polymers that characterizes the interactions between the chemical
diffusion process, chemical-induced material degradation and crack propagation;
2) a methodology and experimental data to quantify the relationship between
degradation of mechanical properties and molecular weight; 3) model validation
through an experimental study of crack growth in a corrosive liquid environment;
and 4) a reliability-based design method for polymer pipes, which will allow
engineers to design pipes for a desirable lifetime at a tolerable failure risk.