* 1462204
* Collaborative Research: Computational Study of Low Volume Solder Interconnects for 3D Integrated Circuit Packaging
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Yongmei Jin, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 03/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Moore's Law, which predicts that the number of transistors in an integrated
circuit doubles approximately every two years, has been a major driver for the
US economy for decades. Unfortunately, technological and fundamental challenges
associated with continued device shrinking make the current rate of progress
unsustainable. Recently, 3D integrated circuit technology has emerged as a
leading approach to keep up with Moore's Law by stacking chips rather than by
shrinking device dimensions. To achieve 3D integration, new joining technologies
for interconnection and stacked bonding must be developed. Bonding by low volume
solder interconnects is specially promising due to their good electrical,
thermal, and mechanical properties. This collaborative research award supports
fundamental research to obtain the knowledge needed for the development of low
volume solder interconnects. Research results will not only help realize the
full potential of this new bonding technique in 3D integrated circuit packaging,
but also be used to improve joining methodologies important in the aerospace and
nuclear power industries and in power electronics and thermal management
applications. Moreover, the project will help establish an effective
collaboration between the two PIs who are both from underrepresented groups.

The small dimensions of low volume solder interconnects make it possible for the
solder joints to solidify isothermally through the formation of intermetallic
compounds at the expense of the liquid solders. This technique, also known as
Transient Liquid Phase Bonding, allows the formation of a joint at temperatures
lower than the expected operating conditions, minimizing damage to the
temperature-sensitive components of the circuits from overheating. However, the
small dimensions of low volume solder interconnects lead to large current
densities during operation. These large current densities induce large
electrical, thermal, and mechanical driving forces which give rise to complex
microstructural processes. This research aims to advance the fundamental
understanding of the complex microstructure processes in low volume solder
interconnects, in particular about the important microscopic mechanisms
governing processing-microstructure-property-performance relationships. The
research team will develop an integrated multi-physics phase field modeling and
perform systematic simulation studies of the microstructure formation and
evolution during processing, operation, and damage of low volume solder
interconnects. The simulations will be used to correlate macroscopic processing
parameters and operating conditions to microscopic phenomena involving
diffusion, current flow, heat transfer and stress concentration, and elucidate
the mechanisms of defect formation.