* 1462910
* GOALI: Modeling and Control for Manufacturing Intelligence with Cloud Computing and Storage
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Kira Barton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2020
* USD 299,997.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will
investigate using a paradigm shift in manufacturing systems operation using a
cloud-based framework to achieve higher quality, higher throughput, and lower
energy usage. An emerging industry trend is to store the large amount of data
produced on manufacturing plant floors in the cloud. This data includes
production targets, quality inspection results, machine faults, etc, but has the
potential to also include detailed energy usage information of each machine on
the plant floor as well as maintenance logs of every machine. In current
practice, this data is collected into dashboards that engineers can use to
understand the current state of the manufacturing system. Within this project,
we will use this data to automatically find relationships that exist between
quality, throughput, maintenance, and energy usage. These relationships can be
analyzed and leveraged to develop better production schedules, reducing the
overall cost of production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this goal,
modular hybrid models of the different components in the manufacturing system
will be developed. These hybrid models will include both the discrete-event
behavior of the components as well as their continuous-variable dynamics.
Leveraging the operational data produced on plant floors and pushed into cloud
storage, automatic methods will be developed to extract the parameters for these
models from real-time data streams. Finally, optimization functions will be
developed that can encode the tradeoffs between productivity, energy usage, and
maintenance, and the developed models will be used to solve for the optimal
production parameters. This research will transform the state of the art of
manufacturing operations, enabling a high degree of maintenance scheduling and
customization to meet the ever-increasing demands of manufacturing operators.
The generated knowledge on hybrid modeling and multi-objective system
optimization for manufacturing systems will lead to a new paradigm of
intelligent manufacturing through effective and efficient monitoring and control
with the cloud. Furthermore, this research will lay the foundation towards a
completely automated cloud-based manufacturing operation.