* 1462992
* A Mathematical-Experimental Strategy to Discern the Molecular Basis of "Successful Mucus"
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* M Forest, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 959,999.00

In human airways, the mucus barrier is the front line of defense whereas the
immune system is secondary.  "Successful mucus" efficiently traps invasive cargo
(pathogens and particulates) and continuously clears mucus and cargo from the
airways to the larynx where it is swallowed to the gut and chemically disarmed
before penetration of the mucus barrier, preventing exposure to cells or the
blood stream.  Many diseases and pathologies are now associated with
"unsuccessful mucus," from genetic diseases like cystic fibrosis to acquired
conditions such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).  Mucus has
become the miner's canary of lung health.  The experimental-mathematical
projects outlined in this research present a strategy to replace quality-of-life
metrics of lung disorders with rigorous, robust scientific metrics that
integrate novel experimental technique with the mathematics of data analytics,
model selection, and predictive computation.  These advances promise a new
standard for mucus biology, with the potential to transform clinical practice
from patient symptoms to preemptive monitoring and assessment of mucus transport
properties, to identification of likely sources of success and failure, and to
test impact and duration of therapeutics.  The education and training of
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars in the integration
of knowledge and techniques from biology, biophysics, applied mathematics,
statistics, and medicine contributes to the enrichment of all disciplines and
fields, and furthermore to the future generation of researchers and
practitioners in academia and the public and private sector. &lt;br/&gt;  
&lt;br/&gt;Mucus in every organ has a baseline composition (a spectrum of mucin
macromolecules, proteins, electrolytes, and water) that is reproducible in cell
cultures, and then a host of "living-induced" molecular species (pathogens and
by-products, immune response agents, DNA from dead cells, and substances from
environmental and lifestyle factors).  This molecular composition conveys to
healthy mucus the ability to impede the diffusion of species from nanometer to
micron size, and the ability to be activated (thereby cleared) down to pico-
Newton forces of single cilia.  All particles tracked via microscopy in mucus
diffuse "non-normally" and the statistics of their diffusion varies with
particle size and surface chemistry; all rheology data point to nonlinear
viscoelastic behavior that differs depending on the frequency, lengthscale, and
stress level of the propulsion mechanisms in the lung.  This striking capacity
of successful mucus to respond simultaneously yet differently to the diversity
of insults and to its clearance by cilia and air drag has confounded the science
of mucus biology.  Consequently, there has been no assessment standard of
transport properties for mucus, no conclusive test for successful mucus, no
understanding of what molecular species or tandem species determine mucus
success or failure in either transport property, and no rigorous basis to test
potential remedies to reinstate healthy transport properties.  In this project,
experimental techniques will be explored to decompose mucus with respect to its
molecular basis, with top-down deconstruction of clinical mucus into baseline
and living-induced components, and bottom-up reconstruction from a sterile cell
culture baseline superimposed with controlled living-induced components. 
Mathematical techniques will be developed to assess diffusive and viscoelastic
properties of physiological relevance over this entire mucus sample space,
including strategies to resolve open mathematical questions about anomalous
diffusion and nonlinear viscoelasticity.