* 1462749
* Poromechanics Beyond the Second Law of Thermodynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Martin Starzewski, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The entire field of continuum mechanics has been developed subject to the axiom
of the second law of thermodynamics. This axiom implies a non-negative rate of
irreversible entropy production. Yet, the results of contemporary physics have
shown that this law does not hold at very small spatial and/or temporal scales.
The fluctuation theorem instead describes entropy as a stochastic quantity that
is exponentially more likely to be positive than negative and, upon ensemble
averaging, leads to the conventional second law inequality. This theorem has
already replaced the second law in considerations of the rheological and thermal
responses of liquids. Consequently, the continuum models for fluid filled porous
media must be reformulated. The research outcomes would be significant both for
the fundamental understanding of geological, biological and man-made materials.
In particular, mechanistic description of the material responses will be
modified according to the microstructure and its characteristic length scales.
As a result, this research will provide new insight into the mechanics of highly
complex media such as gels, fluid-saturated rock systems, cardiovascular and
pulmonary tissues. The PI plans to offer short courses related to the mechanics
of random and fractal materials and structures, and will expand the delivery of
a high-school-level short course on fractals. Selected images and animations
obtained through the research will be integrated into outreach programs to
enrich the K-12 educational system. Research supported under this award seeks to
define a paradigm shift in continuum mechanics and, especially, poromechanics.
The research aims to answer the question how the consideration of the
fluctuation theorem may alter our understanding of the continuum mechanics of
porous media. A stochastic thermomechanics framework with internal variables
considering the fluctuation theorem in place of the second law axiom will be
formulated. The admission of random scatter in nanoscale systems, with possible
violations of the Clausius-Duhem inequality, will lead to a modification of
Darcy's law, of the poromechanical constitutive relations and of the heat
conduction relations. The new formulation would explicitly account for scale
dependence. The effective permeability and heat conduction moduli are expected
to turn out to be higher than as dictated by classical continuum theories. Next,
homogenized constitutive descriptions will be established based on a micropolar
theory for the use in random, and possibly fractal, fluid-saturated media. New
forms of field and differential equations will be derived and employed to derive
solutions of relevant initial-boundary value problems, thereby modifying the
conventional solutions of problems of continuum poromechanics.