* 1462060
* Optimization of Individualized Medical Treatment for Improved Population Health
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Brian Denton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 375,001.00

Chronic diseases are the leading cause of death in the United States, and
diabetes in particular is one of the major underlying causes of stroke, coronary
heart disease, kidney failure, and blindness. Despite extraordinary advances in
the development of medications for treating chronic diseases like diabetes there
are significant barriers to achieving their full benefits in practice. Existing
treatment guidelines are often "one-size-fits-all" and do not account for the
heterogeneous nature of patients. They are frequently focused on a single risk
factor, while many chronic diseases have multiple risk factors that interact in
a complex way. The goal of this project is to develop methods for measuring the
benefits and the costs of treatment guidelines for chronic diseases, such as
diabetes. Specifically, mathematical models will be created that can simulate
the progression of chronic diseases over a patient's lifetime. Moreover, new
algorithms will be designed that can be used to discover treatment guidelines
that are optimized to account for individual patient risk factors, uncertainty
health outcomes, and other factors influencing treatment
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formulation and validation of mathematical
models for chronic disease progression requires the use of very large data sets
with longitudinal population level data including laboratory, claims, and other
data that makeup the complete electronic health record for a patient. Model
parameter estimates are subject to unavoidable uncertainty as a result of
patient heterogeneity, missing data, and conflicting estimates from different
data sources. Additionally, complex interactions between disease risk factors,
treatment efficacy, and medication adherence give rise to new large-scale
optimization models that are difficult to solve. To address these challenges,
this project will (a) create and validate new stochastic models for robust
optimization of treatment guidelines that explicitly account for the
heterogeneous nature of patients and their variation in adherence behavior; (b)
analyze the mathematical structure of these models and develop methods for
computing optimal treatment policies; (c) develop ways to integrate patient
adherence behavior into treatment models; and (d) use insights from the optimal
policies obtained to develop fast, easy-to-implement, near optimal guidelines,
that account for individual patient preferences, and which can be implemented as
an aid to clinicians and policy makers to improve population health.