* 1462385
* Stochastic Optimization for Design under Uncertainty with Dependent Probability Measures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Sharif Rahman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2020
* USD 287,820.00

Many complex systems and engineering structures are plagued by uncertainties in
manufacturing processes and operating environments. Conventional design
approaches rely on heuristically derived safety factors and do not account
quantitatively for the statistical variation of a system response. In this
project, the principal investigator will conduct fundamental research on design
optimization of complex systems in the presence of statistically dependent
uncertainty. Novel methods will be developed to determine the best design
alternative considering that the system behavior is uncertain and driven by
dependent input variables. Potential engineering applications include ground
vehicle design for improved durability and crashworthiness, fatigue- and
fracture-resistant design for civil and aerospace applications, and reliable
design of microelectronic packaging under harsh environments. Beyond
engineering, the results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy and
society through potential application in areas such as energy, finance,
management, scheduling, and transportation and logistics, where optimization
under uncertainty plays a vital role. This research is multi-disciplinary,
encompassing several disciplines, including engineering, computer science,
mathematics, and statistics. It will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to build a
solid mathematical foundation, devise efficient numerical algorithms, and
develop practical tools for design optimization subject to uncertainty
characterized by dependent probability distributions. The effort will involve
(1) a new theoretical development of the generalized polynomial dimensional
decomposition method for a high-dimensional stochastic response; (2) new
formulae and scalable algorithms for calculating the statistical moments and
reliability, followed by design sensitivity analysis; and (3) new reliability-
based and robust optimization algorithms for shape and topology designs. Due to
innovative calculation of the expansion coefficients, the generalized
decomposition method will be efficiently implemented regardless of the size of
the stochastic design problem. The innovative formulation of the statistical
moment and reliability analyses and design sensitivities, which requires a
single or at most a few stochastic simulations for all possible designs, will
markedly accelerate the optimization process, potentially producing breakthrough
solutions to stochastic design problems.