* 1462739
* Mechanotransduction from Cells to Tissues: Mechanisms and Physiological Significance
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Deborah Leckband, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2020
* USD 449,919.00

Mechanical cues are essential for life. They determine how tissues organize in
embryos, and they guide tissue regeneration and even plant growth. Cells use
proteins to connect to each other, and also to sense the forces between them.
Discovering how the cells convert forces on the connecting proteins into
chemical signals is the goal of this research. The importance of this work is to
build an understanding of how mechanical inputs at the cell level control the
tissue physiology, shape, size and strength. At the cell level, the research
will establish how the networks of adhesion proteins that connect between the
cells modify the mechanical properties of the cells. The next question to answer
is how the cell level changes mechanically change the tissue level mechanical
properties. As part of this project, the research investigators will work with
local high school and middle school girls and underrepresented minorities to
teach how science can be an interesting career.

The broad goals of this program are to establish how mechano-sensitive adhesion
proteins integrate mechanical cues to regulate cell mechanics, the propagation
of mechanical information through tissues, and the regulation of tissue
functions. Under Aim 1, combined magnetic twisting cytometry and traction force
microscopy will enable us to identify biochemical and mechanical mechanisms
integrating E-cadherin force transduction signaling to integrin activation at
the basal plane and increased cell contractility. Aim 2 of this proposal uses
biochemical perturbations and dynamic fluorescence imaging, in conjunction with
mechanical perturbations, to establish mechanisms by which force transduction
signals are propagated across cell boundaries to the surrounding tissue. In Aim
3, we then demonstrate the physiological consequences of altered tissue
mechanics on the permeability of epithelial tissues. The latter studies will
investigate the impact on hydraulic pressure and tissue mechanics on the
regulation of macromolecules flux across epithelial tissue. The intellectual
significance of this work will be the identification of multiscale, mechano-
transduction mechanisms that are essential for establishing comprehensive,
predictive models of mechanobiology.