* 1462622
* Computationally-Guided Manufacturing of Nanowires and Nanowire Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Xianfan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2019
* USD 198,828.00

Semiconductor nanowires have unique properties that make them prominent
candidates for the next generation high-performance electronic devices, chemical
and biological sensors, solar cells, and photonics devices that can potentially
impact every industrial sector. However, current technologies for producing
nanowires are not suitable for commercial scale manufacturing. Because nanowires
are often produced as an entangled mesh, complicated fabrication procedures are
required to select, position, and align nanowires in placement required for
making devices. This award supports research to investigate a novel
semiconductor nanowire manufacturing technology that overcomes the above-
mentioned obstacles. The research team will develop a unique and first of its
kind technology for manufacturing nanowires with controlled dimension,
composition, orientation, placement, property, and functionality necessary for
large scale manufacturing of nanowire devices. The project will involve multiple
disciplines including nanomanufacturing, computational modeling of materials
synthesis, high precision control, and manufacturing system integration. As
nanowire devices will find a broad range of applications in energy, healthcare,
consumer electronics, and defense, results from this research will benefit the
U.S. economy and society. In addition, the project will also help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research, increase impact on
education, and increase public awareness of nanoscience and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enabling technology of the project is a
laser-induced chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method recently developed at
Purdue University. In this process, a laser beam is incident on a substrate,
above which precursor gases such as silane and germane are heated and
dissociated. Moving the substrate under computer control allows laser-guided
growth of semiconductor nanowires with ultrahigh precision. The key to producing
nanowires with dimensions of a few tens of nanometers is to utilize the
interference effect between the incident laser beam and the surface scattered
laser radiation. The research team will focus on computationally-guided
manufacturing. It will generate computational models of the nanowire
manufacturing process, and integrate them with advanced metrology tools, and
feedback control in to a single manufacturing platform. As a result, this
research will realize real-time control of the nanowire dimensions, properties,
placements, and properties that is necessary for manufacturing nanowire devices
at large scale.