* 1462502
* EAGER-DynamicData: Principled and Scalable Probabilistic Frameworks for Dynamic Multi-modal Data
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Lawrence Carin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

Emergence of the Big Data phenomenon has given rise to data collections that are
massive, highly heterogeneous and multi-modal, dynamically evolving, as well as
incomplete, noisy and imprecise. These characteristics are becoming increasingly
prevalent in data from a diverse range of domains, such as robotics, cognitive
neuroscience, sensor generated data (e.g., in geoscience and remote sensing),
and the dynamically evolving data on the web. The heterogeneity, complexity,
dynamic evolution, and the often real-time processing requirements, call for
methods that are both statistically rigorous as well as computationally
scalable. Moreover, performing fast feature-extraction and/or predictions at
*test time* is another key requirement, especially in problems involving dynamic
data arriving at high speeds. This project will innovate on scalable statistical
methods for learning from such massive dynamic multi-modal data, with a focus on
designing novel probabilistic models for multi-layer latent feature extraction
for such data. These multi-layer latent feature representations of the data will
help capture the underlying dynamics and allow reconciling the data
heterogeneity arising due to diverse data types and widely differing spatial and
temporal resolutions across the different modalities, while also being useful
for a wide range of fundamental data analysis tasks, such as classification,
clustering, and predicting missing data. At the same time, the focus will also
be on developing methods that are efficient at test time, so that fast feature
extraction and predictions can be made in real time, to make these methods
readily applicable to dynamic streaming data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EArly
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project endeavors to move beyond existing
ad hoc approaches currently used for these problems, and develop a
probabilistically grounded, statistically rigorous, and computationally scalable
framework, based on Bayesian and nonparametric Bayesian modeling. Taking a
Bayesian generative modeling approach will naturally enable modeling the dynamic
behavior of the data and seamlessly integrate diverse types of data, while
handling issues such as missingness, noise and the imprecise nature of the data.
In addition, the nonparametric Bayesian treatment will provide the much-needed
modeling flexibility and address many of the limitations of the existing Deep
Learning models, e.g., by doing away with the need of extensive hand-tuning,
incorporating rich prior knowledge about the model parameters, and allowing a
natural sharing of statistical strength across the multiple data modalities. To
handle the associated computational challenges, the framework will provide novel
inference machinery in form of online Bayesian inference methods that will
naturally handle dynamic, real-time data, and parallel and distributed Bayesian
inference methods to handle massive multi-modal data that are too large for the
capacity (storage and/or computational) of a single computing node. Furthermore,
due to its inherent ability of quantifying model uncertainty, the proposed
Bayesian framework will naturally facilitate a dynamic integration between model
computation (inference) and data acquisition, and help design informed data
acquisition (i.e., "active" sensing) methods in the context of dynamic multi-
modal data. An overarching goal of this project is to also help synergize two
important research directions in machine learning - nonparametric Bayesian
methods and Deep Learning methods. By designing scalable nonparametric Bayesian
solutions to the type of problems Deep Learning methods have been applied for,
the project will convince the skeptics of Deep Learning methods to adopt these
methods more openly. At the same time, the compelling range of problems and
applications Deep Learning are being used for, will broaden the appeal of
nonparametric Bayesian methods from a practical sense. We expect this synergy
between these two areas will significantly advance the state-of-the-art in both
areas.