* 1462342
* EAGER-DynamicData: Dynamic Data-Driven Avionics Systems for Flight Decision Support in Emergency Conditions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Carlos Varela, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Dynamic Data Driven Avionics Systems (DDDAS) have the potential to endow
aircraft with the ability to dynamically use sensor data to detect failure
conditions and accurately simulate flight plans in order to support pilot
decisions in emergency scenarios. PI Varela will investigate how to dynamically
detect data errors and equipment failures by matching measured data to pre-
computed error signatures and damage performance profiles. Once a failure type
is detected, redundant data will be used to correct for instrument errors when
possible and to increase the fidelity of an onboard self flight simulator. This
research will enable virtual failure enhanced flight simulations to predict the
outcome of different flight plans before they are executed. DDDAS will thus
support better-informed decision making for pilots in emergency conditions and
it will also be applicable to autonomous unmanned air and space vehicles.
Furthermore, new mathematical techniques and associated software for data
streaming analytics will likely be applicable to other domains, including health
monitoring and spacesuit technologies. The PI intends to make all developed
programming technology, run-time middleware, and flight data available to the
community in open-source form.

This research project will investigate methodologies and develop new techniques
in several fundamental research directions as they pertain to the proposed DDDAS
model: (1) This project will enhance dataflow concurrent programming to make it
fault-cognizant and fault-tolerant. In particular, this work will extend the
unbound and bound states of dataflow variables with a new dataflow variable
state: correlated uncertainly bound. This enhancement will allow software
developers to explicitly model distributed redundant data streams to be able to
recognize and tolerate failures with quantified uncertainty. The project will
also study the impact of this enhancement on the heterogeneity and asynchrony
tolerance already afforded by the dataflow concurrent programming model. (2)
This project will investigate extensions to logic programming to support
stochastic reasoning. In particular, the PI will create language extensions to
standard Horn clause-based knowledge bases to incorporate probabilities.
Additional extensions will specifically support spatial and temporal data
streams. Furthermore, the PI will create incremental reasoning algorithms to be
able to recompute queries efficiently as applications dynamically receive new
data. (3) Finally, this project will investigate cloud-based techniques for
scalable data analytics. The PI will explore the use of hybrid (private and
public) clouds for online (real-time) data analytics as well as for offline data
storage and processing. Elasticity and scalability of data streaming, storage,
and processing techniques on hybrid clouds will enable multi-criteria
optimization. Policies will include optimizing for analytics performance,
aircraft-to-cloud communication, and/or cost. &#8232;The DDDAS model will be
applied to flight decision support systems in emergency conditions. Specific
activities will include: i) creating multi-fidelity models and incremental
algorithms that will allow DDDAS to inject data from aircraft sensors
dynamically, ii) formalizing the notion of aircraft damage/failure profiles, and
iii) evaluating the new mathematical and computational techniques with actual
flight accident data.