* 1462880
* Collaborative Research: A Micro-empiric Examination of the Economic Effects from Natural Disasters in Dense Urbanized Areas: The Case of Hurricane Sandy and New York City
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ingrid Ellen, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2019
* USD 263,121.00

Dense urbanized areas are places where businesses thrive, but they are also
increasingly vulnerable to natural disasters. This project aims to quantify the
effect of natural disasters, and specifically Hurricane Sandy, on the resilience
and recovery of business establishments in a large and dense urban center, New
York City. The findings will inform financial planning and risk-assessment
strategies for businesses, property owners, and government officials so that
they can be better prepared against the threats of natural disasters and execute
more effective recovery processes. The findings from this study will enable
governments to better understand the economic costs of disasters, identify the
most vulnerable businesses, and help bolster the resilience of those vulnerable
businesses and enable them to recover more rapidly in the face of extreme
events. The results will also help local governments design and target more
effective programs to support urban businesses and neighborhoods after disaster
events. Overall, the findings will not only help to improve the viability of
individual businesses and properties damaged by disasters, but also to enhance
the overall economic health of coastal cities. The PIs will create a rich
dataset on business activity, properties, neighborhoods and storm damage and use
it to analyze the nature and degree of post-disaster resilience for businesses
in New York City. They will examine whether or not resilience varies depending
on the type and size of the business, the characteristics of the local
neighborhood and the severity of the disaster's damage. They will use various
analytical techniques and research designs to better identify the direct impact
of a natural disaster on the nature and duration of a business' recovery and
resilience. They will also test to see if government aid either facilitates or
hinders the business' recovery by looking at the case of Business Recovery Zones
in New York City.