* 1462289
* Quantification and Analysis of the Decisions of Economically and Environmentally Informed Travelers in Urban Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Huaizhu Gao, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 375,000.00

Aiming at promoting optimal use of transportation infrastructure, the purpose of
this project is to quantify and analyze the effects of information provision
about energy and environmental costs on travel demand. In addition, this project
will identify the most effective instruments to provide information to the
travelers. A specific goal of this project is to investigate the mechanisms that
travelers use to gather and process information about the actual environmental
and energy costs of transportation. These mechanisms will be then used to
produce estimates of the willingness to pay of commuters for reducing their
travel footprint and to identify the best way of communicating environmental
information. An additional goal is to measure the potential efficiency gains in
the use of transportation infrastructure when commuters receive information
about the actual costs of travel. Finally, the value of the consideration of
complete costs for strategic and tactical planning of urban sustainability will
be analyzed in a practical setting. More specifically, the transportation-
planning model of New York City will be extended to consider economically and
environmentally informed travelers. Educational and outreach efforts will
include construction of a free community-based application with a web-based
version that will provide customized emission information and tips to educate
travelers on how to act to reduce their travel footprint. Information and
interaction sessions with metropolitan planning organizations will be organized
to share the policy results and tools that will come out from this study.

One of the main research tasks of this project is the derivation of an
econometric approach for travel mode and route choice models to elucidate the
behavioral effects of generalized cost information -including energy consumption
and emissions. An expected contribution of the econometric approach is the
formulation of discrete choice experiments with treatments in the definition of
the alternative attributes. The choice situations in this case will include
differing treatments on how information about emissions is presented (or
omitted), and controlled mechanisms for offsetting those emissions. The
econometric approach will result in the estimation of the economic valuation of
transportation externalities. Using a semi-parametric formulation, the economic
valuation estimates will allow for heterogeneous travelers without imposing
restrictive assumptions about how environmental preferences vary across the
population. These estimates will be then integrated into the analysis of
transportation network equilibrium, and into the design of advanced
transportation information systems that are dynamic, consider multiple
attributes, and constantly update the information being provided. Regarding
network models, this project will analyze consideration of a stochastic feature
in link cost estimation rather than in route choice, with the aim of updating
current planning models of major metropolitan areas without the need for
computationally expensive changes.