* 1462409
* EAGER-Dynamic Data: A New Scalable Paradigm for Optimal Resource Allocation in Dynamic Data Systems via Multi-Scale and Multi-Fidelity Simulation and Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Chun-Hung Chen, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,364.00

The fundamental objective of ubiquitous sensing and control in engineered and
natural systems is to understand, analyze, and optimize operational conditions
of these systems. Although the classical feedback control theories lay a solid
foundation to enable meeting operating goals and constraints based on the
assessed system states, the traditional control paradigm has limited
applicability to the modern dynamic big data and complex systems. The
fundamental challenge is the efficiency of processing, fusing, and computing of
data from multiple heterogeneous and distributed sources to arrive at a timely
and optimal decision. This project will develop innovative approaches to enable
seamlessly and efficiently integrating unprecedented dynamic interactions of
multiple entities multimodal and multi-fidelity data collection activities, and
the computing of systems operational conditions at different levels and scales.
The technological developments will enable the evaluation of a very large
decision space for multiple entities in the system in an efficient and robust
manner, and scale up to the big data environment brought forth by ubiquitous
sensing. The research outcome has a potential to significantly advance the state
of the art in dynamic data system, simulation, and optimization research,
potentially opening a new avenue to improve the execution of a large variety of
application systems. The research, while generic and applicable to other dynamic
data engineered systems, is specifically motivated by the big data problem in
semiconductor industry, a crucial sector of the US and world economy. Research
findings will be disseminated through technical publications and presentations
as well as classroom teaching where a new multi-disciplinary course will be
developed at GMU and offered to a wide-range of students.

The objective of this exploratory research is to develop a new scalable
computational paradigm for real-time optimal resource allocation in dynamic data
systems. The transformative aspect of this research is the recognition that the
successful execution of a dynamic data system relies on real-time global
situational awareness and the capability to translate awareness into (near)
optimal resource allocation decisions in a timely manner. The fundamental
technical breakthrough is a new multi-scale and multi-fidelity simulation and
optimization framework that integrates data collection and decision making at
multiple scales and multiple fidelity levels in an adaptive, efficient, and
robust manner. Multi-scale simulation and optimization allows identifying
promising local scale resource allocation decision using localized data. Local
scale resource allocation decisions are then evaluated by global scale multi-
fidelity simulation and optimization in search of the optimal system-wide
decision. Such an integrated multi-scale and multi-fidelity paradigm exploits
the responsiveness at local scale and the global situational awareness at the
global scale, and thus has the potential to attain both efficiency and
robustness in the real-time decision making process. Through efficient and
scalable fusion of multi-modal and multi-fidelity data, distributed entities in
the system monitor the operating conditions of the dynamic data system and
autonomously control the instrumentation and data collection process in response
to perturbations in system operating conditions. With value of information, the
decision model enables joint evaluation of data collection, computing, and
resource allocation decisions to dynamically schedule and prioritize tasks that
would contribute most to the successful execution of dynamic data systems.