* 1462067
* FRG:  Collaborative Research:Extreme Value Theory for Spatially Indexed Functional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Piotr Kokoszka, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 209,075.00

This project focuses on the development of statistical tools to model the
spatial and temporal structure of environmental and climate extreme events. Most
climate and environmental data sets can be viewed as collections of curves, one
curve per year, available at several locations within a region. For example,
temperature at a specific location has an annual pattern. The shapes of such
annual curves change from year to year, and from location to location. Extreme
departures from a typical pattern over a sizeable region can impact agricultural
production and public health. The economic impacts are considerable,
particularly, if they occur at unexpected times and locations. An unusual timing
of a heat wave over a large area may cause significant economic damage due to
crop failure and forest fires, and also affect the level of preparedness of
public health services. Similarly, long spells of cold, storm-free winter time
weather often lead to an increase in particulate pollution levels in densely
populated mountain valleys. It is important that public officials are well-
informed about the possible range and impact of such extreme events. This
project will contribute toward a rigorous and objective understanding of the
risks involved, and provide quantitative tools for researchers and decision
makers in the fields of agriculture, public health, actuarial science,
climatology and ecology.

The project seeks to develop a statistical framework for a quantitative
assessment of possible extremal departures from the usual annual pattern over a
region, i.e. departures of the form that have not been observed in historical
records, but can occur with a positive probability. The primary focus of the
project is the creation of a mathematical framework, and implementation through
the development of statistical software. Building on recent advances in
functional data analysis, extreme value theory and spatio-temporal statistics,
methodology for modeling the extremal distributions of curves observed at
spatial locations will be developed. Extreme curves will be determined by
functionals defined on a function space in which the curves live. The work will
be guided and validated by the analysis of several historical, derived, and
computer data sets. Exploratory analysis will reveal the most prominent
properties of extremal shapes. This will be followed by model building and the
development of asymptotic theory needed to evaluate probabilities of events not
previously observed. The models will reveal extremal features of the spatially
indexed functional data that are not apparent from the exploratory analysis.
Procedures for the construction of confidence regions, where extremal departures
may occur with prescribed probability, will be obtained. Exploratory and
inferential tools for the assessment of trends in the extremal shapes and
regions over which they occur will also be derived.