* 1462453
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Topology Optimization for Additively Manufactured Metal Castings
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* James Guest, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 05/31/2018
* USD 234,929.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) Program
collaborative research award will develop an integrated design-manufacture
framework by coupling topology optimization design methods with additive
manufacturing processes. Topology optimization is a systematic, computational
tool for designing high performance devices and components. Topology-optimized
designs, however, are often geometrically complex and thus difficult, if not
impossible, to fabricate with traditional manufacturing processes. Additive
manufacturing is arising as a potential means for overcoming this obstacle, as
its layer-wise fabrication approach enables the creation of geometrically
complex components without negatively affecting production cost or throughput.
However, despite this natural synergy, additive manufacturing and topology
optimization approaches have not yet been integrated into a comprehensive
design-manufacture framework. Without this integration, topology-optimized
designs may be incompatible with additive manufacturing and require tedious and
potentially deleterious post-process alterations to conform to manufacturing
restrictions. The primary goal of this research is thus to optimize parts for
as-built conditions by (i) identifying, characterizing, and understanding the
aspects of an additive manufacturing process that impose constraints on part
geometry and (ii) advancing topology optimization methods to incorporate these
constraints. Thus the work will substantially improve both the efficiency of the
engineering design process and the efficacy of the resultant engineered
artifacts. The integrated design-manufacture optimization capability will be of
considerable benefit to a broad range of industries, including automotive,
agricultural, and aerospace where (for example) the realization of lightweight
large-scale components could lead to substantial energy savings. The
multidisciplinary research team will also create integrated educational modules
and provide research opportunities for underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As manufacturing constraints are specific to each
additive manufacturing process, the research team will focus on designing
components to be manufactured via the 3D sand printing process in which metal
parts are made by casting molten metal into 3D printed sand molds. The team will
identify, characterize, and quantify the aspects of this additive manufacturing
and metal casting process chain that impose constraints on component geometry
and mathematically incorporate these constraints into the topology optimization
method. The topology optimization approach will have roots in projection-based
algorithms where manufacturing design variables are coupled to the physical and
analysis spaces to naturally achieve manufacturability. Maintaining rigor in the
design framework will facilitate extension to other&amp;#8232;materials and
additive manufacturing processes. The team will design, fabricate, and
experimentally test an engineered component for a case-study (provided by the
industrial partner) to validate the developed design-manufacture framework.