* 1462352
* Collaborative Research: EAGER-DynamicData: Probabilistic Analysis of Dynamic X-ray Diffraction Data: Toward Validated Computational Models for Polycrystalline Plasticity
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Armand Beaudoin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

The past two decades have witnessed the development of accurate and efficient
computational methods for a wide range of physical processes and the transition
of these models into regularly used tools for product design and development
within all sectors of the US economy. One important exception to this trend is
in the field of material science where progress in creating new classes of
materials and advancing the use of existing systems is hampered by the lack of
validated computational models. Of particular interest in this proposal are
structural polycrystalline metals, of central importance in the automotive,
aircraft, and energy industries, where the processes of fatigue and fracture
pose significant modeling and computational challenges. To resolve these issues,
dynamic high-energy X-ray diffraction (HEXD) experiments have recently come on
line that are capable of probing the internal evolution of samples of these
materials in real time as they are subject to processing or service conditions.
The resulting data sets are both large (up to 10Tb for a single experiment) and
complex thereby complicating their analysis and integration within the material
design process. Even with extensive human interaction, state-of-the-art
computational tools can extract only a tiny fraction of the full information
contained in these data sets. Realizing the potential offered by these data and
models requires fundamentally new Big Data-type of computational methods. The
work in this project is aimed at developing such a tool set. Of specific concern
in this project are the use and extension of sophisticated, probabilistic, video
processing methods as the basis for addressing a pressing problem in the
analysis of dynamic HEXD data. The physics of X-ray diffraction from
polycrystalline samples gives rise to data sets comprised of temporally evolving
collections of localized structures, referred to as "spots," in a three-
dimensional data space. Use of these data in conjunction with computational
plasticity codes requires that these spots be associated with individual grains
in the polycrystal and that these sets of evolving structures be tracked over
time. To date, the only tools for addressing this indexing problem are static in
nature and function best for cases where the material sample is in a pristine
state. Similarities between this dynamic indexing problem and the problem of
identifying and tracking objects moving in a video scene motivate the adaptation
and further development of a multi-hypothesis tracking approach developed by the
PI team to the analysis of HEXD data. The method is based on the construction of
a conditional random field over a large set of hypotheses capturing ways in
which spots can be associated with one. Estimation of the optimal tracks and
association is carried out using efficient graph cut methods making the overall
approach well suited to near real time implementation. The existing work in this
field will be extended through the construction of dynamic models for the
evolution of features associated with the spots (e.g., centroid location, low
order moments) based on existing plasticity codes and incorporation of these
models into the random field to achieve a multiple model, multi-hypothesis
tracking approach for dynamic HEXD data.