* 1462247
* EAGER-DynamicData: Transforming Wildfire Detection and Prediction using New and Underused Sensor and Data Sources Integrated with Modeling
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Janice Coen, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

Wildland fires are a costly natural hazard. Newer modeling systems have combined
numerical weather prediction models with the traditional tools used to model
fire behavior, making them more capable of realistically modeling how fires
unfold, however, applying them to accurately anticipate a fire?s growth is a
difficult forecasting challenge. The principal challenges are that errors
accumulate as the accuracy of weather forecasts decreases with time and that
some processes cannot be anticipated by the model such as the lofting of burning
embers ahead of the fire (potentially starting new fires) and firefighting. The
team?s recent work has combined the&lt;br/&gt;Coupled Atmosphere-Wildland Fire
Environment (CAWFETM) weather?fire behavior modeling system with satellite-based
fire detection data from the Visible and Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite
(VIIRS) instrument to ignite fires already in progress, allowing an accurate
forecast of fire growth for the next 12-24 hours; sequences of these simulations
can maintain a reasonable forecast of fire growth from the time the satellite
detects it until it is extinguished. The remaining challenges limiting the
forecast skill are common to traditional approaches to modeling complex,
nonlinear natural systems and include accumulating error and optimally
exploiting all available data sources. The team will investigate how more
tightly integrating new and underused sensor and data sources with the modeling
could potentially transform both wildfire detection and prediction. Advances
will be integrated into the team?s work transitioning the system into
operations, benefiting society with earlier wildfire detection, faster response,
and better fire forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to develop
innovative Dynamic Data System techniques that improve wildfire detection and
growth forecasting. The work will address three objectives, 1) develop and apply
algorithms (steered by other data) to distill new and existing (but
underutilized) sources of data on wildfire detection and mapping, 2) develop and
apply algorithms to integrate asynchronous&lt;br/&gt;data on wildfire detection
and monitoring with coupled weather?wildland fire models, and 3) measure the
improvement in wildfire detection time and forecasted fire growth. The methods
include creating an adaptive control system for initiating forecasts based on
the arrival of new data; allowing sensors to inform algorithms where to look in
other underutilized datasets; creating&lt;br/&gt;approaches for intelligent,
iterative processing of large datasets; and using model forecasts to drive these
intelligent searches. The techniques could have broad application across other
nonlinear systems that are currently done in a traditional manner with rigorous
scheduling of routine, repeated modeling relying on fixed detection algorithms
and regular, periodic input data&lt;br/&gt;arrival.