* 1462231
* Creep Deformation in Shale at Submicron Scale
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Ronaldo Borja, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 354,810.00

Shale is a fine-grained sedimentary rock consisting of a mixture of clay,
quartz, feldspar, pyrite, carbonate, and organic materials forming a highly
heterogeneous nanocomposite. As a seal rock, shale has been used to contain
toxic, long-lived chemical and radioactive waste products in the ground. In
fact, crystalline rocks and thick shale sequences have long been considered as
prime storage sites because of the shale's ability to resist fracture. The
mechanical properties of shale depend on the properties of its basic
constituents, including those of clay particles and organic inclusions, as well
as the porosity of the mixture. Due in large part to its clay and organic
content, shale exhibits significant creep deformation that can create subsidence
issues on a regional scale, as well as alter its effectiveness as a seal for
toxic waste products that must be contained for thousands of years. This award
supports fundamental research to investigate the creep deformation behavior of
shale at the nanometer scale. Investigation into the mechanical properties of
this heterogeneous material provides insight into the fundamental processes
governing creep at a scale critical for its function as a seal, as well as
allows interpretation of the creep phenomena at larger scales. The research
involves several disciplines including materials science, biomechanics, and
other scientific disciplines concerned with the studies of nanoporous materials.
It supports a female doctoral student who will help broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project investigates the creep properties of shale at nanometer scale using a
combination of laboratory testing and numerical modeling. Experiments include
nanoindentation testing to determine basic mechanical properties of the shale
constituents, and imaging of the pore structure with nanometer-scale resolution
using full-field Transmission X-Ray Microscopy (TXM), a scarce resource
available at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource within the SLAC
National Accelerator Laboratory. Numerical modeling includes a novel formulation
of mixture theory for solid-solid mixture of softer matter and harder matter,
reflecting a realistic physical representation of the heterogeneous structure of
shale at submicron scale. Interaction between these two matters, which possess
starkly different stiffness and creep properties, could potentially shed light
onto the nature by which micro-cracks form and propagate through a heterogeneous
nanocomposite. From a modeling standpoint, mixture theory is used for the first
time to delineate a solid-solid mixture of softer matter and harder matter at
the nanometer scale.