* 1462397
* EAGER- DynamicData: Novel Approaches for Optimization, Control, and Learning in Distributed Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Wotao Yin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Recent advances in sensor and robotics technology have led to large networks of
coordinated mobile platforms that can perform automatic sensing, mapping,
learning, and control tasks. While the remote tasks can be controlled by the
ground center via long-range communication links, the links are expensive and
suffer long delays. This project develops computational methods that will
significant improve the ability for the remote agents to coordinate locally with
one another for tasks such as recognize and navigate around obstacles,
reconstruct signals, and learn new control policies from a large amount of
multi-modal sensor data, all done with little or no communication to a center.
The proposed approach is radically different from the current state of the art.
It also includes educational components such as courses, seminars, and
initiatives for under-represented minority and women.

The proposed work is a set of novel algorithms for a variety of computing
problems in multi-agent networks, for problems involving extremely large-scale
distributed datasets and high complexity objectives, and with greater accuracy
at rates that are provably faster than existing methods. Very promising
preliminary results have been obtained. The proposed project includes (a) a new
approach to integrate multi-agent coordination with problems arising in
optimization, game theory, control, and learning, into systems of equations,
inclusions, or variational inequalities; (b) novel operator splitting methods
that lead to decentralized numerical solutions of these systems, which scale to
new levels of size, complexity, and diversity; (c) stochastic approximation
techniques to deal with the imminent "distributed data deluge", along with
accelerations techniques based on variance reduction, importance sampling, and
asynchronous parallelization; and (d) a set of open-source software products for
optimization, control, and learning problems with dynamic and large-scale data,
along with a comprehensive evaluation plan. The contributions of the project is
a unified framework in parts (a) and (b) above, which enable the decentralized
numerical solutions at new levels of speed, complexity, diversity, and
resilience. In order to achieve the goals, substantial resources will be devoted
to both mathematical research and engineering challenges.