* 1462916
* Nanomanufacturing of Biopolymer Nanofiber Hierarchical Assemblies
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Amrinder Nain, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2019
* USD 308,000.00

Immediate cellular environment, commonly referred to as the extracellular
matrix, consists of micro/nanofibers (diameter: microns to sub-100 nanometers)
and serves as a scaffold upon which most cells in the body attach and receive
mechanical and chemical cues. An increased awareness of the role of alignment in
extracellular matrix-cell interactions and the role of biophysical cues in
development and disease models including cancer has necessitated the development
of fiber manufacturing technologies mimicking the native environments for in
vivo translational and in vitro cell behavior studies. Electrospinning is the
most commonly used manufacturing method to fabricate nanofibers. However, it
still lacks precise control on fiber diameter, spacing and orientation. This
award utilizes a non-electrospinning fiber manufacturing platform to architect
precise biophysical environments for cell studies through improved spinnability
of biopolymers with control on fiber diameter, spacing and orientation in
multiple layers. The resulting constructs can be instrumental in developing
implantable scaffolds for tissue engineering, and single cell diagnostic
platforms. Therefore, results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy
and society. This multidisciplinary research involves elements from disciplines
such as manufacturing, polymer physics, biology, mechanics and mechanical
engineering. The award will help broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering research and positively impact engineering education at
both undergraduate and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics of
polymer fiber formation at the nanoscale involves a delicate balance between
solution rheology and applied external forces, which makes nanomanufacturing and
hierarchical assembly of nanofibers extremely challenging. To augment our
capabilities in fiber manufacturing, a non-electrospinning nanofiber
manufacturing platform will be used to study fiber spinnability in this work.
Due to elimination of electric source in the manufacturing process, the platform
will provide superior control on fiber diameter, orientation, spacing and
assembly, particularly in multiple layers. Using poly (lactic-co-glycolide acid)
and fibrinogen as model polymer systems, this project will develop fiber
spinnability scaling laws representing fiber diameter design space spanning a
wide range of solution rheologies and processing parameters. Furthermore,
mechanical tensile testing of single fibers using atomic force microscopy at
different strain rates will provide the fiber probability failure Weibull
distributions in the manufacturing process. This research will fill the
knowledge gap on the spinnability of biopolymers and for the first time provide
the ability to manufacture custom architectures representing gradients in
biophysical cues. The overall research will thus provide a roadmap to design and
build scaffolds of biopolymers with improved quality, scalability and
repeatability.