* 1462267
* Construction of Single Molecule Nanostructures by Self-Assembly and Fixation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Timothy Scott, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The potential for strands of DNA to spontaneously assemble into branched
nanostructures was first described in 1982; however, although DNA-based
fabrication has seen extraordinary advances over the intervening thirty years,
the resultant structures are relatively weak, reducing its versatility as a
nanoscale manufacturing approach. Additionally, the construction of highly
complex structures requires multiple, sequential fabrication steps, requiring
periodic stabilization of the incomplete structure. This award supports an
investigation into the fabrication of single molecule nanostructures that are
progressively built up from small molecular components to generate complex,
multi-dimensional nanostructures with excellent thermal, chemical, and
mechanical stability. This project will provide the capability to fabricate
self-assembled, nanoscale devices that remain stable under harsh environments
where weaker structures would fail. Owing to the multi-disciplinary nature of
this project, the student participants will be trained to identify questions in
organic and polymer chemistry, and in reaction kinetics and thermodynamics, and
design and carry out the experiments necessary to answer those questions. The
students will have a broad skill set for tackling emerging research areas and
will be effective at communicating with researchers from different disciplines.
Additionally, this project will assist the recruitment, education, and
development of the next generation of scientists through outreach to under-
represented demographics, widening the pool of researcher talent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, reversible, pH- and temperature-
sensitive reactions, specifically amine/aldehyde condensation and
furan/maleimide Diels-Alder cycloaddition reactions, will be employed as dynamic
covalent "base pairs". In an approach mimicking the self-assembly commonly
observed in complementary DNA strands, the assembly of complementary strands of
peptoid- and hybrid peptoid/peptide-based dynamic covalent oligomers, fabricated
using solid phase synthesis, will be performed and the hybridization selectivity
of the double-stranded assemblies will be characterized. Fixation reactions, in
conjunction with the base pairs that dimerize under orthogonal reaction
conditions, will be employed, allowing for multiple assembly steps to be
performed without disruption of the emergent nanostructure. Finally, through
careful consideration of their residue sequence, the dynamic covalent-mediated
assembly of oligomers into branched nanostructures will be demonstrated. The
successful completion of this work will yield both the understanding and
capability to fabricate arbitrary, robust nanostructures using dynamic covalent-
mediated assembly, an important new direction in nanomanufacturing.