* 1462555
* Leg Mechanics for Dynamic Locomotion
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Jonathan Hurst, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 426,901.00

This research moves towards walking and running robots that will meet and exceed
the agility, efficiency, and robustness of human walking and running.
Specifically, the research will address fundamental principles behind the
physical design of legs, including describing configurations of joints, springs,
and other components to best enable legged locomotion. This work falls within a
broad, interdisciplinary effort to understand leg function and dynamics, and
will have utility and impact among the robotics, dynamics, and biomechanics
communities. The foundational design guidelines initiated here will enable
robots that can go anywhere that animals and humans go, and many places they
cannot, such as nuclear power plant disaster areas and burning buildings. The
same foundation will enable prosthetic limbs and exoskeletons that match the
natural dynamics of a human leg, while running all day on a single battery
charge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enhance understanding of the
interaction between the design of a legged system and its dynamics during
touchdown, stance, and swing, focusing on three key aspects of the design:
First, the inertia distribution in the leg, with an emphasis on how mass
placement, number of links, and "redundant" elements of leg kinematics (such as
pointing the knee "up" or "down") contribute to the impact felt by the system at
touchdown and the dynamics during swing phase. Second, the motor coupling to the
linkages, focusing on how different mappings between actuation and mechanism
degrees of freedom can lead to the motors either sharing loads or fighting
against each other. Third, spring function and placement, including desirable
nonlinearities for mitigation of impacts and swing-phase ringing, alignment of
principle stiffness axes with mechanism degrees of freedom, and transmissions
that allow for configuration-dependent elasticity. The research approach draws
on examples from biology and previously constructed robots, utilizes
mathematical tools from applied mechanics, and builds on prior work with
experimental walking and running robots.