* 1462633
* Monolithic Nanofabrication: A Bottom-up Approach for Manufacturing Nanotextured Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Teri Odom, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2020
* USD 259,999.00

Nanofabrication techniques typically rely on additive or subtractive methods in
order to achieve nanostructured substrates. Additive manufacturing involves the
building up of a three-dimensional object by direct-writing or printing of a
digitally designed object. Subtractive manufacturing uses etching and other
processes to remove solid material from a bulk sample. However, extension of
these approaches to the nanoscale and in a high-throughput manner is
challenging. This award supports an entirely different strategy for surface
texturing at the nanoscale?monolithic nanofabrication?by first creating a thin
layer on a thermo-polymer with plasma gases and then relieving the strain in the
system. Since surface nanotextures form spontaneously across the entire surface
upon compression, the technique is massively parallel. Key advantages of
monolithic nanofabrication include simplicity and scalability especially since
the polymer substrates (without nanopatterns) are already in use on shrink-
wrapped buses. Large-area, hierarchical nanotextures in functional materials are
important in a range of applications, including self-cleaning windows, water
collection, photovoltaics, bio-fouling, and reduced friction and drag. This
research is multi-disciplinary and involves the disciplines of manufacturing,
mechanics, chemistry, and materials science. Products of monolithic
nanofabrication will be integrated in nanopatterning modules for high school
students within the NSF Materials World Network framework, in hands-on
activities for public outreach events on nanomanufacturing, and in freshmen
chemistry labs on polymers and surface hydrophobicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of monolithic nanofabrication will open new approaches to control
disorder at the nanoscale and the microscale. Most large-area nanopatterning
methods aim to produce periodic structures at ever smaller length scales. Well-
ordered patterns are often not necessary, however, for an increasing range of
applications. This work aims to manipulate local and long-range nanoscale
disorder simultaneously on a single substrate thus making hierarchical
nanotextures and hence enable unconventional applications. The major
nanomanufacturing processing outcomes of this project are: (1) determining
parameters to observe nano-fold and self-similar wrinkle formation; and (2)
demonstrating how an all-chemical treatment of thermoplastics can generate a
tunable mix of ordered and disordered nanopatterns. The major product outcomes
include: (1) substrates with in-plane nanotextures with three or more wrinkle
wavelengths; (2) nanotextured substrates with control over ordered and
disordered regions; and (3) hierarchical nanotextures in functional materials.
This platform is well-suited to extract the fundamental principles of how plasma
gases react with soft materials to produce local nano-wrinkling. The scalability
of the spontaneous texturing process and commercial availability of
thermoplastics make monolithic nanofabrication a practical nanomanufacturing
strategy.