* 1462404
* Collaborative Research: EAGER-DynamicData: Machine Intelligence for Dynamic Data-Driven Morphing of Nodal Demand in Smart Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Nikolaos Gatsis, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 73,303.00

The electric power grid is the indispensable infrastructure for power delivery
and distribution. It is a system of high complexity and heterogeneity comprised
of a variety of interconnected systems, subsystems, generators, and loads. In
addition, it is a dynamic system with evolving characteristics that suffers from
several infrastructure limitations, which if not handled properly, may lead to
instabilities with severe consequences including costly brownouts and blackouts.
However, advancements in information and data-driven technologies offer the
necessary ground for developing tools that efficiently monitor grid
infrastructure and manage electricity flows in ways that achieve and maintain
high performance and reliability in grid operations. Towards that end, coupling
power systems with information systems converts traditional electric energy
delivery infrastructures into interconnected hybrid energy-data systems called
smart energy systems, where power flow is controlled via information signals.
Dynamic data available in smart energy systems includes, but is not limited to,
hourly user energy consumption measurements from smart meters, electricity
pricing signals, system voltage readings from GPS-synchronized measuring units
scattered throughout the network that can take hundreds of readings per second,
and data from weather stations. Thus, due to grid complexity, a tremendous
amount of information is not only generated but also transferred throughout the
grid, and grid participants, such as customers, utility companies, and grid
operators, are exposed to multiple heterogeneous data streams coming from
various sources. In this data intensive environment, participants are being
engaged to make fast real-time decisions regarding morphing of their load demand
and consumption behavior patterns. Nodal load forecasting is identified as a key
point for developing future smart energy systems and electricity markets. The
principal theme of this research is the fast and optimal nodal load morphing in
smart energy systems that takes into account big volumes of dynamically varying
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this research addresses the problem of
management and processing of big data within the framework of Dynamic Data
Driven Systems (DDDS) as applied to nodal load morphing. The focus of this study
will be the development of a set of new intelligent and self-adaptive algorithms
for online big data processing and fast real-time decision-making in smart
energy infrastructures. The main feature of the current research is the
integration of machine learning DDDS with dynamic optimization methods to solve
the computational problem of forecasting optimal or near-optimal shapes of a
load in a timely manner accounting for multiple streams of continuously incoming
data and their inherent uncertainty. Emphasis will be given in handling and
processing incentive signals and more particularly electricity pricing signals
as a major factor in load morphing. Furthermore, extensive testing and
verification of the developed algorithms will be performed on real-time
simulated scenarios obtained with the GridLAB-D software simulator. In short,
the proposed research for nodal load morphing will enable a new and
transformative approach towards efficient, inexpensive, and fast processing of
big data as applied to smart energy systems.