* 1462771
* Manufacturing Aligned Arrays of Semiconducting Carbon Nanotubes for Faster and More Energy Efficient Next-Generation Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Michael Arnold, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Carbon nanotubes are nanomaterials that are comprised entirely of carbon atoms
arranged in a cylinder. The diameter of a carbon nanotube is only about 1
nanometer or 1 billionth of a meter. Carbon nanotubes are among the best
conductors of electricity that have ever been discovered. They promise to
increase the speed and complexity of computing devices, increase the bandwidth
and energy efficiency of commercial and military wireless communications
technologies, and lead to new types of unconventional electronics that are not
rigid but can be stretched, rolled, and folded. To realize nanotubes' promise,
researchers must first learn how to assemble them into aligned arrays on
substrates. This award supports fundamental research on a recently discovered
manufacturing process for achieving this goal. Inks containing semiconducting
carbon nanotubes are spread into thin films on the surface of a water trough.
The nanotubes deposit and align themselves on a substrate as it is withdrawn
from the trough. The overarching objective of the research is to increase the
uniformity and improve the organization of the nanotube arrays to open the door
for large-area nanotube array manufacturing for commercial applications. These
advances will benefit the U.S. economy, high-tech electronics industries, and
society. Moreover, the efforts on nanomaterials metrology and manufacturing will
impact the development of new undergraduate laboratories on materials
characterization for engineering education.

The nanotube assembly occurs via a process called floating evaporative self-
assembly. The uniformity and organization of nanotubes will be improved by: (1)
determining the mechanisms that direct nanotube organization during floating
evaporative self-assembly; (2) controlling packing density and inter-nanotube
spacing by using multifunctional polymers to wrap the nanotubes and mediate
inter-nanotube interactions during assembly; and (3) developing metrology to
understand the link between processing-structure-electrical properties. In
preliminary research, floating evaporative self-assembly has been exploited to
align arrays of ultrahigh purity semiconducting nanotubes prepared using
conjugated polymers as nanotube-differentiating agents. The excellent degree of
alignment and control over the packing density of the nanotubes using this
method has led to gains in nanotube array field effect transistor performance of
1400x in on/off ratio (at constant conductance) and 30-100x in on-conductance
(at constant on/off ratio). Increasing the uniformity of these arrays will open
the door for commercial opportunities in thin film applications and
macroelectronics. Further controlling the microstructure will open the door for
increased conductance and commercial opportunities in high-frequency linear
amplifiers and logic transistors.