* 1462358
* Soil Suction Surrogates for Advancing Complete-Stress-State Solutions to Expansive Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Sandra Houston, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 260,000.00

Approximately 320 million hectares of the world's land is covered with expansive
clays that are subject to shrinkage and swelling in response to changes in soil
moisture conditions. Damage to U.S. public infrastructure from expansive clays
is estimated to be $15 B/yr. For every billion dollars in damage from
unconservative design, perhaps $10B is lost from overly conservative design.
Expansive clays are unsaturated soils in that the void space between clay
particles is filled partly with air and partly with water. However, common
approaches to dealing with expansive soils do not fully consider the unsaturated
soil aspects that drive infrastructure damage. This award supports the
development of an innovative approach to bringing unsaturated soil mechanics
theory into wide use in dealing with infrastructure development on expansive
clay profiles. Due to the magnitude of expansive soils problems, and the
involvement of 10s of thousands of practitioners addressing these problems, this
study will provide societal benefit through saving billions of dollars annually
on U.S. infrastructure. The project has numerous outreach components, including
cross-training between researchers and practicing engineers that will improve
engineering education. Participation of underrepresented students and returning-
veteran students will broaden the impact of this study through development of
more diverse and well-trained work force. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A dual approach
will be taken for estimation of expansive soil swell-shrinkage movements,
wherein a fundamentals-based soil suction and net normal stress approach will be
linked to a surrogate-based approach. The method will embrace principles of
unsaturated soils theory, yet expand applicability through well-founded yet
commonly-measured soil suction surrogate parameters. Climatic effects (including
site-specific 'microclimate') will be incorporated into surrogate parameter
determination, consistent with recent research on soil surface-atmosphere
interactions. This research fills a gap between theory and the vast amount of
available field data. A fundamentally-based soil suction surrogate will
facilitate use of the huge database of soil parameters available from past
expansive soil investigations. Simple functions of water content and index
properties will be used - in lieu of soil suction - to evaluate expansive soil
movements for partial wetting or drying under field net normal stress
conditions. The primary goal is to develop a soil suction surrogate approach
that yields exactly the same, or essentially the same, expansive soil movement
results as the complete-stress-state based suction approach, and which allows
geotechnical engineers to take advantage of their vast experience from a more
fundamental perspective.