* 1462498
* EAGER-DynamicData: Collaborative: Exploiting the Dynamically Architectural Configurability for Compressed Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Wenyao Xu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 40,000.00

Sensors or sensing systems are increasingly critical in a variety of
applications including national security, surveillance monitoring and health
care. Those systems should function with minimal hardware recourses, minimal
communications and minimal computation overhead, and these efficiencies can
dramatically improve the performance, reliability and usability, which can
broaden the overall application scope of sensor systems. This EAGER project is
to pursue preliminary results of dynamic configurability of architectural and
circuit models in sensing systems, and the proposed research will have
significant impacts on a range of sensing applications under the resource-
constrained environment. For example, in large-scale sensor networks or
implantable sensors, energy is tightly constrained. The ultimate goal of the
research is to exploit the configurability and dynamics of sensing systems to
improve the overall system efficiency. This project serves as an expedition to
investigate the dynamically architectural sensing techniques and may open a new
research direction of theory and practice in the signal acquisition. Upon the
success of this project, a better performance-energy tradeoff in the sensing
system will be obtained, which can further strengthen its advantage compared to
other sampling techniques, and extend its application regime. To broaden the
impacts of this project, PIs will disseminate the research results through
multiple channels, including conference presentation, journal publication and
open research material online. PIs also plan to integrate the research outcomes
into the curriculum development and develop a new research seminar on related
topics. The project will provide research opportunities for undergraduate
students and researchers from underrepresented groups.

Specifically, this EAGER project investigates the dynamic configurability of
parameterized Compressed Sensing architecture. With the physical and
architectural models, the Compressed Sensing architecture is flexible and
provides a larger design/configuration space, and can adapt towards different
signal structures and use conditions. The research work is expected to explore a
deeper bound of the performance-energy by exploiting the architectural
configurability with physical models. To this aim, a set of research tasks will
be performed in this project, and the technical thrusts can be summarized from
three aspects. First, the project will explore the configurability at both
architectural- and circuit- levels in Compressed Sensing, incorporating signal
structure variations. Multiple factors in the Compressed Sensing will be
investigated. Second, by integrating physical models into the Compressed Sensing
architecture, a larger design space will be discovered and defined. The benefit
of the performance-energy trade-off will be demonstrated in the new space.
Third, a set of novel algorithms will be developed for efficient configuration
search in the design space. Several deterministic and heuristic strategies will
be investigated in the project.