* 1462076
* Collaborative Research: Performance-Based Framework for Wind-Excited Multi-Story Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Ahsan Kareem, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 05/31/2019
* USD 187,221.00

The current prescriptive design philosophy that relies simply on meeting
requirements stipulated in standards is shifting towards a performance-based
design (PBD) approach for achieving designs that rationally meet society's need
for a safe built environment. Extensive research has facilitated the successful
adoption of PBD in earthquake engineering, but the same cannot be said for wind
engineering and wind hazard. Wind acts differently on buildings than the
earthquake loading. Wind loading is of long duration and performance is more
critical for human comfort than for the earthquake loading. Therefore, the need
exists to pursue development of a framework that embraces the concepts of PBD
during the design of building systems to resist severe wind events. This would
offer designers of new buildings and retrofitters of existing buildings a means
not only to rationally assess the performance of structures under winds, but
also to communicate their results in a language that decision-makers can
understand. A major hurdle to the widespread use of PBD procedures is their
uncertain nature, which makes the iterations traditionally involved in a design
process impractical. The uncertainties can be effectively addressed by the
development of specific optimization schemes that can handle the size and
diversity of real world applications.

This project will develop a PBD framework for multi-story wind excited buildings
in order to optimally mitigate structural and non-structural damage. The
methodology will explicitly account for the inevitable uncertainty that
characterizes all aspects of structural response estimation to natural hazards.
This goal will be achieved through the definition of an effective wind building
performance model that will rationally assess damage and loss in terms of
consequence and fragility functions. To drive the building performance, site-
specific wind hazard models will be defined in terms of appropriate intensity
measures for a range of wind events, e.g. synoptic winds and hurricanes. By
identifying suitable aerodynamic models, interaction parameters will be defined
for driving a simulation-centered plastic theorem-based framework that not only
yields input engineering demand parameters for performance in wind, but also
provides a full portrait of the post-yield behavior of the structural system. In
order to achieve systems that optimally satisfy the performance objectives, the
wind PBD problem will be formulated as a probabilistic optimization problem. By
developing a general solution strategy capable of efficiently handling problems
characterized by system-level probabilistic constraints and/or objective
functions in terms of high-dimensional design variable vectors, an integrated
PBD and optimization methodology will be defined that has the promise to
revolutionize current wind engineering practices.