* 1462329
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and Controlling the Mechanical and Thermal Properties of Polymer Nanofibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Richard Mu, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2018
* USD 90,000.00

Polymers find ubiquitous applications in modern civilization. However, polymers
are generally regarded as poor heat conductors, while many applications would
benefit from polymer materials that are able to function as good heat
conductors. Recent studies have suggested polymer materials that have been
significantly stretched could have substantially enhanced mechanical strength
and heat conduction. We therefore aim to study the mechanical and thermal
properties of nanoscale fibers formed in a jet that induces significant
stretching. We expect that heat transport in these nanofibers may be profoundly
enhanced compared to larger, unstretched versions of the same polymer. We will
study how the jet stretches the polymer molecules, and how the resulting
molecular orientation in turn results in enhanced mechanical strength and heat
conduction, which may eventually lead to exciting new polymer materials that are
extremely strong, flexible, and good conductors of heat. Such materials would
enable a variety of applications, such as flexible electronics and displays,
solar cells, and advanced structural materials integrated with high-power
electronics, leading to significant future technological advancements. The
project has integrated research and educational components to train graduate
students in an interdisciplinary environment, and to extend the impact to
underrepresented minorities through collaboration between Vanderbilt and Fisk
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to correlate the
manufacturing process conditions, structure, as well as mechanical and thermal
properties of electrospun polymer nanofibers. The approach is to integrate
informed control of the electrospinning process, mechanical and thermal
transport property measurement, thorough microstructural characterization, and
theoretical analysis to achieve an in-depth understanding of how electrospinning
parameters affect nanofiber microstructure, mechanical and thermal properties.
The structure and property characterization will be performed at an individual
nanofiber level, thereby avoiding averaging over potential fiber heterogeneity.
Microstructure will be characterized using micro-Raman spectroscopy, a technique
which is able to provide detailed information about molecular composition and
orientation from a small sample volume. Mechanical properties of individual
nanofibers will be characterized using an atomic force microscope to perform a
3-point bend test. Thermal properties of individual nanofibers will be measured
using custom-built microdevices. With an understanding of how electrospinning
parameters affect microstructure, and the interplay between microstructure and
mechanical/thermal properties, we will be able to optimize deposition parameters
to achieve polymeric materials with tunable mechanical and thermal properties.