* 1462530
* EAGER-DynamicData: A Hierarchical Approach to Dynamic Big Data Analysis in Power Infrastructure Security
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Christian Shelton, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2018
* USD 185,000.00

This research will address a dynamic big data problem that is of urgent national
interest: the need for efficient methods to diagnose faults and attacks in
critical interconnected infrastructures, such as electricity power networks.
Additionally, this project will investigate new methodologies to extract
knowledge from the complex streams of data that come from various sensors in
infrastructure systems and the models of their behavior. Results and findings in
this project will be validated via industry-accredited power system simulators,
and will be useful to the power industry in enhancing the safety, stability, and
security of essential power infrastructure. This project will promote multi-
disciplinary research involving expertise in big data analysis, machine
learning, security, power systems, and control systems. This research will
provide a powerful bridge between theory and real-world applications while
serving as a training platform for a diverse new generation of engineers at the
University of California, Riverside, one of America's most ethnically diverse
research-intensive institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will foster
the use of multi-resolution data-driven methods for the detection and
classification of anomalies in critical dynamical infrastructures, with focus on
power networks. This project has three novel, innovative, and potentially
transformative technical elements: (1) A comprehensive statistical model, as an
alternative to existing physics-based models, using Dynamic Bayesian Networks
and Conditional Random Fields to model complex infrastructures subject to
failures and attacks; (2) A hierarchical detection and classification method
based upon machine learning concepts to tame and leverage the vast amount and
diversity of dynamic multi-resolution data collected by spatially distributed
sensors; (3) A systematic method to train and inform data-driven methodologies
from model-based and analytical knowledge that come from power systems and
control theory to build scalable and performing detection and classification
mechanisms in power infrastructure security.