* 1462760
* A Phase Field Arlequin Model for Resolving Nonlocal Hydromechanical Effects of Porous Media Across Time and Spatial Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* WaiChing Sun, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2020
* USD 349,997.00

Porous media are common to engineered and natural systems. This class of
materials includes amongst others bone, sand, rock and concrete. Understanding
how the microscopic defects and flaws of porous media evolve is of great
importance for predicting large-scale response. This award supports fundamental
research on predicting and analyzing mechanical behaviors of fluid infiltrating
porous media. Emphasis is placed on problems that involve strong near- and far-
field interactions, such as hydraulic fracture operations and preventing re-
activation of faults. The framework will adaptively activate material models of
different levels of sophistication based on the need to extract small-scale
information. This adaptive nature leads to highly efficient simulations where
all CPU time and computational resources are wisely allocated for the most
important hydro-mechanical events in the most important region at the most
critical time. As a result, this highly efficient model will help industries and
engineers predicting material failures more accurately and faster and therefore
benefit to the US economy and society. The research is fully integrated with
education activities that use 3D printers to demonstrate the fundamental physics
of porous media. Outreach activities at the underprivileged school district will
help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively
impact engineering education.

This award supports research on a new phase-field based, adaptive Arlequin
multiscale model for poromechanics. While classic Arlequin method uses partition
of unity on energy functional to couple small- and large-scale models in a fixed
domain of interest, this new work will allow fine-scale region to enlarge,
shrink or vanished via an evolving phase field. The fact that phase field has
finite thickness will be exploited to seamlessly create evolving transition zone
between fine- and coarse-scale models. The coupled numerical model will be
implemented in an operator-splitting scheme where displacement, Darcy's
velocity, pore pressure and the phase fields are updated asynchronously. By
overcoming the computational barrier due to coupling effect across length scale,
the concurrent multiscale model will provide fresh insight in understanding the
fundamental role of pore-fluid in the formation of localized band, cracks
propagations in porous media with defects, flaws and other small-scale
geometrical features.