* 1462895
* Mechanics in Photopolymerization Based Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Hang (Jerry) Qi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2019
* USD 307,033.00

Additive manufacturing, often called 3D printing, is poised to revolutionize
manufacturing. Its transformation into a manufacturing platform requires the
ability to reliably create shape as well as desirable properties. Currently
there is little understanding on how the mechanical properties of 3D printed
parts relate to the printing process. This award supports fundamental research
on mechanics of the layer-by-layer photopolymerization process common to many 3D
printing system. It provides knowledge on how mechanical properties of the
printed materials emerge from the printing process and how distortions occur.
The knowledge gained provides solutions to the selection of printing parameters
that yield parts with desirable properties. Such knowledge will enhance the use
of photopolymerization based additive manufacturing for a wide variety of
applications in healthcare, biomedical, aerospace, and automotive industries.
This research involves several disciplines including mechanics, physics,
chemistry, manufacturing, and materials science. The associated activities
include underrepresented groups in the multidisciplinary research.

In photopolymerization based additive manufacturing there exist strong
interactions of optical absorption, chemical reaction, species diffusion, phase
change and volume shrinkage. Consequently, the layered deposition processes
result in a material with dramatically different mechanical properties than the
same polymer processed in bulk. This award supports research to investigate the
relationship between print parameters and resulting product characteristics. The
outcomes will bridge the knowledge gap between the printing process and the
geometry and properties of the printed part. The research team will perform
experiments to systematically investigate mechanical properties of the material
within the printed layers and of the interfaces. The experimental observation
will facilitate the establishment of theories and computational models. These
models are defined in the context of continuum mechanics considering not only
stress and strain but also the printing conditions and chemical processes. The
computational models will be used to conduct parametric study to identify
optimized printing parameters.