* 1462191
* EAGER-DynamicData: Subspace Learning From Binary Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Yuejie Chi, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 09/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Decentralized sensing systems play an increasingly critical role in everyday
life, including wireless sensor networks, mobile crowd-sensing with internet-of-
things, and crowdsourcing with human workers, with applications in network
analysis, distributed wideband spectrum sensing, target tracking, environmental
monitoring, and advertisement prediction. Despite the promise, however,
efficient inference is extremely challenging due to processing large amounts of
data at the typically resource-starved sensor nodes. This project develops
efficient feature extraction and dimensionality reduction tools for
decentralized sensing systems with minimal computation, storage and
communication requirements of each sensor node to make sense of the surrounding
dynamic environments. Students on this program will develop multi-disciplinary
expertise in signal processing, machine learning, optimization, and statistics.
New graduate-level courses on high-dimensional data analysis will be developed
by the PI at Ohio State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically,
this project offers an integrated approach for subspace learning from bits,
where the sampling strategy explicitly accounts for the communication burden by
only requesting a single bit from each sensor node. This project opens up
opportunities to develop a theory of principal component analysis (or subspace
learning) based on binary sensing, where noisy data samples are synthesized into
coarse yet high-fidelity binary measurements that are more amenable for
communication and inference. The consideration of binary measurements is well-
motivated, as in practice, measurements are either mapped to bits from a finite
alphabet before computation, or available naturally in the quantized form, such
as comparison outcomes from human as sensors; constraints in storage and
communication are often expressed in terms of the number of bits rather than the
number of real measurements; finally, binary measurements are also more robust
against unknown, nonlinear and heterogeneous distortions from different sensors
compared with real measurements. Unfortunately, none of the existing subspace
learning frameworks is tailored to acquire and process quantized measurements,
and will yield highly sub-optimal results if naive quantization is applied. This
project addresses the above challenge and highlights a novel interplay between
the quantity, precision, and fidelity of measurements in sensing for estimating
and tracking a low-dimensional subspace in a dynamic environment. Decentralized
and online inference algorithms for subspace learning are developed together
with adaptive sensing schemes to speed up convergence.