* 1462295
* Combining Laser Melting, Alloying, and Nanoparticles to Make Harder and Smoother Surfaces on Metal Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Kumar Sridharan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 03/31/2018
* USD 310,412.00

Many manufacturing processes (including laser hardening, laser welding, laser
texturing, and laser polishing) use surface heating and melting to create metal
products. They are normally used to achieve one outcome: hardening or smoothing.
The ability to simultaneously achieve both outcomes through pulsed laser
polishing will save time and money, and benefit manufacturers of medical
devices, optical instruments, automobile plastic components, aerospace parts,
bearings, cutting tools, and many other products. This award supports
fundamental research to enable this ability. Results of this research will be
valuable to a wide range of manufacturing processes that utilize focused energy
beams to locally heat and/or re-melt metal surfaces, e.g., laser texturing,
laser welding, electron beam welding, laser cladding, laser peening, and laser
heat treating. New knowledge will be widely disseminated through publications
and integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses, thereby helping to train
the future workforce.

The research objectives are to test two hypotheses. The first hypothesis is that
alloying or adding nanoparticles to a metal will substantially increase its
viscosity and surface tension when it is in a liquid state, resulting in a
smoother surface after laser re-melting as compared to metals with lower
viscosity and surface tension. This hypothesis will be tested in two steps.
First, the viscosity and surface tension of liquid-state aluminum alloys whose
surfaces are modified with nanoparticles or boron will be determined to see if
there is a significant difference compared to unaltered surfaces. Dynamic
nanoindentation with long hold/creep durations and nano-scale pull-off
(adhesion) experiments will be used to determine the viscosity and surface
tension, respectively. Secondly, the measured viscosity and surface tension of
alloyed and nanoparticle embedded surfaces will be measured with a white light
interferometer and focus-variation-based optical metrology system to confirm
that changes in viscosity and surface tension are the cause of any observed
changes to the surface texture. A second hypothesis is that adding boron or
nanoparticles to the surface of a metal alloy will have significant effects on
the microstructure kinetics during laser re-melting, resulting in harder
surfaces as compared to metals without surface modification. This hypothesis
will be tested by using electron microscopy and x-ray diffraction to observe the
effects of laser re-melting on the microstructures of aluminum and steel alloys
whose surfaces are modified. Nanoindentation tests will also be conducted on
these laser re-melted samples in order to measure their hardness.