* 1462151
* Optically-based Processing of Nanostructures in Polymer Matrix Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* James Spicer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2019
* USD 276,015.00

Polymer matrix nanocomposites are materials that contain nanostructured
components in polymer matrices and display a wide variety of behaviors depending
on the size, shape and distribution of these components in the polymer. These
materials have the potential to revolutionize a range of energy production and
usage technologies, but manufacturing methods for these materials must be
improved to make them affordable. This requires the development of entirely new
processing techniques for production of nanostructures in polymers that permit
rapid, large-scale fabrication of the desired structures. This award supports
fundamental research to establish the knowledge base for the development of
optically-based processing methods that can be used to produce nano-reinforced,
functional nanocomposites. These methods will allow for the production of large
quantities of materials with properties that can only be achieved using
nanostructured materials. Examples of these materials include photochromic
coatings that darken with exposure to sunlight, photocatalytic films that can
purify water using sunlight, and artificial photosynthetic materials that can
produce hydrogen using water and sunlight. The work supported by this award is
multidisciplinary and requires understanding of photochemistry, processing
science, materials chemistry, measurement science as well as computational
simulation techniques. This research will lead to new manufacturing methods
having broad impacts on energy-related technologies and will also encourage
young scientists and engineers (including those from underrepresented groups) to
pursue careers in related fields.

This work investigates photo-initiated, in situ, chemical vapor deposition for
particle modification to alter the properties of polymer matrix, nanocomposite
materials. The research focuses on fundamental issues connected to the synthesis
of nanostructures using a type of in situ chemical vapor deposition that can be
controlled using photo-activated processing. Deposition within these materials
using laser-induced precursor chemical decomposition can yield complicated
nanostructured particle systems with desirable behaviors. The use of lasers
allows particles to be processed at selected locations in the matrix permitting
patterning of the material. The research will address knowledge gaps related to
the processing science behind these polymer matrix nanocomposites including the
importance of various processing parameters on in situ nanoparticle formation in
polymer matrices, the role of precursor diffusion when photothermal heating of
the matrix material is performed, the roles of synthesis mechanisms in
optically-initiated processing, and the factors that govern selective processing
of particles at particular locations in the base polymer.