* 1462993
* GOALI: Fundamental Studies on High Impact Pressure, Supersonic Water Droplets for Material Deformation and Removal
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Joseph Klewicki, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 409,589.00

Ultra high pressure, high velocity continuous columns of water jets are used in
a number of applications, e.g., as a carrier for grit in water jet cutting of
metals. Under ideal conditions, the water pressure of the jet is equal to the
pressure head generated by the pump. However, past research has shown that the
breakup of the stream into droplets produces impact pressures that significantly
exceed the water-hammer pressure. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison
with Industry (GOALI) award supports fundamental research into droplet formation
and droplet-surface interaction phenomena. Results from this research can help
achieve their applications from peening to coating removal to machining in a
more economical and environmentally friendly manner. This will benefit society
at large by creating environmentally friendly processes with significantly less
water usage and contaminated materials compared to competing technologies.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Objectives of this research are to (1) assess the effect
of various process parameters, i.e., co-flow gas velocity, partial chamber
pressure, high frequency instability triggering, and reduced Weber number on
droplet formation; (2) determine the droplet characteristics, i.e., droplet
velocity, diameter, and spacing, that are required to create the desired
droplet-surface interaction results (e.g., residual stresses, surface roughness,
or material removal rate); (3) characterize the material behavior and triaxial
stress failure mechanisms at high deformation rates; and (4) implement a multi-
jet system that can process large surface areas and study additional process
parameters, i.e., jet spacing and individual jet pressure. The tools that will
be used in this research are (i) an experimental set-up which includes
measurement of key process parameters, i.e., visualized droplet characteristics
listed above, droplet force, and temperature; and (ii) a suite of predictive
finite element models that capture the droplet-surface interaction results. The
methodologies used will be both experimental (to allow process parameters to be
controlled, measured, and explored) and numerical with validated models (to
allow further investigation of the design space compared to simply a trial-and-
error experimental approach). The knowledge gained from this research will also
benefit the study of other physical phenomena, e.g., cavitation erosion. The
academic, industrial, and national laboratory partners have significant
expertise in fluid dynamics and solid mechanics modeling, experimental methods,
material characterization, machine development, and manufacturing, pertinent to
assuring the success of this research.