* 1462781
* RUI: Cultural Influences in Water Management Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Martha Kaplan, Vassar College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 75,901.00

Effective water governance structures are critical to preventing water stress,
which can have profound implications for stable governance and public trust.
This project explores how water management strategies and the public responses
to those efforts are effectively undertaken in a large, water-scarce urban
context. To understand the ways in which organizational and infrastructural
decisions are made in such circumstances, the researcher asks the role that
local cultural beliefs and practices have in shaping the development of new
water technologies. Data from this research will improve scientific
understanding in similar situations where water access is stressed because of
the demands of a rapidly expanding urban population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Martha Kaplan of Vassar College examines the impact of culture on
infrastructural decisions and water management strategies by studying state
policy and popular water use in a water-scarce context. The research takes place
in Singapore, a Southeast Asian island city-state that is has no natural
aquifers, and a growing urban population. Originally dependent on imported water
from neighboring Malaysia and rain water, they have added NEWater (recycled
sewer water) and desalinated water to the public water supply. Research will
analyze (1) state water management, including media campaigns to make recycled
"NEWater" acceptable, (2) popular responses to state initiatives and (3)
everyday engagements with drinking water. Methods include participant
observation, oral history, structured interviews, and drinking water censuses
(an innovative, systematic method developed by the PI working with an
undergraduate researcher in 2007). As a project funded under the Research in
Undergraduate Institutions solicitation, up to four undergraduate students will
participate in the research, receiving training in key anthropological research
methods. This project is committed to the principle that a well-informed public
can have a key role in determining policy. Scientific publication and popularly
accessible information about the cultural diversity of drinking water systems
and environmental perspectives can enable citizens in any society to make better
choices in their everyday water practices, and better inform effective public
policy efforts. In sum, this project aims to trains future anthropologists, and
produce accessible studies of plural and different water cultures.