* 1462752
* Dynamic Stabilization of Electro-Spinning Process for Production of Inflatable Drug-Delivery Stents
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Rein Anton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 03/31/2019
* USD 336,132.00

Electrospinning, first discovered in the late 1930s, is a versatile method to
create ultra-fine fibers from polymer solutions with diameters ranging from a
few nanometers to several micrometers. Currently, electrospinning is the only
method for the fabrication of continuous fibers at the nanometer scale. One of
the main application areas of electrospinning is tissue engineering, where
electro-spun nano-fibers are used to produce tissue and organ templates. Despite
its ability to produce very fine fibers, the electrospinning process as a
manufacturing technique is poorly controlled. The very same forces responsible
for drawing the fibers are also at play in generating an undesirable
instability, leading to random fiber distribution and poor control over the
location of the produced fibers. This award supports fundamental research to
provide knowledge required for the development of a controlled nano-fiber
deposition process. This project's dynamic stabilization approach will enable
the manufacturing of woven polymeric stents that can be used in tissue
engineering and in the production of new biodegradable drug-delivery stents.
Therefore, results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy, and will
lead to the development of advanced therapeutic devices. This research contains
an outreach program using an analog of the approach aimed at motivating children
from disadvantaged communities and underrepresented minorities to pursue STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this research will explore
dynamic stabilization and electrostatic focusing as a new means to control the
deposition of electrospun fibers. For the first time, it will examine the
feasibility of focusing charged filaments inside a Paul-type linear ionic trap.
Despite their widespread use in mass spectroscopy, linear ionic traps have never
been used to trap macroscopic ions such as electrospun polymeric fibers. Using
Floquet analysis, the research will examine theoretically the feasibility of
trapping charged fibers and will establish the required trapping parameters. A
closed-loop control of the electrospinning process based on the dynamic
stabilization is also planned.