* 1462064
* Student Travel Scholarships for Telluride Science Research Meeting on ?Frontiers in Biomagnetic Particles IV,? in Telluride CO June 23-26, 2015.
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Jeffrey Anker, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 03/31/2016
* USD 4,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
Clemson Univerity is to provide student support to attend the conference titled
"Frontiers in Biomagnetic Particles IV" in Telluride, Colorado. The focus of
this three-day symposium is on the synthesis, characterization and control of
biomagnetic nanomaterials as carriers with a wide range of biomedical,
environmental and industrial applications. This international event will bring
scientists, engineers and biomedical professionals together, and they will
present their recent studies and results, and discuss this rapidly growing and
highly interdisciplinary field. The symposium builds upon earlier three
successful conferences organized by these investigators. The broader impact goal
of this proposal is to increase the participation of women and underrepresented
minority students in science and engineering areas. This travel support would
provide them with a unique opportunity in interacting and networking with other
scientists outside of their normal educational experiences. Additionally, the
organizers would make every effort to have at least 50% women and minority
students as session chairs in leading the discussion on the research topics
being presented at the conference.

Magnetic particles are an enabling technology for a wide variety of biomedical,
chemical, electronic, and functional materials applications, and these particles
are expected to provide a unique handle in manipulating and sensing
nanostructures. Since this field would greatly benefit from multidisciplinary
interactions from chemists, biologists, physicists, and engineers, the main goal
of this conference would be to create a technical and professional environment
in which participants from diverse disciplines could interact. This conference
will be designed to discuss recent trends and activities related to biomagnetic
nanoparticles and initiation of future collaborations among the attendees.
Biomagnetic nanoparticles are unique materials, properties of which could be
controlled, transported and imaged using external fields. Four specific topic
areas will be highlighted at this conference: a) Biosensors and imaging; b)
Biomagnetic separations and transport; c) Biomedical applications such as drug
delivery; and d) Career and professional development opportunities for students.