* 1462254
* EAGER-DynamicData: Collaborative Research: Data-driven morphing of parsimonious models for the description of transient dynamics in complex systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Themistoklis Sapsis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 75,000.00

Predicting and quantifying the behavior of complex systems in engineering and
science is a topic of critical importance for many areas such as design,
optimization, and safety. Even more critical is the forecast of extreme
responses of these systems. Rare responses that can lead to catastrophic events
manifest themselves in a wide range of systems such as geophysical phenomena,
power and communication networks, and epileptic incidents in brain activity,
just to mention a few. In all of these cases, accurate predictions are hampered
by the fact that the exact dynamics of the system in nature is often poorly
understood. This poor understanding is due to the large number of essentially
coupled mechanisms that operate at different temporal and spatial scales.
Although it is not always essential to predict the system with high accuracy
over all these different levels, it is important to understand and model the
effect of the unresolved mechanisms to the degrees of freedom we want to
predict. This requires a reliable knowledge of the descriptive laws for these
mechanisms as well as their coupling to the degrees-of-freedom of interest and
this is clearly not always (well) done. This incomplete modeling of the dynamics
leads to inevitable model error that is essential to be taken into account for
reliable predictions. An obvious way that this can be done is by the utilization
of available and dynamically incoming data. The goal of this work is the
development of methods and algorithms to extend the capability for data-driven
morphing (that is, data-driven adaptation) of parsimonious models. These will be
able to adequately capture the instantaneously most significant dynamics of the
system and utilize them to inexpensively perform informative prediction and
uncertainty quantification. Such a development will be of critical importance
for many fields where the modeling and predictive capacity is limited by the
inadequate understanding of the underlying physical
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this proposal is to link machine
learning with model reduction in a data-stream-driven environment, in order to
formulate fundamentally novel methods for the probabilistic forecast of complex
stochastic systems. Of particular interest is the quantification and prediction
of extreme responses, by relying exclusively on the utilization of available
data and with the minimum use of equations (or high fidelity solvers), if these
are available. The effort is driven by the presence of serious obstacles
associated with the prediction of such features in complex dynamical systems:
non-negligible model error in the descriptive laws (if these are available),
prohibitive cost for real time computations, sparse data or data with non-
negligible error, and transient dynamics. These difficulties are manifest at a
time when there is a great need for understanding and prediction of extreme
responses in contexts such as climate dynamics, nonlinear waves, and networks of
high dimensionality. The aim is to address several of theses challenges by
constructing new stochastic prediction methods that will extend the existing
state-of-the-art for data-driven modeling and prediction through the
implementation (and appropriate extension) of machine learning / data mining
techniques and the combination with stochastic order reduction and uncertainty
quantification methods that dynamically adapt the reduced order subspace
according to the dynamics. These efforts will be guided by a proof-of-concept
application involving prediction of extreme, localized events in nonlinear
waves. Adaptive reduced order models driven by data will be a key element for
the inference of critical dynamical properties, which are otherwise "buried" in
the complex responses. By linking machine learning techniques to adaptive
reduced order models our research will catalyze new domains of
numerical/mathematical analysis and it will extend the reach of more
conventional mathematics-assisted modeling beyond some of its current limits.