* 1462124
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Emergence of Social Inequality
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* George Milner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 30,080.00

Researchers seek to understand the emergence of social inequality in prehistory
and its effect on cultural organization and development. The European Bronze
Age, roughly ca. 2500 to 800 B.C., was a time of swift cultural change that
resulted in new social, political, and economic lifeways. Bronze tools and
weapons began to be mass-produced in standardized forms. Social differentiation
and ranking became more entrenched, and peoples and ideas became increasingly
mobile in Europe. Archaeological methods are well suited for identifying both
the material and organizational changes that happened during this time (e.g.
changes in status, diet, belief systems, settlement), and their effect on local
populations. This project examines changing burial practices, settlement
patterns, and subsistence strategies as proxies for increasingly complex socio-
economic systems in Bronze Age northern Croatia. Results will characterize
trajectories of social complexity and inequality in prehistory, but can also be
used to inform research on the emergence and maintenance of inequality in modern
groups. Data collection will actively involve and train undergraduate and
graduate students in quantitative methodology crucial for studying the human
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will analyze burial assemblages and
grave contexts from museum collections to reconstruct basic levels of social
structure, with an emphasis on changes over time at both household and community
levels. Mortuary and osteological data will be complemented by archaeometric
analyses on bone, including an AMS 14C radiocarbon dating program and stable
carbon and nitrogen isotopes. Variation in stable isotope values can signal
social differences within the population, and will be used to complement more
traditional archaeological correlates of sociopolitical organization (e.g.,
settlements and architecture, burials, distribution of exotic or symbolic
artifacts). Radiocarbon dating will be used to date the progression of these
material markers, and link them to broader sociopolitical and economic changes.
Research will be conducted on Late Bronze (1300-800 BC) and Early Iron (800-600
BC) Age collections of the Iapodian cultural group, currently held at the
Archaeological Museum Zagreb (AMZ) in Croatia. This project represents an
important first step in a long-term investigation of Iapodian sociopolitical
development in the context of the European Bronze and Iron Ages. More generally,
results will contribute to understanding of how and when social inequality
materializes, the resulting consequences for individuals and groups, and how
these power structures are maintained (or not) over time. Results will be
published in international publications and presented in lectures and workshops
to public audiences in the US and Croatia.