* 1462850
* Design and Exploration of High-Temperature Steels for Electric Power Generation Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Dieter Isheim, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 02/29/2020
* USD 336,367.00

Increasing the efficiency of electric power generation helps reducing fuel
consumption and carbon dioxide emission. About 80 percent of the electricity in
the U.S. is generated with steam turbines whose efficiency is limited by their
maximum operating temperature. This award supports fundamental research to
develop economically viable steels that can be used at substantially higher
temperatures than those used in steam generators today, in order to increase
their energy conversion efficiencies. Benefits for the U.S. economy and society
will be multidimensional: in addition to potential savings in fuel cost and
reduced emissions in power generation afforded by these new alloys, this
research will advance the knowledge base for designing improved high-temperature
alloys by deepening the understanding of how processing and the resulting
microstructure bring about the improved properties of a newly designed
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop the intellectual
basis for designing high-temperature resistant steels that can be used in high-
efficiency ultra-supercritical steam generators for electric power plants at
temperatures above 650C (1200F). This involves a novel combination of several
strategies in steel design: utilizing a fine dispersion of semi-coherent mono-
carbide or carbo-nitride precipitates, additions of molybdenum or tungsten for
solid solution strengthening, and optimizing the carbon concentration to
suppress formation of precipitate phases detrimental to creep strength. The
underlying scientific concepts include minimizing interfacial energies and
diffusion to reduce the rate of coarsening, and semi-coherent interfaces between
precipitates and the matrix to create obstacles for impinging dislocations for
improved high-temperature strength. In pursuing these design principles,
computational thermodynamics, precipitation modeling, micro- and nanostructural
characterization by optical, transmission-electron and atom-probe microscopies,
and evaluation of high-temperature mechanical properties will contribute to a
multidimensional understanding of the processes governing the high-temperature
creep strength, ultimately leading to the development of new alloys with
improved properties.