* 1462862
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Thermal-Noise-Based Mechanisms for Intracellular Motion, with Application to Engineered Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Murti Salapaka, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 05/31/2019
* USD 266,000.00

The emerging ability to engineer the simultaneous directed motion of large
numbers of small particles, from micrometer size down to large molecules, will
have tremendous impact in diverse areas of medicine, electronics and bio-
materials. Such directed motion is an integral part of normal intracellular
function, where motor proteins convert ambient electrochemical potentials and
random thermal agitation into motion and act as tiny cargo haulers. This project
will learn from and build upon these biological mechanisms, to create a
framework for facilitating robust and efficient collective motion of large
numbers of microscale and submicroscale particles. Innovative instrumentation
created for this project will probe forces acting on motor proteins. Realization
of engineered motion of microscale particles will lead to new materials for
electronics and biomedicine. The new analytical techniques will find use in
related studies, such as on the role of cellular transport malfunctions in
disease.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will employ the following two
Brownian ratchet based approaches to obtain robust and efficient mechanisms for
transporting cargo at the microscale: (i) shape optical fields to accurately
realize desired potential energy landscapes that enable Brownian ratchet
mechanisms where noise enables useful work, and (ii) understand how biological
components such as motor proteins and microtubules employ Brownian ractchets to
achieve motion, and use these constructs for moving engineered cargo. Optical
ratchet mechanisms will be realized using modern control techniques. For
studying bio-protein motion, modern controls and systems tools will be used to
obtain probes at least an order of magnitude faster than the present state-of-
the-art. New modes of investigating motor proteins using optical traps will
include tension and force clamps, which will facilitate unambiguous
interpretation of molecular motion. Innovative open- and closed-loop control
laws for optical force fields will be derived to realize Brownian ratchet based
directed motion.