* 1462876
* Coordinating Electrical Stimulation and Motor Assist in a Hybrid Neuroprosthesis Using Control Strategies Inspired by Human Motor Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Nitin Sharma, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 04/30/2018
* USD 234,000.00

Functional electrical stimulation (FES) and powered exoskeletons are two
technologies being used to restore walking in individuals with paraplegia. FES
comprises low-level electrical currents applied to activate leg muscles. In
contrast, powered exoskeletons use electric motors mounted on an external
wearable frame to move lower-limb joints. Each of these technologies has
limitations. In this project they are used in synergy, to create a hybrid
neuroprosthesis that addresses these individual drawbacks. Critical to the
success of the hybrid approach is coordinated control of multiple FES-activated
muscles and the electric motors. This coordinated control must adapt over time
as FES-induced fatigue degrades the ability of the user's muscles to follow the
desired walking motion. The control algorithms resulting from this project will
enable consistent walking movements despite FES-induced muscle fatigue,
contributing to the emergence of an adaptable and lightweight hybrid exoskeleton
with substantial advantages over FES systems or powered exoskeletons alone. This
research will enhance physical activity and improve mobility for individuals
with impaired lower limb function, enabling greater community participation and
increased quality of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a hybrid exoskeleton,
coordinating multiple FES-activated muscles and electric motors can be
complicated due to redundancy. Further, updating multiple control inputs to
account for system uncertainty and FES-induced muscle fatigue can be
computationally expensive for the real-time control. This research will design
adaptive low-dimensional control methods for the hybrid neuroprosthesis. The
human motor control inspired control structure can be used to control multiple
effector system using a fewer number of commands. Thus, redundancy and
complexity associated with the closed-loop control of the hybrid neuroprosthesis
will be reduced. Dynamic optimization will be used to design low-dimensional
control modules for walking. Then by using Lyapunov-based stability analysis,
update and feedback control laws for the control structure will be designed.
This will ensure stability and tracking despite system uncertainty and muscle
fatigue. Finally, the new control structure will be experimentally verified on
able-bodied subjects.