* 1462613
* I-Corps:  Development of a bioengineered organic matrix for enhanced bone regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Deepak Vashishth, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 04/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Currently, synthetic bone substitutes are poorly designed materials that do not
effectively induce new bone formation. Use of these products increases risk of
delayed bone healing. Bone matrix proteins (BMPs) stimulate new bone formation,
but are expensive and are known to cause adverse effects in patients, as
documented recently by the FDA. The team has developed a cost-effective, organic
biomaterial for enhanced bone mineralization and orthopedic regeneration.
Through the use of an innovative, materials design approach employing the
aforementioned bone proteins, this project aims at commercializing a new class
of hybrid organic matrices that can significantly enhance the growth of new bone
tissue. The development of the bone substitute seeks to shift paradigms in
orthopedic regenerative medicine. The success of this work will usher in a new
class of bioengineered matrices that safely induce new bone formation and
prevent occurrence of non-unions. An increased efficacy in bone grafting
procedures will directly translate to lowered hospitals costs and better patient
outcomes.

Non-collagenous proteins (NCPs) osteocalcin (OC) and osteopontin (OPN) are
building blocks of bone, and are released by cells into the extracellular
environment during the mineralization process, where they are incorporated into
the matrix due to their affinity for bone mineral. OC and OPN are considered
powerful regulators of bone matrix quality, strongly influencing mechanical
integrity of bone. NCPs function as link proteins connecting the collagen and
mineral phases of bone matrix together, and as regulators of bone mineral
properties. The self-healing potential of NCPs due, to their interactions with
both, the mineral and collagen phases in bone matrix, makes them ideal
candidates to explore in the field of orthopedic regeneration. By providing the
body with these building blocks of bone, the team seeks to achieve enhanced
mineralization and accelerated bone regeneration. The team is fabricating and
characterizing collagen-based matrices containing NCPs that now need to be
characterized and tested for efficacy through in vitro and in vivo studies.
Preliminary conversations with clinicians and angel investors, have led the team
to believe that a successful test of efficacy will be a significant milestone in
the commercialization of its innovation.