* 1462631
* Collaborative Research: Programmable Metal-Assisted Chemical Etching for Three-Dimensional Functional Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Weidong Zhou, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2018
* USD 119,999.00

Metamaterials are artificially structured materials that exhibit unusual, but
advantageous, electromagnetic properties not readily found in nature. The
special properties arise from regions of complex structural features organized
in a periodic arrangement. Currently, the fabrication of the optical
metamaterials is largely based on intrinsic two-dimensional patterning
processes, with limited demonstrations of three-dimensional optical
metamaterials mostly based on polymer structures. There are no manufacturing
techniques for direct fabrication of three-dimensional crystalline
semiconductor-based metamaterials. This award explores a unique programmable
metal-assisted chemical etching process for the scalable nano-manufacturing of
three-dimensional functional metamaterials. Such an approach will overcome the
current roadblocks towards integrated photonics based on functional
metamaterials to enable complete control of light. The versatile fabrication
methodology and materials functionalities will inevitably impact the production
of three-dimensional electronics and photonics, tissue engineering, and energy
conversion/storage. By engaging students including women and minorities in this
emerging field of research, the award activities will help ensure their
competence and leadership in today's global environment. Outreach activities
targeting high school teachers, students, and the general public will raise
awareness and prepare our future workforce to embrace the emerging US nano-
manufacturing industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal-assisted chemical etching is
an anisotropic solution-based etching method that defies the textbook definition
of wet etching. By this technique, three-dimensional high aspect-ratio
semiconductor nanostructures are formed by engraving patterned metal template
into the body of the semiconductor. Under controlled conditions, etching occurs
only at the interface between the metal and the semiconductor. As a result, the
metal layer descends or digs into the semiconductor as the underlying
semiconductor is eroded. In this study, as etching proceeds, a magnetic field is
programmed to guide the movement of ferromagnetic-metal catalyst and arbitrary
three-dimensional curvilinear nanostructures are formed by programming the
trajectory of the metal catalyst as it engraves into the body of Si or higher
index III-V semiconductors. Because of its compatibility with integrated circuit
manufacturing, this method is scalable for high-volume manufacturing of highly
desired functional optical metamaterials. The collaborative effort with
complementary expertise in nanofabrication and photonics, respectively, is
positioned to provide a leap-ahead advance in capabilities for manufacturing
three-dimensional micro- and nano-scale semiconductor and metallo-dielectric
structures with unprecedented control of shape and dimensions, and for
development of novel functional optical and other materials and devices.