* 1462885
* Experimental Study of Cyclic Plastic Deformation Mechanisms in Hexagonal Close-Packed (HCP) Magnesium
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Yanyao Jiang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/28/2019
* USD 342,318.00

Magnesium has two-thirds the density of aluminum and is the lightest structural
metal. It is the fourth most common element on the Earth and is a green material
due to its lightweight, nontoxicity, and recyclability. Magnesium alloys, which
are mixtures of magnesium with a small amount of other metals, can be used in
automotive and aerospace industries to reduce fuel consumption and greenhouse
gas emissions. Structural components are often subjected to repeated loads and
the resulted cyclic deformation may lead to failure of the component during
operation with a catastrophic consequence. Understanding deformation is of
primary importance for engineering design. Magnesium displays distinguishable
deformation phenomena due to its atomic structure that is different from most of
the other engineering structural materials. This award supports a fundamental
study of the distinct deformation in magnesium under repeated loading. The
knowledge obtained from the research will provide a base for the design of
magnesium components. The effort will promote the application of magnesium and
benefit the U.S. economy and society. The research results will be integrated
into the senior design classes for undergraduate education with open-ended
projects emphasizing the application of the lightweight magnesium.

The major difference of a magnesium alloy from a conventional metal is the
mechanical twinning that plays a pivotal role in deformation of the magnesium
alloy. The overall objective of the research is to explore the deformation
mechanisms due to twinning/de-twinning in magnesium through carefully designed
cyclic deformation experiments and microscopic observations. A systematic study
of the twinning/de-twinning deformation mechanisms will be conducted to
understand nucleation and growth of twins, structures and properties of twin
boundaries, twin-twin interaction, and residual twin development in magnesium
under cyclic loading. Magnesium single crystals oriented along different
directions will be subjected to various cyclic loading conditions, and the
material microstructures and their evolutions with applied loading cycles will
be studied by using different microscopic characterizations. Loading fixtures
and extensometer will be designed to facilitate direct and accurate stress and
strain measurements in small testing specimens. The work will lead to a better
understanding of deformation mechanisms in magnesium due to twinning/de-twinning
and will advance modern engineering design and manufacturing. The obtained
experimental results will serve as a benchmark for the development and
validation of constitutive deformation models at different material length
scales.