* 1462420
* CAREER: Models for Supply Chain Design and Logistics Management of Biofuels
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Sandra Eksioglu, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2017
* USD 258,235.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to build integrated supply chain design and management models for biofuels.
These supply chain models will (1) consider the specific nature of biomass
supply; (2) take an integrated view of production, transportation, and
inventory; and (3) integrate strategic, tactical, and operational decisions. The
goal is to improve the performance of this supply chain, and consequently
increase the practicality of biofuels as a source of energy. In pursuit of this
objective, the following two research areas will be investigated. (1) Supply
chain design problems. Two-stage stochastic programming models will be developed
that integrate location decisions with transportation and inventory management
decisions. (2) Production and distribution problems. Multi-criteria optimization
models will be developed that minimize supply chain related costs, and maximize
the positive impact of biofuels to the environment.

This research will significantly advance the knowledge base needed to address
supply chain design and management problems for biofuels. Other industries, such
as the personal computer and retail industries are already taking advantage of
sophisticated supply chain designs. This work will help build the infrastructure
that is necessary to switch from using petroleum to using biofuels as a source
of renewable and sustainable energy, since well-organized supply chains have the
potential to decrease transportation, inventory and other related supply chain
costs. This research has the potential to positively impact the society by
creating substantial economic value for farmers and biorefineries. Another major
contribution of this award will be its impact to the education of graduate and
undergraduate students through participation in this research project, and
through discussion of related case-studies that will be used in the classroom.