* 1462389
* High-density Plasma for Efficient Manufacturing of Electronic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,01/31/2017
* David Galipeau, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 01/31/2017
* USD 299,890.00

Plasma technology plays a critical role in manufacturing of electronic devices,
such as flat panel displays, computer chips, and solar panels. Industry plasmas
currently used for manufacturing suffer from multiple limitations, including low
plasma density (which slows processing), poor uniformity over large areas,
contamination of plasma and the resulting materials, and inefficient energy use.
This award supports fundamental research on high-density plasma using a unique
magnetically enhanced inductive plasma source. New knowledge obtained from the
research will lead to novel plasma sources that enable efficient manufacturing
of electronic devices and various thin-film products, significantly reducing the
costs of consumer electronics, promoting the adoption of clean energy, and
reducing the negative impact of manufacturing on the environment. This project
will strengthen university-industry collaboration and economic competitiveness
of the U.S. electronics industry. It will also contribute to workforce
development by training students and attracting local tribal students to science
and engineering.

Industry plasmas are created by strong electromagnetic fields. The efficiency of
plasma processing is mainly determined by plasma density, plasma temperature,
and energy distribution of electrons and ions. Conventional low-density plasmas
are excited by unconfined electromagnetic fields that allow energetic electrons
to escape easily from the plasma region, while high-density plasmas can be
created by confined electromagnetic fields that retain energetic electrons
within the plasma region to greatly extend their lifetime. The confined electric
and magnetic fields act simultaneously and have interaction effects on the
plasma. Little is known about the properties of high-density plasma created by
confined electromagnetic fields and the effects of the primary induction
parameters (excitation frequency and magnetic field distribution) on plasma
properties. To fill this knowledge gap, the research team will perform three
tasks. First, establish a plasma simulation model using dedicated software
COMSOL to describe fundamental plasma properties (including plasma density,
plasma temperature, and energy distribution of electrons and ions). Second, use
the established model to predict effects of excitation frequency and magnetic
field distribution on plasma properties. Finally, verify some of the predicted
results by experiments. For example, plasma density and electron energy
distribution at a limited number of points of the plasma region will be measured
using a Langmuir probe, and plasma density over the entire plasma region will be
indirectly measured using an optical emission spectrometer.