* 1462693
* CrowdSight: A Crowdsourcing Platform for Catalyzing and Studying User-Centered Innovation in Engineering Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Brian Bailey, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 04/30/2020
* USD 400,001.00

The objective of this research project is to develop the theory and
implementation of a novel computational design method that enables rapid
generation of feedback on product designs from a scalable audience of potential
users. Many product innovations fail because the needs of users were not
adequately considered during the design process, in large part because gathering
user feedback is expensive and slow. This award will enable fundamental research
on techniques that leverage online crowdsourcing for generating helpful,
affordable, and timely feedback on preliminary product designs from an external
audience. The ability to generate feedback on-demand will have a transformative
impact by enabling engineering designers to develop product innovations that
better satisfy the needs of heterogeneous users. The results from this research
can also lead to improvements in commercial feedback services and increased
confidence in the use of these services, thereby promoting activity in this
niche of the U.S. economy. This research synthesizes techniques from several
disciplines including engineering design, human-computer interaction, and
computer science. The multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden
participation of under-represented groups in research and positively impact
engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design method will be shaped by
studying the discourse of product design reviews and implemented by extending an
existing platform developed in prior research. Using the extended platform as an
online testbed, software methods will be developed that address fundamental
problems for crowdsourcing design feedback such as the inability to generate
feedback under time constraints. The results will considerably improve the
quality, predictability, and affordability of crowdsourced design feedback and
will generalize to other domains. Experiments will also be conducted to measure
the impact of using the integrated platform on authentic design processes. The
platform will be released as open source to benefit the research community and
members of society such as entrepreneurs and amateurs who are pursuing product
innovations as part of their personal or professional goals.