* 1462804
* High-Strength Carbon Fibers from Eco-Friendly Processing of Biomass
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Mark Thies, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2019
* USD 375,000.00

Carbon fibers are among the strongest known reinforcing fibers used in a wide
range of commercial composite materials. Because the element carbon does not
melt, carbon fibers need to be obtained from organic precursors. Among renewable
feedstocks, lignin is starting to play an important role as a potential
precursor for carbon fibers, owing to its significant carbon content. However,
the irregular chemical architecture of lignin makes the resulting carbon network
very inefficient. Therefore, the resulting carbon-fiber properties are still
significantly lower than those obtained from currently used synthetic
polyacrylonitrile precursor, which involves the use of strong solvents and leads
to toxic off-gases such as hydrogen cyanide. This research project is directed
towards the development of a green precursor and an efficient processing route
to obtain high strength carbon fibers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lignin is readily
available as an inexpensive by-product from Kraft paper mills, but this
untreated form contains too many impurities to be used in high-performance
products such as carbon fibers. Recently, Clemson researchers have discovered a
renewable solvent that can purify Kraft lignin and isolate a high molecular
weight lignin fraction in the solvated state. Clemson researchers (in a separate
project) have also shown that dry-spinning of non-fractionated, acetylated
lignin can lead to carbon fibers with enhanced strength. Therefore, the research
team hypothesizes that the solvated lignin precursor will enable direct dry-
spinning of precursor fibers, followed by their conversion to microstructure-
controlled, high-performance carbon fibers. The specific research objectives are
(i) control of the molecular architecture of fractionated-solvated lignin
precursors (ii) rheological evaluation of suitable solvated lignin fractions to
measure strain-hardening for efficient dry-spinning of precursor fibers, and
(iii) microstructural control to obtain superior performance in the resulting
carbon fibers. The intellectual significance of this research is that lignin
fractions with controlled molecular weight and architecture will provide a
unique materials platform for studying the rheological and microstructural
(rheo-structural) behavior of these bio-derived fluids. Specifically, a long-
linear architecture will be identified that leads to strain-hardening during
extensional flow, a desirable phenomenon for stable dry-spinning of fibers. It
is hypothesized that the control of molecular architecture of the fractionated-
solvated lignin will lead to the efficient formation of graphitic carbon and
superior properties for the resulting carbon fibers.