* 1462284
* GOALI: Routes to Improve Performance for Membrane Separation of Next Generation Biofuels for Transportation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Bryan Vogt, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2019
* USD 299,810.00

Gasoline is generally blended with plant-derived ethanol, however, ethanol tends
to increase the water content in the gasoline and decreases the engine
performance. New engineering approaches allow for other fuel products to be
produced from plant-derived sources, most notably butanol, which overcomes the
aforementioned issues associated with ethanol. However, the butanol product is
dilute in water and the water must be removed. Membranes provide a low cost
solution to the butanol recovery, but there are performance trade-offs that
limit its utility. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) project will examine a new class of materials that could enable
significant improvements in the performance of these membranes. Successful
completion of this project would not only advance these membranes, but also
accelerate their commercialization through the partnership with Promerus,
LLC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine an alternative BCP system
based on polynorbornenes (PNB); PNB can exhibit a high glass transition
temperature (&gt;200 °C) and likely large free volume generally absent for high-
Tg polymers that could enhance the flux. One critical challenge for BCPs is the
development of low cost processing routes that are suitable for high volume
manufacturing and yield well-defined microphase-separated structures. This
project seeks to determine methodologies to controllable highly reproducible
microphase-separated structures and understand their fundamental thermodynamic,
dynamic and mechanical properties. Recently, Promerus LLC has developed new,
functional group-tolerant polymerization initiators; enabling the synthesis of
unique functionalized norbornene BCPs. It is hypothesized that the developed
morphology will critically impact the membrane performance with likely trade-
offs between flux and selectivity with the size of the hydrophilic/hydrophobic
domains. This hypothesis will be tested using a series of copolymers by
systematically varying the composition, molecular mass and alkyl side chain to
understand how the BCP nanostructure acts to improve performance. The
overarching goals of this project are to understand how the structure of the
copolymer impacts properties critical to membrane operations and how to control
this structure through processing techniques extendable to large-scale
manufacturing. Fundamental investigations to elucidate morphology-mechanical
property relationships and quantify impact of fouling and defouling on the
mechanical, morphological, and separation properties, all as a function of
processing conditions will be research. This work will provide fundamental
processing-structure-property relationships for BCPs for separations and enable
novel material designs for commercialization.