* 1462648
* 3D Printing of Hierarchical Fiber-Reinforced Soft-Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Sandipan Mishra, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Hierarchical fiber-reinforced soft-composites are composites made up of
polymeric fibers (with specific material properties and hierarchical length-
scales) embedded within a soft polymer matrix. Their emerging applications have
highlighted the impending need to combine 3D printing (or additive
manufacturing) technologies with the directed deposition of polymeric fiber
networks. While the printing of multi-material polymer parts using droplet-
deposition or melt-extrusion techniques is well-established, the 3D printing of
hierarchical fiber-reinforced soft-composites is largely unproven. This award
supports fundamental research directed towards developing 3D printing processes
for these composites. The research findings will enable the development of a
reliable and scalable 3D printing technology for such composites, leading to the
creation of a new market-segment for 3D printers. It will also facilitate
innovations in fields such as bio-inspired materials, embedded sensing, and 4D
printing (3D printed products with shape-memory properties). These avenues
collectively represent a multi-billion dollar world-wide market that affects key
industries such as aerospace, healthcare, and defense. This award also supports
educational outreach activities that will impact students in multiple
institutions (including Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and Hudson Valley
community college) and the minority-serving middle/high-schools in the upstate
New York area.

This research will investigate the fundamental manufacturing science and
process-control problems unique to the 3D printing of hierarchical fiber-
reinforced soft-composites. The PIs have recently invented a novel 3D printer
that combines the conventional inkjet-based printing of ultraviolet curable
polymers with the directed stamping of electrospun fiber networks. Using this 3D
printing platform, the PIs will investigate the effect of key fiber and
substrate properties on the fiber-transfer efficiencies and the physics of the
fiber-droplet interactions encountered during the 3D printing process. On the
experimental front, the research will focus on the manufacture of a diverse
family of patterned fibers suitable for 3D printing, followed by process studies
involving fiber-transfer efficiencies/material property characterization and
high-speed imaging studies of fiber-droplet interactions. The modeling aspect of
this research will focus on establishing novel control strategies tailored for
3D printing hierarchical fiber-reinforced soft-composites. The process studies
will yield quantitative metrics that map the fiber-transfer efficiencies to
critical process parameters such as stamping load, and fiber/substrate
properties. These process maps will enable the selection of appropriate stamping
load profiles while controlling the 3D printing process. The high-speed imaging
study is expected to identify new droplet spreading regimes, droplet shapes and
characteristic time-scales encountered during the 3D printing of hierarchical
fiber-reinforced soft-composites.