* 1462292
* GOALI: Precision Measurement and Control of Machined Surfaces using Digital Holographic Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jun Ni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 224,114.00

Global manufacturing competition drives companies to greatly improve the quality
of their products, leading to increasingly strict tolerances. Even a small error
can be the difference between a successful product launch and a major delay.
Precision-machined surfaces are critical in many product functionalities. For
example, the quality of machined automotive engine deck surface may have an
impact on the potential oil leakage through gasket area. It may also affect the
distortion of engine block and head assembly, which in turns affects the
frictional behavior, and thus fuel economy of the engine. This Grant Opportunity
for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research project will investigate the
fundamental mechanism of complex surface shape generation. Results of the
research will provide the knowledge needed to develop the methods for precision
surface measurement and control utilizing the latest innovations in digital
laser holographic measurement. The results of this project will greatly benefit
US manufacturing sectors and enhance their core competencies. Improved surface
quality and achieved proactive process control can improve the manufacturing
quality by reducing the scrap rate in production and will help industry to
establish proactive control over processes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
will provide the knowledge needed to establish novel multi-scale surface shape
characterization methods for machined surfaces. In these methods, features will
be extracted from high-definition digital holographic measurement data of
engineering surfaces with consideration of machining process parameters. The
extracted features will help identify the mechanisms of surface quality issues
in both large and medium scales, i.e., shape distortion and waviness variation.
Quality control methods can then be established based on deep understanding of
surface variations and their root causes. By leveraging the high definition data
from digital laser holographic surface measurement and relevant important
process information, this study will provide new insights into surface shape
variation and control. The methodologies will be tested and validated using real
factory data provided by the industrial partner.