* 1462499
* Hydropower Plant on a Chip: Frictionless Nanochannel Systems for Hydroelectric Power Generation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Chang-Hwan Choi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2019
* USD 199,990.00

Water flow through nanoscale channels can create electric power called streaming
current. However, such nanoscale hydrodynamic flows have not yet been
intensively investigated for practical energy manufacturing systems,
particularly due to their low energy conversion efficiency resulting from
significant frictional energy loss at the channel walls. This award supports
fundamental research on such nanoscale hydrodynamic flows to lay the technical
foundation for the development of nanofluidic energy manufacturing systems with
high hydroelectric energy conversion efficiency and output power that are
meaningful for real applications. Working as a "hydropower plant on a chip" with
virtually little energy loss, the frictionless nanofluidic energy manufacturing
systems can power small autonomous sensors, their networks, and mobile/wearable
devices without batteries. Scaled-up systems (e.g., arrays of such chips) can
further serve as reliable power stations for large systems with amplified power
output. Scavenging energy from water, a sustainable/renewable resource, will
enable such systems to be functional with little influence by ambient
conditions. The integrated educational/outreach activities with research will
help to prepare the next generation of technology leaders, a necessity for the
U.S. to maintain its leadership role in energy manufacturing in a global
economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to verify the
theoretical prediction that a superhydrophobic surface reducing viscous wall
friction with significant slip can increase ionic streaming current in nanoscale
channel flow and consequently the electrokinetic energy conversion efficiency,
potentially close to 100%, and also the output power up to a level two orders of
magnitude higher than the current state of the art. To achieve this objective, a
parametric study will be performed numerically for the electrostatically and
hydrodynamically heterogeneous boundary conditions configurable on various types
of superhydrophobic surfaces. The resulting streaming current and flow
properties will be computed by coupling the Poisson-Boltzmann and the Navier-
Stokes equations and employing the fluidic circuitry based on Onsager reciprocal
relations. The theoretical results will then be verified with nanofluidic
experiments by testing superhydrophobic nanochannels of regulated sizes for
varying electrolytes and flow conditions. The combined theoretical and
experimental approaches will reveal the new knowledge of the correlations
between the electro-hydrodynamic and -kinetic variables critical for the
electrokinetic power generation in nanochannel systems with heterogeneous
boundary conditions.