* 1462855
* Improving Our Understanding of Liquefaction-Induced Displacements: Integration of Remote Sensing Data and Field Data from the 2010/2011 New Zealand Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Ellen Rathje, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2020
* USD 377,916.00

Liquefaction is a significant seismic hazard in which the induced ground
movements cause severe damage to the built environment. Our understanding of the
consequences of liquefaction is hampered by the limited field data that exist
regarding liquefaction-induced movements (e.g., lateral spreading) during
previous earthquakes. This project will investigate liquefaction-induced lateral
spreading during the 2010 Darfield and 2011 Christchurch earthquakes in New
Zealand using displacements derived from satellite imagery and LIDAR. These
displacements will be integrated with subsurface, topographic, and geologic data
to improve our understanding of the factors that influence liquefaction-induced
lateral spreading displacements. The results of this work potentially will have
far-reaching impact on geotechnical engineering because of new insights into the
phenomenon of lateral spreading provided by the dense spatial resolution of the
deformations measured by the remote sensing techniques. This work will
substantiate a new displacement monitoring technique for the geotechnical
community such that future earthquake studies and hazard mapping can take
advantage of these techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a combination of
improved sensors (e.g., 50-cm resolution optical satellite imagery, 1-m
resolution LIDAR) and advanced processing algorithms (e.g., precise
georeferencing between images and datasets), it is now possible to monitor sub-
meter displacements via remote sensing and at fine spatial resolution on the
ground. The unprecedented spatial resolution of the deformations produced by
remote sensing combined with the availability of an enormous amount of
subsurface data in Christchurch provide a unique opportunity to improve our
understanding of the characteristics that influence liquefaction-induced lateral
deformations. The project also will involve detailed geologic mapping and
interpretation by engineering geologists, and this information will be used to
gain further insights into the geologic constraints that influence the observed
displacement patterns and lateral spread kinematics. These data will allow us to
investigate the influence and interconnections of the subsurface
characteristics, spatial variability, geologic conditions, topography, ground
motions, etc. on the observed movements; this understanding will improve both
empirical and numerical models for predicting lateral spread displacements.