* 1462501
* Mechanics of Dynamic Discontinuities
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* James Hanna, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2019
* USD 295,862.00

As flexible objects move, they often develop discontinuities in their shapes.
Discontinuities of interest are features such as sharp folds, contacts with
obstacles and guides, or tears. This work seeks to understand the mechanics and
dynamics of these discontinuities and investigates how they move, and how they
affect the motion of the flexible object as a whole. Fundamental engineering
science outcomes may eventually be applied to many different technology domains.
Thin, flexible structures like strings, cables, sheets, and plates are important
components of many engineered systems, including, among other things, energy
harvesting technologies, sensors, marine and aerospace structures. Manufacturing
technologies such as transfer printing and textile processing also involve the
dynamical behavior of thin, flexible structures and their contact
discontinuities. Mechanical metamaterials and morphing devices rely on the
manipulation and response of thin plates or strips linked by hinges or other
sharp features. The project will also provide opportunities for outreach and
education on topics in mechanics, through demonstration of exciting phenomena
insightful to the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamical behavior
of discontinuities is a fundamental topic in analytical mechanics. The work will
apply a new unifying variational framework for non-material discontinuities in
materials and structures, including kinks and folds, moving contacts and
impacts, and peeling and tearing fronts. The approach is new in that it treats
all of these objects as time-dependent boundaries. The work is organized around
three projects, each representing a different class of discontinuity: 1) Pickup,
impact, and peeling of cables and tapes, 2) Propagating folds in membranes,
plates, and shells, and 3) Cracking, tearing, and cutting of sheets. The work
will generate novel theoretical results on momentum and energy balances in these
systems, and analytical solutions for motions of discontinuities. Tabletop
experiments with chains will provide experimental data on discontinuous dynamic
contacts.