* 1462044
* Creating Impact from Governmental Open Data (OD): Innovation Process Transparency in OD Contest Design
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Ann Majchrzak, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 08/31/2020
* USD 286,370.00

Making governmental information publicly available can fuel innovation. The
release of weather and GPS data led to the Weather Channel and commercial
agricultural advisory services as historical examples of novel applications that
created public benefit. The Open Government initiative, launched in 2009,
provides access to several hundred thousand machine-readable datasets in areas
such as energy, health, and education. However, despite the potential for public
benefit there are concerns that this platform for governmental open data does
not sufficiently spur civic participation, resulting in fewer applications.
Increasing access and usability of these data would result in more effective use
of government data for the benefit of American citizens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the use of innovation contests as a
way to develop solutions that use open governmental data. Innovation contests
involve a large crowd of non-expert users, developers, entrepreneurs, and
government officials who jointly develop solutions. The Federal Government
engages in such contests (e.g. Challenge.gov). This project tests an alternative
competition design that fosters transparency and encourages collaboration. The
study involves field experiments with several hundred participants. Participants
collectively decide what problems to solve and share their perspectives towards
the innovative solutions created by the crowd. The field experiments consider
alternative mechanisms for sharing different types of innovation-related
knowledge and for increasing transparent decision making in order to drive
citizen participation and spur the development of novel and useful open data
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;