* 1462347
* Collaborative Research: Facility Support: National Lacustrine Core Facility (LacCore)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Erik Brown, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 213,102.00

1462347 Brown

This collaborative grant between the University of Minnesota - Twin Cities
(EAR-1462297) and Duluth campuses supports renewed partial funding of operations
and laboratory improvements at LacCore, a national multi-user lake sediment core
archival and analysis facility. LacCore was previously supported under EAR-
0949962 and EAR- 0949285. The LacCore Facility supports the limnological
community for studies that contribute to our understanding of past climates,
ecological systems, and biogeochemical dynamics on the continents though
detailed sedimentological analysis and archival services for lacustrine cores.
LacCore operates open laboratories to allow community access to specialized
field and laboratory equipment and staff expertise for Initial Core Description
(ICD) methods including: core splitting; non-destructive multi-sensor core
logging; XRF core scanning; SEM imaging; palynological preparation; grain size
analysis; carbon coulometry; phase identification via x-ray diffraction;
biogenic silica analysis; preparation of samples for subsequent stable isotopic
analysis; digital core photography, and optical petrography/smear slide
analysis. LacCore also provides refrigerated and frozen core storage and
archival services and field coring equipment and curatorial materials (D-tubes)
support for lake coring expeditions. LacCore staff are responsible for curation
of lake core ICD metadata and the routine transmission of all data to NOAA?s
National Geophysical Data Center, development of software for core image
analysis and correlation, and education and outreach activities including
advising Native American tribe resource managers in the state of Minnesota,
supporting student travel grants to expose students to standard protocols for
core description and analysis, and developing social media and smart phone
applications in support of geoscience education and public awareness. With the
selection of the University of Minnesota as the new Continental Scientific
Drilling Coordination Office (CSDCO; EAR- 1338322), replacing a role that used
to be managed by DOSECC, LacCore PIs will now engage in large drilling project
planning and execution.

The LacCore Facility will continue as a training ground for hundreds of
researchers, particularly graduate students, in coring and core analysis
techniques. LacCore staff are engaged in education and outreach including an
ongoing collaborative project aimed at study of the paleoenvironments of wild
rice lakes in northern Minnesota with tribal college students and teachers from
the Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa and Fond du Lac Tribal and
Community College. LacCore staff actively engage in outreach activities to
support the engagement of underrepresented students in the geosciences. LacCore
data are accessible via web-based open data archives and LacCore staff actively
maintain and develop software tools that assist in the imaging and
interpretation of lake core records.

***