* 1462101
* Collaborative Research: Extrusion Roll Imprinting of High Fidelity Nano-scale Features on Continuously Moving Substrates
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Donggang Yao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Brigid Mullany
* 04/30/2018
* USD 26,664.00

Extraordinary mechanical, optical, electrical, magnetic, and thermal properties
are possible in materials at the nano-scale. To successfully exploit these
useful properties in a wide range of applications, nano-scale features,
especially 10 nm and less, must be formed reliably and in a cost-effective
manner. Although continuous, roll-to-roll nanoimprinting processes exist for
replicating nanofeatures, they are currently limited to ultra violet light
curable resins. Additionally, the fidelity of the replication needs considerable
improvement. This collaborative research award supports fundamental research to
provide the needed knowledge base for the investigation of continuous imprinting
of nano-scale features on any type of thermoplastic polymers, reliably.
Thermoplastic polymers with versatile physical and chemical properties are
highly desired in numerous disposable devices for applications in energy,
healthcare, biomedical, chemical, automotive, telecommunication industries. It
is anticipated that the results of the project will form the scientific basis to
facilitate successful transfer of this novel nanomanufacturing technology to
industry. The project will augment curriculum development, particularly in the
interdisciplinary area of nanomanufacturing. In addition, it will promote
teaching, training, and learning through multidisciplinary approaches and
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups including women
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research uses a
multidisciplinary approach to address the need to manufacture cost-effective
nanostructures onto extruded film surfaces. The project will study the
variotherm extrusion roll imprinting process as a clear path to scalable
nanomanufacturing. It will investigate the fabrication of belt molds with
micro/nano features from a planar geometry, study a Leonov type continuum-based
constitutive model to capture the nonlinear viscoelastic behavior of the polymer
film during roll-to-roll nanoimprinting, and perform molecular dynamics
simulation to study the nanocavity filling process. Fundamental contributions
are anticipated in the nanoscale dynamics of polymer flow and deformation during
continuous imprinting. Specifically, the research will advance understanding of
boundary effects (including wall slip) on micro/nano deformation, dynamics of
polymer chains under geometrical confinement, viscoelasticity in size scales
below 100 nm, multiscale modeling capabilities for non-equilibrium deformation
of macromolecules, and control of thermomechanical history in nanofabrication.