* 1462807
* Collaborative Research: Accelerated Large-Scale Simulation Study of Atomic-Scale Wear Using Hyper-Quasicontinum
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Ellad Tadmor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2020
* USD 248,355.00

This collaborative award supports research on the mechanics of wear mechanisms
occurring at the atomic scale. A novel predictive computational approach, the
hyper-quasicontinuum (hyper-qc) method, will be employed and advanced. This
approach will enable the computational simulation of friction and wear at
realistic sliding speeds with atomic resolution of critical events and spatial
domains. The simulation results are expected to lead to new insights into the
fundamentals of atomic-scale wear. Such knowledge is a prerequisite for
predicting wear at macroscopic length scales. Hence the outcomes will provide
valuable insight into the improved engineering of structures and materials with
the aim of wear reduction. Wear of conventional mechanical parts has been
conservatively estimated to cause a loss equivalent to approximately 1.5 percent
of an industrialized nation's Gross Domestic Product. For the United States,
this corresponds to about 250 billion dollars in 2013. The problems arising from
wear are even more critical in the newly emerging field of nanotechnology. Wear
significantly hampers the adoption of systems with moving parts. Thus, the
outcomes would enable further advances in nanotechnology. All computer codes
established as an outcome of this project will be made freely available to the
research community via dedicated web portals (qcmethod.org and openkim.org). The
collaborative project will provide training for graduate students. An outreach
program for science and engineering education will be organized with local high
schools in Cincinnati whose student populations are predominantly from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate aim of this project
is to develop a novel predictive model for nano-scale wear, which can be used to
reduce wear at macroscopic length scales. The research approach is based on the
use of the hyper-qc method. To enable the analysis of wear, methodological
innovations to advance the hyper-qc method are necessary. These advances would
enable the method to deal with multiple time-scales. A novel approach for
coupling of atomistic and continuum regions accounting for heat transfer will
also be established. The hyper-qc method will make it possible to consider key
experiments on atomic-scale wear. Simulating will capture all relevant features
of wear experiments with an atomic force microscope apparatus. Thereby, atomic
resolution is retained in the contact region and sliding speeds comparable to
actual experiments are considered. Wear simulations will consider various
engineering materials of technological interest including silicon, silicon-
oxides, and diamond-like carbons. From the hyper-qc simulations it will be
possible to identify the atomic-scale mechanisms responsible for wear at the
nano-scale and to study their dependence on important experimental conditions
such as sliding velocity and temperature. Conflicts between simulation results
and experimental data and observations will be used to improve existing models
for nano-scale wear.