* 1462270
* A New Level-Set-Based Robust Topology Optimization Approach with Applications to Design of Phononic Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shikui Chen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2019
* USD 392,934.00

Topology optimization is a computational design approach for efficiently
generating material geometries with desired properties. However, these
geometries are often difficult to manufacture or may require additional post-
processing before they can be realized using additive manufacturing techniques.
In addition, multi-physics, multi-material problems involving uncertainty are
not well addressed with conventional topology optimization methods. This award
supports fundamental research towards the development of a unified computational
framework that combines level-set-based topology optimization methods, robust
design, additive manufacturing, and experimental characterization to address
these challenges. This approach seamlessly integrates generative topology
optimization with additive manufacturing. The resulting methods and tools will
enable innovative design of next-generation multifunctional materials. The
findings of the research will be broadly disseminated to the academic community
and general public. The teaching and outreach activities will improve the
quality and effectiveness of education for teachers and students at the K-12,
undergraduate and graduate levels, with a significant effort towards involvement
of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a novel level-
set-based automated computational design method will be developed to provide
seamless integration of topology optimization, multiphysics mesh-free finite
element analysis, robust design, and additive manufacturing. This will enable
systematic design and efficient realization of high-quality and high-throughput
multifunctional metamaterials. The goal of this research will be accomplished
by: (1) conducting high-fidelity simulations on acoustic/elastic wave
propagation in phononic metamaterials using an element-free Galerkin method; (2)
devising new numerical methods to handle large-scale topology optimization
problems with non-convex objective functions and multiple nonlinear constraints;
(3) developing new design methods for simultaneous robust shape and topology
optimization with level-set-based dynamic topological design; (4) exploring new
methods that leverage the information embedded in geometric level-set models to
enable seamless integration of topology design with additive manufacturing; (5)
cross validating the design methods and models through experimental tests. The
combination of numerical and experimental studies will provide a better
scientific understanding of the underlying multiphysics mechanisms in
multifunctional phononic metamaterials. New techniques for accurate multi-
physics modeling, efficient large scale topology optimization and uncertainty
quantification, and uncertainty propagation will be explored.