* 1462732
* Renewable Paving Binders from Top-lit Updraft Kilning of Biomass
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* Wenqiao Yuan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 05/31/2021
* USD 375,000.00

The long-term goal of this research is to develop a renewable alternative to
asphalt binder in pavements while maintaining or improving performance over
conventional binders. This project will study bio-binders produced as a by-
product of top-lit updraft kilning (TLUK) of biomass to replace asphalt. TLUK is
currently under study primarily for the production of syngas and bio-char but
also generates a heavy-oil like liquid waste, called tar in biomass
gasification. This project will lead to improved methods for producing paving
binders from processing of biomass, advancing sustainable civil infrastructure
design and reducing paving costs which have risen dramatically in recent years.

The objective of this project is to test the hypothesis that the selection of
biomass feedstock, TLUK operating conditions, and modifiers can be aligned to
yield a bio-binder with properties and performance comparable to petroleum-based
asphalt and that reduces energy use and emissions over the life of the pavement.
Through exploring multiple feedstock sources, including corncobs (agriculture
residual), switchgrass (perennial grass), and woodchips (woody biomass), and
varying TLUK operational parameters, this research will link production methods
to bio-binder yield and quality. This, in turn, will advance knowledge regarding
production of bio-renewable alternatives to asphalt. Additionally, the research
will explore improvement of bio-binder performance through modification by
polymers, which have been successfully utilized in petroleum-based asphalts. A
multi-scale approach will be taken to best engineer bio-binders. Fundamental
characterization of bio-binders composition and microstructure will be performed
and linked to production parameters. Macroscale performance of bio-binder
cohesive and adhesive properties will be measured and qualitatively linked to
composition. In addition, bio-binder aggregate mixtures will be produced to
assess constructability and performance. Critical properties for qualifying bio-
binders for use in pavements will be identified through comparison between bio-
binder properties and mixture performance. Life cycle assessment will be
conducted for the processes associated with bio-binder production, use in
pavement, and pavement end-of-life management to assess and enhance the
sustainability compared to conventional asphalt pavements.