* 1462717
* Predicting Changes in Structure and Properties During Wear in Metallic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Timothy Rupert, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 344,998.00

Wear is generically defined as the loss or displacement of material during
sliding contact, and is an engineering topic of great practical importance.
Material loss during service can result in reduced component performance or even
catastrophic failure of a device. Nanostructured metals, where internal
structural features have dimensions in the nanometer range, are promising
materials for wear-resistant coatings and engineering components because of
their extremely high hardness and strength. However, the unique nanostructure
that imparts excellent strength also accumulates wear damage in unique ways.
This award supports a systematic investigation of wear loss and damage in such
nanostructured metallic materials. The research combines mechanical engineering
with materials science and physics, while also utilizing a combination of
cutting-edge experimental and computational techniques. Of specific interest is
the identification of the effect of operating conditions on the accumulation of
wear damage. Therefore, this project will benefit the U.S. economy by allowing
for the design of better wear-resistant materials that extend product lifetime
and limit wear failures. In addition, educational and research opportunities
will be created for students from diverse backgrounds, broadening participation
in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an innovative
study to reveal the mechanisms of structural evolution and damage during wear of
nanocrystalline metals, and to understand how these changes affect subsequent
mechanical response. Molecular dynamics simulations will first be used to
explore how abrasive sliding drives grain boundary migration, grain growth, and
grain boundary relaxation. Of specific interest will be the connection between
continuum predictions of stress fields, local atomic stress distributions, and
structural evolution. The effects of alloy chemistry and grain boundary energy
will also be probed. These simulations will be used to guide wear experiments
and inform site-specific structural characterization, in order to study the
evolution of near-surface microstructure as a function of grain size, wear
cycle, applied load, and sliding speed. This data will be used to create
"structural evolution maps," to improve the field's understanding of how
nanocrystalline materials respond to complex deformation conditions and help in
the future design of damage-resistant nanostructured materials. The study will
also quantify how the mechanical properties of the near-surface material evolve
with wear damage.