* 1462796
* Optimal Pulse Design in Quantum Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jr-Shin Li, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2019
* USD 288,000.00

The capability to precisely control the dynamics of quantum systems constitutes
a significant step in the advancement of quantum science and technology. State-
of-the-art quantum technology can be used to trap and experiment with individual
atoms (quantum optics), image brains and hearts (magnetic resonance imaging),
generate structural and dynamical information of biological macromolecules
(nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy), and process information and
computation (quantum information and computation). All of these applications are
enabled by the application of a single electromagnetic pulse or multiple pulse
sequences. A typical problem is to engineer time-varying pulses that
simultaneously steer a large ensemble (e.g., billions) of identical quantum
systems from an initial state to a desired target state, or as close as
possible, in a permissible amount of time. Such pulse design tasks are
challenging because individual quantum systems in an ensemble have slightly
different dynamics, such as different frequencies, but they need to be
controlled by the use of a common control input. This project will develop a
unified control-theoretic framework for systematically and effectively design
pulses that optimally control the time evolution of quantum systems. This highly
transdisciplinary research will not only result in innovative and significant
contributions to systems theory and control engineering, but also generate
promising contributions to biochemistry and medical physics. For example, this
research will enhance resolution in medical imaging for precise medical
diagnosis. The project will also support new initiatives to promote
interdisciplinary education for students, in particular for those from
traditionally underserved populations through the creation of summer research
opportunities for students from local high schools in the city of St. Louis,
MO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By bridging ensemble systems theory with geometry and
computational optimal control, general and versatile frameworks for quantum
control will be formulated. Specifically, a dynamic mapping between nonlinear
quantum spin systems and linear harmonic oscillators under optimal forcing will
be constructed, which enables the derivation of undiscovered analytical
broadband pulses, and an intuitive and elegant geometric connection of the
evolution of a quantum spin ensemble with a helix on the Frenet frame will be
established. In addition, an iterative algorithm based on the singular value
decomposition and a universal optimization procedure integrating
multidimensional pseudospectral discretizations and constraint partitioning
techniques for designing unconstrained and constrained optimal pulses will be
devised. In collaboration with experimental quantum control groups at different
institutions in the United States and overseas, the developed methods will be
employed to design practical pulses for protein NMR spectroscopy and MRI, as
well as low-complexity pulses for portable medical imaging devices. These pulses
will be experimentally realized and verified.