* 1462826
* Understanding and Creating Switchable Many-State Architectured Materials Through the Exploitation of Nonlinear Post-Buckling Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Ryan Elliott, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2019
* USD 283,586.00

Architectured materials consist of two or more constituent materials and empty
space arranged in and ordered assembly. These materials have properties not
offered by any one material alone. One class of relevant materials is that of
lattice materials where periodic assemblies of slender material elements make up
the material's internal structure. When subjected to mechanical loads, these
materials can respond in extremely complex and highly nonlinear ways. The
response often includes buckling of the microstructure elements. During this
instability the microstructure changes from one configuration to another. This
award supports fundamental research to generate the knowledge necessary to
understand and design architectured materials with desirable types of microlevel
buckling behavior. These materials would be switchable between many different
buckled states, and each state would have its own properties that could be
tailored for specific applications. Such materials would have many applications
ranging from vibration control in aerospace structures with multiple flight
regimes to multi-function sensors where, for example, one material state would
sense changes in magnetic field, another changes in temperature, and a third
changes in mechanical load. The research project will train graduate and
undergraduate students in the emerging science of architectured materials and
the mechanics of buckling and instabilities. It will also encourage
participation of underrepresented groups in research and engineering through the
incorporation of research results in graduate and undergraduate courses at the
University of Minnesota, and through interaction with K-12 faculty and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will research the fundamental issue
of post-buckling behavior in periodic architectured materials. Research will be
conducted on the nonlinear mathematical modeling and characterization of
buckling and instabilities in the microstructure of architectured materials; on
the high-performance computational simulation of these complex materials; and on
understanding how the behavior of these materials is affected by the presence of
imperfections in their constituent materials and/or their manufacture. The
research will employ the mathematical theories of bifurcation and symmetry
groups to understand the complex buckling mechanisms that occur in periodic
architectured materials. It will use these mathematical tools to explore and
create computational algorithms for efficiently and systematically mapping out
the rich set of states and buckling behavior associated with these materials.
The research will also study how a periodic architectured material's buckling
behavior depends on its periodic unit cell properties such as size, shape,
lattice geometry, and constituent material properties.