* 1462046
* 2015 Engineering Mechanics Institute (EMI) Conference: Computation for Sustainable Urban Systems; Stanford University, Palo Alto, California; June 16-19, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Ronaldo Borja, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 03/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

Over fifty percent of the world's population now lives in urban areas, a
proportion that is expected to increase further as more and more names are added
to the list of megacities in the world. Projections show that urbanization
combined with the overall growth of the world's population could add another 2.5
billion people to urban populations by 2050. This imposes considerable demands
on the environment to find resources for its inhabitants. The Engineering
Mechanics Institute Conference to be held at Stanford University on June 16-19,
2015 focuses on the role of engineering mechanics to tackle important problems
associated with sustainable urban systems. The Conference will be attended by
experts in different areas of engineering mechanics from all over the world. The
objective of this project is to provide graduate students an opportunity to
present their work in front of experts in their field of specialization, as well
as promote exchange of scientific knowhow with these experts. Graduate students
will be provided financial assistance in the form of travel fellowships to
enable them to attend the Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban systems offer
important opportunities for economic development. However, they also impose
considerable challenges such as providing for public transportation, housing,
electricity, water, sanitation, and other services for their inhabitants. In
addressing these challenges, the Conference theme will revolve around
sustainability of urban systems. Topics that will be covered in the Conference
include molecular and micro-structural modeling and experimentation, mechanics
of bio-inspired and biological materials, applied mechanics, computational
methods in engineering mechanics, damage and fracture mechanics, performance-
based engineering, mechanics of concrete and cementitious materials,
geomechanics and geohazards, geo-energy, sensing and structural health
monitoring, stochastic dynamics and inverse problems, and mechanics of
sustainable structural materials.