* 1462434
* Low Cost Generalized Coupled Cluster Theory for Static and Dynamic Correlations
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Gustavo Scuseria, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 03/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Gustavo Scuseria of Rice University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational methods program in the Chemistry Division to
develop novel, efficient and accurate methods to treat molecules and materials
in which the motion of electrons is strongly correlated. Computational methods
play a key role in understanding chemical and physical behavior and therefore
can help guide the development of transformative technologies which rely on
novel material properties. However, there are important problems for which the
existing techniques are inadequate. Most prominently, current computational
tools do not properly describe the strong correlations which are responsible for
superconductivity and various important magnetic phenomena. This research seeks
to remedy that deficiency by extending conventional methods in a new and unique
direction. These new methods will be applied to study the strong correlations in
graphitic systems, which serve as prototypes for systems displaying magnetic
ordering. In the longer term, the tools developed in this proposal will be
useful for other researchers in chemistry, physics, and materials science as
well. A diverse group of graduate students and postdoctoral associates are
involved in carrying out this research.

In order to accomplish these goals, Scuseria and coworkers combine the recently
developed pair coupled cluster theory (which is able to describe strong static
correlations) with Lie algebraic similarity transformation (which is able to
describe the remaining weak correlations needed to reach quantitative accuracy).
The combination of these two techniques should describe both strong and weak
correlations with reasonable expense while avoiding the unphysical symmetry
breaking which more conventional methods require but which makes their
predictions somewhat suspect. The applications to fullerenes, graphene
nanoribbons, and nanodots will demonstrate the capabilities of this new
computational approach and will help explain their unique properties.