* 1462008
* The Effect of Accelerators on the Regional Entrepreneurial Ecosystem: Financing, Economic Development and Cluster Formation
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Yael Hochberg, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2021
* USD 451,442.00

Seed accelerators are a new form of support for entrepreneurial firms. Replacing
the older model of incubators, seed accelerators operate as fixed-term, cohort-
based, "boot camps" for startups offer educational and mentorship programs for
startup founders, exposing them to wide variety of mentors, including former
entrepreneurs, venture capitalists, angel investors, and corporate executives;
and culminate in a public pitch event, during which the graduating cohort of
startup companies pitch their businesses to a large group of potential
investors. Many local governments have invested in the accelerator model as a
means to transform their local economies. Despite their popularity, with
estimates of more than 3000 seed accelerator programs worldwide, there is little
evidence on the impact of seed accelerator programs, and the degree to which
they tangibly contribute to regional economies or simply result in the
reallocation of entrepreneurial firms and investment dollars between regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide policy relevant evidence on the
role of accelerators in facilitating the emergence of an entrepreneurial
ecosystem in a local region. The project will document how accelerators affect
the provision of venture capital funding, innovation and the development of the
local entrepreneurial economy. Results inform not only on the overall value of
accelerators to the local entrepreneurial ecosystem, but also the value of
establishing links to local industry. Understanding the factors that foster both
growth in regional ecosystems or reallocation of entrepreneurial firms and
investment dollars across different regions provides an understanding of
policies that make a difference to startup founders and investors, and regional
economic vibrancy more generally.