* 1462774
* Collaborative Research: Active Control of Nonlinear Flow-Induced Instability of Wind Turbine Blades under Stochastic Perturbations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Luca Caracoglia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2021
* USD 201,743.00

Wind turbine blades continue to grow in length to extract more energy from the
wind. This trend results in more flexible blades that are more susceptible to
flow-induced instabilities, which can lead to sudden and catastrophic failures.
The onset of these dynamic instabilities can be altered by the inherent
uncertainties in the system, and is dangerously close to the wind turbine's
designed operational speed. This poses a threat to the integrity of the system.
Being able to control these instabilities is critical for the successful
operation of future wind turbine blades. The goal of this project is to examine
and understand appropriate methodologies to actively control nonlinear flow-
induced instabilities of large wind turbine blades, considering their inherent
stochastic nature. This project will support the ability to design and operate
larger, more flexible wind turbine blades, which will eventually increase energy
capture and reduce the cost of energy offshore wind. This research is timely
since the current energy plan of the United States strongly emphasizes the need
for alternative energy production from sources such as offshore wind energy. The
findings of this research will be disseminated at different levels by creating
new modules for different courses, hosting high school classes, and increasing
research opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
consider a fully-coupled continuous fluid-structure interaction model of the
flexible, rotating blades, accounting for varying blade shapes and cross-
sections, as well as bending and torsional properties. We will use this
nonlinear model to examine the effect of a number of non-deterministic system
parameters on the onset of flow-induced instabilities, using perturbation
methods as well as stochastic calculus, and to investigate strategies to
actively control these flow-induced instabilities using advances in bifurcation
control, probabilistic robustness and multivariable robust control. The
Intellectual Merit of this project lies in a unified methodology to advance the
fundamental understanding and analysis of control strategies for large wind-
turbine systems, which involve the interaction of a flexible structure (the
blade) and unsteady flow. These systems contain combined nonlinearities from the
structure, the fluid flow around it, and the interaction between the fluid and
the structure. This research is transformative because it provides fundamental
insights into the underlying physics and control of nonlinear stochastic fluid-
structure interaction systems with non-uniform properties, including future wind
turbine blades, by combining several different areas of expertise.