* 1462127
* Role of Ocean Mesoscale Eddy Atmosphere Feedback in North Pacific and Atlantic Climate Variability: A High-Resolution Regional Climate Model Study
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Ping Chang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2021
* USD 809,388.00

This research will provide new insight into the predictability and predictable
dynamics of coupled climate systems in the North Pacific and Atlantic. The
knowledge gained from this research will shed new light on causes of climate
model biases along the Kuroshio and Gulf Stream fronts. The project will support
one graduate student and one postdoc, and provide valuable professional
development for the young scientists involved in the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to conduct a
comprehensive and quantitative modeling analysis on ocean mesoscale eddy-
atmosphere (OMEA) feedback using a state-of-the-art coupled regional climate
model (CRCM) with grid resolution of approaching resolved convection (~3 km).
The modeling analysis will be complemented and validated by an in-depth analysis
of in situ field measurements generated by recent CLIVAR-endorsed field programs
in the North Pacific and Atlantic, such as Kuroshio Extension System Study
(KESS) and CLIvar MOde water Dynamic Experiment (CLIMODE), as well as high
resolution reanalysis and remote sensed satellite data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of ocean eddies role in North Pacific and
Atlantic climate variability will be examined by testing the following
scientific hypotheses: 1) Energetic ocean eddies along the Kuroshio and Gulf
Stream can exert significant remote influence on North Pacific and Atlantic
storm tracks and weather patterns possibly through their effects on moist
baroclinic instability; 2) OMEA feedback is fundamental in the maintenance of
the Kuroshio and Gulf Stream fronts.