* 1462859
* Manufacturing Stable and Functional Hydrogel Nanofibers from Metal Ion Containing Polymer Blends
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Lei Zhai, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2018
* USD 297,390.00

Metal ions play an important role in building nature-adaptive and responsive
structures such as bones and proteins by interacting with biomolecules. Polymer
hydrogel fibers have great potential applications in tissue engineering because
they can provide a cell-friendly environment for cell growth. However, their
application is limited by the poor stability of these fibers in aqueous
environments. Inspired by natural metal ion/biomolecule interactions, adding
metal ions to charged polymer blends can improve the stability of polymeric
hydrogel fibers and introduce useful functionalities. This award supports
fundamental research to produce stable hydrogel nanofibers from metal ion-
containing charged polymer blends, to understand how the interactions between
the metal ions and polymers affect the nanofiber's structure and property, and
to explore the fabrication of nanoparticles using the metal ions. The method
will produce stable hydrogel nanofibers with various functionalities that find
applications in healthcare, biomedical, sensing and energy industries. The
research will involve chemistry and materials science and engineering, and will
offer excellent interdisciplinary research opportunities for students. The
education and outreach activities will help broadening participation of
underrepresented groups in research, and contribute to the workforce training
and student recruitment in the field of science and engineering. Results from
this research will benefit the U.S. economy and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogel fibers are promising candidates for
manufacturing functional nanofibers for various applications but face challenges
of low stability in aqueous solutions and ineffective further functionalization.
Adding metal ions to complex polyelectrolytes can improve the stability of
hydrogel nanofibers through metal ion/polyelectrolyte interactions and also
enable the production of nanostructures on the fibers. The research team will
study how the interactions between metal ions and polyelectrolytes affect the
fiber's morphology, structure and property, as well as study the diffusion of
metal ions from fibers. Furthermore, the team will use the embedded metal ions
to produce different types of nanoparticles, which offers a novel approach for
manufacturing nanomaterials. The results of the project will provide important
guidance to manufacturing nanostructures using hydrogel fibers. The success of
this transformative research will provide rational and predictable design rules
for manufacturing multifunctional hydrogel nanofibers with structural and
property control for various applications such as sensing and tissue
engineering.