* 1462481
* Integrated Light Sensitive Gels and Hard Materials for Dynamic 3D Displays for the Visually-Impaired
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Lenore Dai, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

One of the primary barriers of leaving the visually-impaired still
underrepresented in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
fields is the inaccessibility to visual content images, which imminently demands
a dynamically refreshable tactile display to revolutionize the means of bringing
three-dimensional (3D) images to the visually-impaired. This project aims to
investigate the fundamentals on the integrated environmentally responsive gels
and hard materials. If successful, the knowledge obtained from this project can
be applied to develop dynamic tactile displays targeting the visually-impaired.
These displays can be placed over two-dimensional (2D) optical display devices
(e.g., a cell phone or computer). The optical light emission is amplified by the
embedded optical devices (hard materials) to trigger the light sensitive gels
(soft materials) to rise (i.e., swell) or descend (i.e., deswell) to change the
surface topography. The 3D dynamic tactile display will provide a transformative
tool for the visually-impaired as well as in the general area of human-machine
interfaces. This novel human-machine interface can also be widely utilized in
many other applications, such as the automobile and consumer electronics that
are becoming a promising direction pursued by both academe and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goals, some key fundamentals will
be thoroughly investigated, including material synthesis, processing technology,
and multiphysics analysis. Combined experimental, analytical, and computational
approaches will be employed to address following issues: (1) engineering the
light responsive gels with broader transition range, larger swelling ratio, and
faster response time; (2) developing feasible process technologies to integrate
and package gels and hard materials, and (3) understanding the localized
deformation of light sensitive gels upon non-uniform light intensity. The work
will significantly advance knowledge in the experimental control of the
synthesis and assembly of the environmentally responsive materials as well as
the theoretical understanding of the coupled large deformation and mass
transport in gels and their concurrent deformation with hard materials. Finally,
the proof-of-concept 3D dynamic tactile display with a single module will
demonstrate the applicability of the material synthesis and processing
technologies.