* 1462171
* State Prediction in the Presence of Input, State and Output Delays: Application to Compressor Surge Control Using Active Magnetic Bearings
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Zongli Lin, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 03/31/2019
* USD 273,501.00

The objective of this research project is to develop new design methods for
controlling engineering systems in the presence of time delays arising in the
inputs, outputs, and states. These methods will help engineers alleviate the
adverse effects of delays on stability and performance. Multistage centrifugal
compressors are one of the most widespread types of industrial equipment, and
consume significant amounts of energy. They are used to drive natural gas
pipelines and are essential components for building heating, ventilation, and
air conditioning systems. Application of the project results to surge
instability will enable higher efficiency operation of these compressors,
thereby lowering operating costs and reducing overall energy use. Through the
Rotating Machinery and Controls (ROMAC) consortium at the University of
Virginia, the research team will interact with engineers from major compressor
manufacturers, to formulate and disseminate solutions to major technical
challenges faced by the industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional predictor
feedback in time-delay systems leads to noncausal control laws when the input
delays are larger than the state delays. Initial investigations indicate that it
is possible to construct a causal state predictor even for this case. The
fundamental idea is to partition the prediction time into sections that are each
shorter than the maximum state delay, and carry out the prediction recursively
over the prediction time. The resulting state predictor is causal, but infinite
dimensional. The thrust of this project is to devise methods to safely implement
the infinite-dimensional predictor. The results are expected to lead to powerful
new tools for control of systems subject to simultaneous input, state and output
delays. An integrated part of the project is to apply the theoretical results to
the control of surge instability in multistage centrifugal compressors by use of
active magnetic bearings.