* 1462638
* Mapping the Underworld of Buried Utilities - A Hybrid Sensing Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Hubo Cai, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 07/31/2019
* USD 216,521.00

This grant will pioneer a novel hybrid sensing approach to accurately map
underground utilities using both sensor and non-sensor data. For the massive
underground utilities, knowing their locations, dimensions, spatial
configurations, and materials is critical to effectively maintaining, restoring,
and upgrading them to provide essential services to the society: water,
electricity, gas, and the Internet. Lack of accurate utility location
information is the main reason for over six million incidents of excavation
damage to utilities every year, causing injuries, fatalities, and property
damage, on the order of billions of dollars. Current sensor-based utility
mapping methods are less effective in the utility-congested urban environment
where many utility lines occupy a tight space, causing sensor signal
interferences and consequent erroneous utility information. The anticipated
approach will create a method to supplement textual data from utility
regulations to digital sensor data, enabling automated and more accurate mapping
of underground utilities. With accurate utility information, 22% of the
excavation-related incidents could be avoided. Therefore, results from this
research will benefit society through cost savings, reduced hazards to citizens,
consistency in services supplied by critical underground lifelines, and improved
sustainability of urban communities. Research outcomes will be integrated into
engineering curriculum, K-12 education, and industry workshops to promote
subsurface utility engineering as a specialization
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to create a hybrid,
multi-sensing method to automate the process of interpreting and fusing
heterogeneous utility data to generate accurate utility maps. This novel
approach is expected to shift the current paradigm in mapping and labeling
underground utilities in utility-congested urban areas by devising methods that
exploit utility specifications and plans as a "virtual sensor." This approach
will provide contextual information for underground utilities. This information
will be integrated with information from the processing of ground penetrating
radar(GPR) scans. The research team will create algorithms to automatically
detect multiple and transformed signatures from underground utilities created
with the GPR scans, estimate utility locations, dimensions, and spatial
configurations, and recognize pipe materials. Natural language processing
algorithms will be devised to mine the textual data in utility specifications
and plans. These algorithms will enable extraction of spatial rules constraining
utilities and their surroundings, which will be fed into a spatial reasoning
algorithm. This use of utility specifications and plans for this purpose is
revolutionary. A novel framework for utility data/information fusing will be
created to address spatial inference and data correspondence computation
problems in utility mapping applications that are as of yet untapped. The
credibility of the system and methods will be validated at each research phase
through experiments.