* 1462656
* Ultrafast Velocity Measurement of Shock Wave using Microwave Photonic Velocimetry
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Jimmie Oxley, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2019
* USD 334,950.00

This award supports fundamental research on a novel sensing modality, namely,
microwave photonic velocimetry (MPV). In shock wave experimentation, velocimetry
is the measurement of the speed of a shock wave as it develops, propagates, and
fades. This provides critical information on shock wave behavior. The goal of
this project is to support the measurement of the velocity of ultrafast shock
waves, traveling at speeds in the order of several tens of km/s, in-situ and in
real-time. This will enable the study of energetic materials, and eventually
lead to much safer industrial workplaces where explosions may pose a hazard.
Robust and accurate velocimetry that can measure ultrafast shock waves is an
outstanding technical challenge that limits our understanding of shock wave
physics and chemistry. If successful, the MPV technology will fill this void by
substantially expanding our knowledge of materials' ability to detonate under a
wide variety of physical conditions (temperature, pressure, concentration,
etc.). Thus, breakthroughs in MPV as pursued in this project, will have
significant societal benefits in preventing disasters and improving safety in
hazardous environments. In particular, MPV is anticipated to be an enabling tool
in the safe handling and storage of non-ideal (borderline) explosives. These are
materials that are conventionally rated as safe, but may become a deadly threat
in workplaces under certain conditions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specific research
objectives include understanding and characterizing the MPV concept,
investigating novel signal processing methodologies, and validating this novel
sensing modality using large-scale, outdoor detonation tests. The direct outcome
is the fundamental knowledge, implementation, and demonstration of the MPV
concept. Key innovations include: 1) the innovative use of interactions between
microwave and optical waves, enabling the creation of a precise, robust, and
low-cost velocimetery, 2) the innovative integration of optical frequency comb
technologies in the MPV system to precisely separate elements measured in the
frequency-domain, 3) the novel MPV probe with integrated graded index fiber
(GIF) collimator, which significantly enhances MPV's performance, 4) a novel
signal processing algorithm that intelligently reconstructs the velocity history
profiles of explosion events, and 5) enhanced multiplexing capability allowing
for simultaneous, multi-probe shock wave velocity measurement.