* 1462118
* Analysis of Large Amplitude, Short Duration Control Forces for Guiding Underactuated Mechanical Systems into Safe Operating Regions
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Hassan Khalil, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 10/31/2020
* USD 336,971.00

In a fully actuated mechanical system, an independent control force is available
for each degree of freedom. Systems with fewer independent controls than
degrees-of-freedom are called "underactuated." Many important systems are
naturally of this class, including certain types of missiles, satellites,
underwater vehicles, and bipedal robots. As might be expected from the shortage
of control inputs, underactuated systems are challenging to stabilize and to
steer. This project improves upon existing approaches by using large-amplitude,
short-duration control forces -- called impulsive forces -- to expand the region
of attraction of the system. The region of attraction is the set of initial
configurations and velocities from which the system will be able to reach its
desired operating point. If the system ever leaves its region of attraction, it
will depart from its desired behavior, corresponding to, for example, the loss
of control of a missile or spacecraft. Expanding the region of attraction means
safer operation, since the system can tolerate upsets due to large disturbance
forces or unexpected initial conditions. A major new contribution of this
project will be to bridge the gap between purely theoretical studies and
practical applications, through careful experimental validation on widely
accepted benchmark test bed systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dynamical systems
are continuously subjected to disturbances and their ability to reject them
largely depend on the stability property of their equilibrium configurations.
This research will enlarge the region of stable operation of underactuated
dynamical systems and reduce the incidence of unstable behavior, behavior that
typically has negative consequences. The region of stable operation will be
enlarged by application of impulsive forces, which will be included in the set
of admissible control inputs. In this project, impulsive control will be
implemented using high-gain feedback over short intervals of time and
mathematical tools such as singular perturbation methods will be used to analyze
and design the high-gain feedback systems. The implementation of high-gain
feedback will require the use of very fast observers to estimate the unmeasured
velocities. To this end, high-gain observers will be designed and analyzed via
multi-time-scale singular perturbation methods. There are many challenging
technical issues that need to be solved to make such designs feasible. This
includes the development of efficient algorithms that can transfer the system
configuration from outside the region of stable operation to inside the region,
using a single application or multiple applications of impulsive inputs. The
developed algorithms will be tested experimentally on simple underactuated
systems; but the methods will be applicable to more complex problems such as
orbital transfer of satellites, rapid maneuvering of missiles and underwater
vehicles, and active prosthetic devices.