* 1462408
* Gradient Methods for Solving Big Data (Tensor) Optimization Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shuzhong Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,999.00

Rapid developments in modern technologies have made large-scale statistical data
sets readily available in many industrial settings, but the task of effectively
turning data into useful information still remains a major challenge in a wide
range of applications. One important source of the 'big data' complication stems
from the way in which the data points are collected and stored. In particular,
the data format in question is known as the tensor, which is a useful format,
because it reflects the interconnections between various factors. Tensor data
sets can be found in statistical learning, bioinformatics, consumer behavior in
marketing, climate change studies, and signal and image processing. However,
computationally the tensor data formats are notoriously difficult. This award
supports fundamental research on the computational aspects of the above-
mentioned information retrieval process. The project has a multidisciplinary
research element and will positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the context of tensor data processing, a
desirable operation is to compute the projection of a given data tensor onto a
simpler set with a certain low complexity structure, where the 'low complexity'
tensors may refer to low-rank tensors, or sparse tensors, or it may also refer
to the tensors with low co-cluster numbers. Formulating tensor projection and
completion problems leads to large scale non-convex -- yet algebraic --
optimization models. This research will develop a framework for the iteration
complexity analysis which will enable effective first-order computational
methods for tensor projection, completion and optimization models.