* 1462363
* EAGER-DynamicData: Reducing Orbital Position Uncertainty with Ensembles of Upper Atmospheric Models
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Aaron Ridley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 125,000.00

The United States has many tens of billions of dollars of assets in low-Earth
orbit, including the International Space Station. In addition, more than 15,000
pieces of debris are orbiting the Earth, and all of these objects are potential
projectiles that could easily destroy valuable assets. Further, if any of this
debris collides, more debris will result, possibly causing a cascade of
collisions, termed the Kessler Syndrome. The present goal of the United States,
therefore, is to track as many objects in low-Earth orbit as possible and, when
a collision is predicted, move the operational satellites to avoid collision.
The problem is fuel is needed to move operational satellites, and those
satellites cannot be refueled. Therefore, it is essential to have as accurate as
possible predictions of the tracks of all of the objects in orbit. In reality,
these tracks are uncertain, just as the future path of a hurricane is uncertain.
In order to more accurately predict the tracks of all of these objects, it is
important to take into account the atmospheric density and account for how that
density changes as a function of energy inputs, such as when the northern lights
intensify. This research will explore how to use models to predict energy inputs
into the upper atmosphere in order to better predict the tracks of orbiting
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main technical goals of this proposal are to:
(1) use probability distribution functions to determine the drivers of the
thermosphere and ionosphere; (2) use a new technique to remove bias in different
models of the upper atmosphere; (3) drive an ensemble of models of the upper
atmosphere using those predictions; (4) use model predictions along with a
catalog of current satellite locations to determine the orbital tracks of
objects in low-Earth orbit; and (5) train a graduate student to conduct
scientific investigations and use models of the upper atmosphere. The
predictions will be made using a statistical analysis of historical data. The
bias removal will be done using Retrospective Cost Adaptive Input and State
Estimation, which allows missing physics within models to be accounted for by
comparing the model output to data sources and adjusting the model. Various
statistical and physics-based models of the upper atmosphere will be driven with
ensembles of drivers to create ensembles of model output, allowing the
uncertainty in the thermospheric density to be accounted for in orbital-track
prediction. The graduate student will run the ensemble of models and track
various satellites provided by the Air Force catalog. The student will write
papers and attend conferences in order to provide updates on the research.