* 1462172
* State-selected ion-molecule reactions of relevance to planetary atmospheres and cometary comae
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Cheuk-Yiu Ng, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2018
* USD 467,254.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Cheuk-Yiu Ng of the
University of California-Davis to conduct experimental studies to look at the
reactions between molecular ions and neutral molecules. In these experiments,
Professor Ng and his group will vary the internal energy of the ion (changing
its rotational and vibrational energy) to see how this effects the chemical
reactivity. The inclusion of a large number of undergraduates in the Ng
laboratory is a notable element of this award. The graduate and undergraduate
students working on this project will receive technical training in laser
science, optical and vacuum methods, and spectroscopy, preparing them for
research careers or entry into the skilled technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Cheuk-Yiu Ng and his research group will
use high power, narrow-bandwidth lasers to generate short-wavelength radiation
in the vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) spectral region. This radiation will be used to
produce molecular ions (nitrogen, water, oxygen carbon monoxide and carbon
dioxide +1 cations) in specific rovibronic states in a molecular beam. Past work
by other scientists has shown profound reactivity differences for molecules with
varying amounts of vibrational and rotational energy, but relatively little is
known about reactivity differences in molecular ions. The total cross section
and branching ratios will be measured for a variety of collision partners,
including hydrogen, methanol, methane, ammonia, acetylene, ethylene, propane,
diacetylene, hydrogen cyanide and water. These reactions are important in the
chemistry of the upper atmospheres of planets as well as in the chemistry of
cometary comae.