* 1462086
* DMUU: DCDC III: Transformational Solutions for Urban Water Sustainability Transitions in the Colorado River Basin
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Kelli Larson, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2020
* USD 4,513,062.00

This collaborative research group will generate the analytical framework and
empirical results necessary to theorize environmental decision making under
uncertainty for urban water systems. One main concern about environmental
uncertainties for cities in the Colorado River Basin is the anticipated impact
on water resources. Possible impacts, such as rising temperatures, changes in
the amount and timing of precipitation, and increased variability, likely will
reduce renewable surface and groundwater supplies and diminish water quality
leading to widespread but uneven risks. The projected biophysical impacts of
environmental change are conditioned by and interact with land-use changes,
population dynamics, economic development, and water-management decisions.
Managing transitions toward urban water sustainability will require innovative
approaches to water governance that are anticipatory, adaptable, just, and
evidence-supported. This collaborative group includes a transdisciplinary team
of social, behavioral, economic, and sustainability scientists working in close
collaboration with stakeholders. A diverse group of undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral scholars will be educated and trained with a focus on key
competencies in sustainability through real-world sustainability research and
education experiences. The collaborative group will build and strengthen
networks of scientists and decision makers that improve the relevance of
scientific knowledge for decisions and foster social learning among diverse
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing from use-inspired sustainability
science and decision making under uncertainty, the investigators will address
the overarching question: Given environmental and societal uncertainties, how
can cities dependent on the Colorado River Basin develop transformational
solutions to implement water sustainability transitions? This research program
is comprised of four Integrated Project Areas: 1) Regional environmental and
land-use changes as biophysical drivers that affect decision making; 2) Actors,
institutions, and governance as socioeconomic drivers that affect decision
making; 3) Simulation modeling, visual analytics, and scenarios for knowledge
integration and exchange; and 4) Evidence-supported transition strategies toward
sustainable water governance. This approach enables the investigators to
evaluate how urban water system decisions are affected by environmental and land
use changes conditioned by and interacting with social, institutional, and
economic processes; model, simulate, visualize, and explore alternative futures
in complex social-ecological-technical systems; and conduct comparative studies
to develop scientific knowledge with explicit consideration of specific
contextual factors and generalizable patterns. This collaborative group project
is supported by the NSF Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences through its Decision Making Under Uncertainty (DMUU) funding
opportunity.