* 1462773
* Distinguishing Between Human Activities in Real-Time Based on Wearable Sensor Data Using a Low-dimensional Model of Human Movement
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Prashant Mehta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 04/30/2020
* USD 346,551.00

Human Activity Recognition is the process of inferring human activity from
motion sensors such as accelerometer and gyroscopes worn on the human body.
These motion sensors are embedded in physical activity tracking devices and
SmartWatches. Accurate inference of human activity offers many benefits for
health monitoring and for promoting overall wellness of an individual. There are
many machine learning-based approaches to human activity recognition from sensor
data. However, in practice, the current approaches often suffer from poor
accuracy on account of uncertainty due to wide range of human body types, sensor
locations on the body and real-time sources of uncertainty such as changes in
activity speed and intensity, sensor noise, packet drops, sensor failure etc.
This award supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the
development of robust activity recognition methodology and algorithms. It is
projected that there will be a trillion embedded sensors in connected people and
devices by 2020. This project's algorithmic and software tools can potentially
be directly applied to fitness monitoring, eldercare support, long-term
preventive and chronic care, and rehabilitation. Therefore, results from this
research will benefit the US economy and society. To promote transitions,
several educational initiatives are planned that seek to engage undergraduate
students in entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A major objective of the
research concerns development of methods and algorithms to mitigate uncertainty
in machine learning problems, such as the activity recognition problem,
involving dynamic data sets. A control-theoretic framework is planned to not
only address the robustness issues due to uncertainty, but also enable certain
unified architectures for learning patterns from sensor data. If successful, the
work can lead to novel algorithmic approaches to represent, learn and recognize
hidden low order patterns in unstructured dynamic data sets. Besides
methodological developments, this project will engineer other more tangible
outcomes such as the development of algorithms and software for feedback
particle filter, enunciation of control architectures and algorithms for
representation of complex patterns in data, and development of software tools
for the human activity recognition system.