* 1462785
* Discovery of Nanoscale Folding Properties of Atomically-Layered Materials by Atomic Lattice Interferometry and Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Kyung-Suk Kim, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2018
* USD 380,000.00

This award supports fundamental research on the mechanics of atomically-layered
materials. When one folds atomically-layered materials, only a few atoms thick,
unprecedented nanoscale material properties can manifest. For example, the
lateral compression of graphene, a multi-layered material of carbon atoms, leads
to patterns of sharp ridges. Along the ridges of these atomic-scale crinkles a
strip with the width of a few atoms is electrically charged. The strip of
charges attracts oppositely charged molecules. The controlled deformation of
such a graphene crinkle network potentially regulates adsorption of biomolecules
and, consequently, the adhesion of biological cells to solid surfaces in real
time. The research results would enable various applications for atomic-scale
materials engineering in nanotechnology, and molecular engineering in biomedical
technology. This includes but is not limited to bio-adhesion control for cancer
treatment and molecular manipulation techniques for genetic engineering.
Further, the results would have impact on nano- and micro- metrology, and
environmental filter and sensor technology. The scientific tool, the atomic
lattice interferometer, will enable observation of the behavior of advanced
nanostructures, not only for scientific research, but also for education in both
life and physical science and technology. An outreach program will be developed
in the Institute of Molecular and Nanoscale Innovation at Brown University. This
program will educate students from underrespresented groups in STEM through
summer internship programs, introduce them to real world problems with an
industrial seed project. The PI will develop new course materials on the
mechanics of folding.

Continuum/ab-initio and experimental hybrid analyses of atomic-layer crinkle
structures and associated flexoelectric characteristics in graphene or graphene-
analogous materials will provide a fundamental understanding of the mechanical
behavior, as well as of the electronic states of a deformation jump like a
crinkle ridge. The PI's laboratory experimentally observed such crinkle networks
for the first time by using a newly invented atomic lattice interferometer. This
novel interferometer opens up unique experimental capabilities of measuring
atomic-scale surface deformations over a wide field of view. The resultant
understanding of the electro-mechanical behavior will establish a systematic
framework for regulating molecular adsorption and cellular adhesion for
biomechanics research. In addition, many important multi-scale modeling and
experimental capabilities, such as high performance computing and testing of
atomic-scale structures, will be advanced. Furthermore, mathematically difficult
and historically unsolved bifurcation problems of ruga (wrinkle, crease, fold,
ridge and crinkle) mechanics will be unraveled.