* 1462503
* EAGER-DynamicData: Dynamic Data Driven Distributed Simulation for Transportation System Applications on Emerging Computing Platforms
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Richard Fujimoto, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2018
* USD 220,000.00

Major changes in urban transportation systems are now underway due to
innovations occurring along several different dimensions. Smart cars, autonomous
and semi-autonomous vehicles, electric vehicles, compact energy-efficient micro-
vehicles, and increased deployment of vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-
infrastructure communications are revolutionizing the vehicle fleet. New types
of transportation services are emerging such as short-term vehicle rentals and
commercial crowd-sourced taxi services that are increasing shared use and
lessening reliance on private vehicle ownership. New sources of data and vast
amounts of information concerning the transportation network itself are becoming
available including crowd-sourced data provided by citizens through mobile
devices and data collected from surveillance systems including unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs). At the same time advances in computing and communications are
enabling new, mobile high performance computing platforms that can be embedded
within the transportation system. It is not well understood how these platforms
can be best exploited in emerging transportation system applications to help
address long-standing issues concerning safety, congestion, resource
consumption, and pollution that significantly degrade the quality of life in the
U.S. and throughout the world. New computational methods are needed to maximally
exploit these new technologies to create the reliable, resilient, and efficient
transportation systems demanded by modern cities.

This project will explore synergies and challenges arising from the integration
of three largely separate areas dynamic data analytics, embedded distributed
simulations, and power-aware computing on emerging high performance mobile
computing platforms for transportation system applications. The context for this
research is power-tunable platforms termed micro-clusters that are small closely
coupled multi-node computer systems assembled from mobile computing components.
On a larger scale, distributed networked micro-clusters will form the
computation core for many dynamic data driven application system (DDDAS)
deployments in the future. This project seeks to develop deep understandings of
key principles concerning the design and operation of micro-clusters executing
integrated dynamic data analysis algorithms and embedded distributed simulations
for emerging transportation system applications. A micro-cluster hardware
testbed will be created as a key element of this project for experimental
research in power aware dynamic data-driven distributed simulation and used for
benchmarking. The results of this study will be used to develop a research
agenda and follow-on research to develop approaches and techniques to minimize
energy consumption while maintaining effectiveness of scalable DDDAS
deployments. Beyond transportation system applications, platforms such as micro-
clusters will become commonplace and widely used in the operation of real-world
systems for a variety of applications besides transportation in areas such as
manufacturing, logistics, and telecommunications. Project results will be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses in transportation, modeling
and simulation and parallel computing. The project will engage underrepresented
and K-12 groups in computing and engineering through participation in summer
internship programs and summer camps.