* 1462575
* Interface Engineering of Fiber Reinforced Calcium-based Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Florence Sanchez, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,917.00

The use of discontinuous and randomly oriented nano/microfibers (steel, carbon,
polymer) as reinforcements in calcium-based materials for civil and biomedical
applications has received increasing attention due to their promising potential
for superior structural and multifunctional composites. The interface between
the fibers and the matrix plays a vital role in material performance and must be
accurately characterized to effectively design materials. The goal of this
research project is to understand reinforcement mechanisms in fiber reinforced
calcium-based composites. Fundamental understanding of key features of fiber
reinforcements will enable better material design and fabrication strategies.
The broader impacts are twofold. Civil engineering applications: Advanced
materials that extend the life of civil infrastructure, reduce maintenance
costs, and enhance safety and sustainability will save billions of tax dollars a
year and have many magnified indirect effects on society. Biomedical
applications: Advanced biomimetic materials will provide more effective medical
treatments. The educational component will introduce high school students to the
intriguing science of the very small and will develop a graduate level course
module on material durability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to fundamentally
understand the molecular structure and dynamics at the fiber-solid-liquid
interfaces that control reinforcement mechanisms in fiber reinforced calcium-
based materials with an emphasis on determining the nature of the interface and
how it relates to interfacial mechanical behavior. The focus is on the molecular
to nanoscale and the chemo-mechanical interactions at reinforcement matrix
interfaces. Molecular dynamics modeling and experimental characterizations of
the structure and dynamics of the interfaces will be integrated to (i) elucidate
the interfacial interactions between fiber surfaces, calcium-bearing solid
phases, and surrounding liquid phases, (ii) quantify and relate the effect of
the chemical structure to the mechanical properties of reinforcement matrix
interfaces, and (iii) formulate molecular dynamics-informed interface cohesive
traction-separation relationships that connect the molecular scale to the micro-
continuum scale at interfaces. The research will (i) provide a molecular to
nanoscale picture necessary to achieve improved engineering properties, (ii)
make advances in relating chemistry and mechanical properties at interfaces, and
(iii) bridge the gap between nano-mechanics and micro-mechanics at interfaces.