* 1462143
* HCC: Small: Collaborative Research:  Analysis of Language Samples for Detecting Language Impairment in Monolingual and Bilingual Children
* CSE,IIS
* 08/31/2014,09/30/2016
* Thamar Solorio, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2016
* USD 130,500.00

It is widely recognized that language impairment can have a negative effect on
literacy skills, and that children suffering language impairment are at a higher
risk of academic under-achievement and lower overall social development. Hence,
early and accurate language assessment for children is critical, especially for
those with non-mainstream linguistic backgrounds. Spontaneous language samples
are commonly used in communication disorders to measure the speaker's competence
across a range of complementary language skills. These elicitation tasks allow
clinicians and clinical researchers to analyze speech fluency by looking at the
patterns of disfluencies and other speech disruptions. Language productivity can
be gauged by computing mean length of utterance, along with measures of
vocabulary and total utterances produced. Morpho-syntactic skills can also be
analyzed from these data, by manually coding for specific grammatical
constructions that are known to signal developmental milestones. At present, use
of the information contained in these language samples is restricted to the
capacity of human experts to manually analyze the data, since little has been
done to use computational models for this task In this collaborative effort by
PIs in the University of Alabama at Birmingham and the University of Texas at
Dallas, the objective is to address this problem by developing computational
approaches for scoring samples from children along different language
dimensions, including speech fluency, syntactic structure, content, and
coherence, with the long term goal of building robust computational linguistic
approaches for identifying language impairments in children. With these ends in
mind, the PIs will investigate a number of core research questions, including
measuring syntactic complexity in children's language, evaluating content in
story retelling and play sessions, and detecting disfluencies in children's
transcripts. Moreover, this research will focus on analyzing samples from
children with three different language backgrounds: English monolinguals,
Spanish monolinguals, and Spanish-English bilinguals of Mexican descent (the
latter representing the fastest growing minority in this country). Since their
models will be data driven, the PIs expect to be able to evaluate empirically
the differences in developmental patterns of speech in children across these
linguistic diversities. Addressing the bilingual population involves modeling
code-switching behavior; thus, additional core research questions include
measuring syntactic complexity in code-switched data, and identification and
categorization of code-switching patterns in bilingual children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will contribute to
developing more accurate and practical tools for assessing language development
in children, a field to which little attention has been paid to date. Addressing
the challenges involved in the automated analysis of children's speech will also
advance the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) in general. Moreover,
since the project involves children with three different linguistic backgrounds,
the new technology will have low language dependency and so should be easily
portable to other languages and domains. In the field of communication
disorders, applying corpus-based approaches to language assessment is still in
its infancy; project outcomes will have a direct impact on this field, by
providing new metrics for scoring spontaneous language samples of children that
can complement the battery of assessment tools currently used.