* 1462565
* I-Corps:  Remote Virtual Physical Examination
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Hamid Bahrami, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Telemedicine allows healthcare providers to connect with patients across
distances while electronic health records enhance the portability and
accessibility of patients' medical histories. Telemedicine is recognized as a
method to drive down cost while improving efficiency, quality of care, and
patient satisfaction. The use of telemedicine has spread rapidly in the past
decade and is now becoming integrated into several sectors of healthcare
industry including hospitals, specialty departments, home health agencies,
private physician offices as well as consumers' homes and workplaces. Despite
all of the innovative products within the telemedicine market today, significant
barriers remain including physician acceptance, cost, and integration into
health delivery. In this proposal, the team is proposing the development of a
completely remote Virtual Physical Examination (VPE) system, a type of
telemedicine platform. The proposed VPE platform is an innovative tool that
acquires and collects the visual and audio as well as the cardiac examination
data of the patients and transfers it securely to a database to be stored for
future access. The VPE app can be distributed to multiple technicians including
nurses, aides, family members, or primary care providers, creating a rich
network of opportunities to participate in telemedicine with improved
integration of quality care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed VPE offers
convenient and cost effective delivery of care in diverse environments opening
new patient markets and enhancing patient satisfaction. The novel software
solution will also expand access of care providers to underserved communities.
The system is comprised of a digital processing device connected to a computer
network comprised of a computer readable storage device and an operating system
configured to perform executable instructions. The prototype has been developed
and optimized to function on diverse Android devices. The computer program
provides executable instructions to create a remote VPE system. The software
module efficiently directs a technician to electronically record a complete
physical examination in a stepwise fashion that can be comprehensive or focused
by a health care professional. The Android app provides technicians with
complete visual and auditory instructions on how to properly perform the VPE
based upon anatomic landmarks and can incorporate exam maneuvers.