* 1462109
* Quantum State Resolved Dynamics of Surface Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Hua Guo, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2019
* USD 450,783.00

Hua Guo of the University of New Mexico is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop and apply state-of-the art theoretical approaches to study
the dynamics of important elementary reactions occurring at the interface
between gas molecules and metal catalysts. Such reactions play an increasingly
important role in modern society. The Bosch-Haber process for producing ammonia,
automobile catalytic converters, microchip manufacture, and hydrogen generation
from steam reforming of natural gas are a few well-known examples. Yet our
understanding of the mechanism and dynamics of interfacial reactions remains
limited. This is largely because our lack of knowledge of elementary processes
at the molecular level. A better understanding of these elementary processes
will not only enrich our knowledge, but might also help the design of new and
more efficient catalyst and better control of the catalytic reactions.
Undergraduate, graduate students and postdoctoral associates participate in this
research.

Specifically, this proposal aims at a thorough understanding of quantum state
resolved dynamics of surface reactions such as dissociative chemisorption and
Eley-Rideal reactions, using state-of-the-art theoretical models and tools
developed for these processes. Building on breakthroughs achieved in the
previous funding period, the current research program focuses on the accurate
determination of full-dimensional Born-Oppenheimer potential energy surfaces for
the interaction of gas phase species with metal surfaces based on large numbers
of density functional theory points, and high-dimensional quantum dynamics
calculations on these potential energy surfaces. These studies represent a
systematic and comprehensive approach to fundamental surface reaction dynamics
and are expected to shed valuable light on the energy flow in the polyatomic
system, activation mechanism, and the origin of the mode specificity and bond
selectivity. Insights gained in these studies may also suggest future strategies
to control interfacial chemistry. In addition, these high-level theories offer
benchmarks for more approximate dynamic models and are expected to stimulate
theoretical studies of other surface reactions. The computer codes and potential
energy surfaces resulting from this research will be available to the broader
community.