* 1462870
* Prediction and Control of Interface Damping in Built-up Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Melih Eriten, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 03/31/2018
* USD 251,597.00

Interface damping is a primary source of energy losses in built-up structures
such as weapon systems, space vehicles, aircrafts, ships, automobiles,
buildings, bridges, and turbine engines. Accurate prediction and control of
interface damping is critical for safety, reliability and energy efficiency of
built-up structures operating in dynamic conditions. Interface damping results
mainly from frictional energy losses over contacting surfaces. Variability,
nonlinearity and uncertainty in contact interactions limit the ability to
accurately predict and model interface damping. This research project aims at
identifying the main mechanisms that govern interface damping, its magnitude and
its nonlinear characteristics. The project will investigate and outline
effective methods to adjust such characteristics to desired values. Results from
this award will enable designs of structural interfaces with desired interface
damping. The expected outcome is the improvement of safety, reliability and
energy efficiency of built-up structures. The results from the research will be
shared with the community and K 12, undergraduate and graduate students through
design projects involving vibrations and acoustics of simple built-up
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time and load dependent stochastic interfacial
events introduce nonlinearity to interface damping, and deter predictability of
dynamical response. The current state-of-the-art in estimating interface damping
is through phenomenological models, which cannot ensure predictive results for
untested conditions. Physics-based models cannot account for all possible events
and changes occurring at the interfaces. This research offers an effective
alternative to complicated modeling whereby the mismatch of elastic properties
across interfaces are adjusted, and loading conditions are identified to reduce
and if possible eliminate nonlinearities and variability in interface damping.
Additional benefit of this alternative approach is the ability to tune interface
damping over several orders of magnitude based on operational needs. The
research approach is a concerted effort in modeling and experimentation that
bridges two distinct disciplines such as tribology and structural dynamics. The
PI will systematically study interfacial mechanics, geometry, friction, material
properties and loading conditions to identify the major contributors to
interfacial energy dissipation. Built-up structures containing interfaces with
controlled material properties, preloads and geometries will be designed and
constructed. Finally, forced and free vibrations tests will be performed on the
built-up structures to explore tunable interface damping in dynamic response. An
education and outreach program will also be conducted to disseminate the
research results to a broader audience, and introduce important concepts of
damping and friction to the students at various stages of their education
process.