* 1462980
* Multiscale Modeling of Defect Rearrangement and Removal in 2D Layered Crystals
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Adri van Duin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2018
* USD 407,225.00

Two-dimensional (2D) crystals consist of a single layer or a few layers of
atoms. Graphene and Molybdenum disulfide are respective examples. Adhesive tapes
are used to peel layers off from bulk crystals. A large library of 2D crystals
can be isolated and prepared, each with its unique character. It has been
conceived to reassemble the isolated 2D crystals into 3D layered structures
through layer-by-layer stacking. With rationally chosen atomic layers and
stacking sequence, these vertically layered crystals can possess exceptional
multifunctional properties for combined and coupled mechanical, optical, and
electronic applications. However, defects within the atomic planes themselves
and between the neighboring atomic planes can significantly degrade the
materials performance. This award supports fundamental research on a new class
of defects ubiquitous in layered crystals and their interactions with other
atomic defects and impurities. Results from this research will provide insights
into engineering processes dealing with defects and leading to the removal of
defects from the layered crystals. This ultimately would lead to materials with
enhanced reliability. The research is multidisciplinary in nature, interfacing
mechanics with materials science and multiscale computational modeling. Graduate
and undergraduate students trained under this project will be exposed to the
multidisciplinary research environment. The software-sharing plan involves
packaging the simulation models into user-friendly software and make these
accessible to the broader research community. This effort will facilitate and
stimulate collaborative research between mechanicians and materials scientists,
physicists, and chemists in this new field of nanotechnology.

Layered crystals support new classes of defects that are absent or unimportant
in bulk crystals. A recent study has demonstrated that surface dislocations in
layered crystals exhibit a rippling morphology in distinct comparison to
conventional dislocations in bulk crystals. This defect is termed ripplocation.
This line defect is straight, narrow, crystallographically oriented, and highly
mobile. The team hypothesizes that as a ripplocation sweeps through the plane of
the 2D crystals, it may cause rearrangement of intralayer defects and interlayer
absorbates. It thus might function as defect collector and cleaner. To test this
hypothesis, this project seeks to define a set of multiscale models for
characterizing the interactions between ripplocations and the intralayer defects
and interlayer absorbates. Research results will provide a fundamental guidance
for ripplocation-mediated defect rearrangement and removal. The research project
will initiate a new paradigm in the control of defects and the fundamentals for
engineering of 3D layered heterostructures.