* 1462640
* I-Corps:  Integrating Patient Facial Photographs with Medical Imaging Studies
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Pamela Bhatti, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 04/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

According the Institute of Medicine's 1999 report "To Err is Human," it is
estimated that nearly 100,000 people die every year in the United States due to
medical errors. It is estimated that nationally the number of serious adverse
events due to wrong-patient errors in Radiology, where one patient's medical
imaging study is placed in another patient's folder, is about 10,000 per year.
Such errors can result in serious harm to both involved patients. The Joint
Commission has recognized this to be a serious problem and mandates that a dual-
identifier technique be implemented whenever any medical service is provided.
Despite this dual-identifier mandate, wrong-patient errors continue to occur in
Radiology. The proposed innovation is a novel technology that automatically
captures patient photographs simultaneously with every medical imaging study.
This technology could lead to a powerful additive identification tool and help
prevent mislabeling of imaging examinations, thereby resulting in fewer medical
errors. In addition, digital photographs may lead to improvement in the
diagnostic interpretation of medical imaging examinations without an adverse
impact on interpretation time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology is
based on automatically and seamlessly obtaining point-of-care patient facial
photographs along with each and every medical imaging study. These photographs
will serve as unique, intrinsic, externally visible patient identifiers, which
will be embedded within the medical imaging studies. When interpreting
radiologists and physicians view the medical images, the photographs are also
automatically displayed in a separate window in the picture archiving and
communications systems (PACS) workstation. Thus, when a wrong-patient error
occurs, even if the radiologist does not notice the difference between the
current and prior radiographs, a comparison between the current and prior
photographs can easily alert her to the wrong-patient error. The proposed
technology has the added advantage that the patient photographs can provide the
interpreting physicians with clinical information, which has hitherto not been
available. Thus this technology may, in addition to providing intrinsic,
externally-visible identifiers, improve interpreting physicians? accuracy and
efficiency.