* 1462291
* EAGER-DynamicData: Minimizing Wind Farm Operation and Maintenance Cost Using Data-Driven Models
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Eduardo Perez, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 08/31/2016
* USD 29,978.00

The growth in wind farm installations in the past years has led to an increase
in the number of wind turbines reaching the end of their manufacturing
warranties. Therefore, the wind industry is now faced with a rising cost of
unscheduled maintenance which is increasing operation and maintenance
expenditures. This research project will develop new operation and maintenance
strategies for improving the reliability of wind farm systems so that wind
energy cost can be reduced. Wind turbines operate under harsh conditions that
lead to wind turbine component failures, which are difficult to predict.
Consequently, it is challenging to schedule maintenance actions so that such
component failures can be avoided or minimized. Because of the continuously
escalating cost of wind farm operation and management in the United States,
devising methods for using available wind turbine sensors data is critical to
decreasing wind farms operational costs. To accomplish this objective, this
research considers new maintenance scheduling models and algorithms that take
into account data uncertainties in turbines status, weather conditions, and the
availability of the resources needed to perform maintenance. If successful, this
exploratory research will enable faster initial maintenance response and better
utilization of limited maintenance resources in wind energy systems. The
efficient utilization of costly resources will foster competitiveness and will
contribute towards reducing the cost of wind energy, achieve electricity price
stability, and reduce dependency on global fuel markets.

There is a need to establish guidelines to reduce operation and maintenance
costs in wind energy systems. In pursuit of this goal, the objective of this
research is to establish how stochastic online data-enabled models and
algorithms can lead to wind turbine rapid damage detection and failure
reduction. Stochastic online optimization is a suitable framework for this
problem since it explicitly assimilates stochastic data that evolve over time
into the optimization model, enabling robust decisions to be made sequentially
prior to observing the entire stochastic data stream. The project motivation
comes from the need for a data-driven methodology for maintenance planning in
wind energy. The proposed work will address basic scientific and engineering
challenges toward the successful derivation of a data-driven stochastic online
optimization algorithm for the operation and maintenance of wind energy systems.
This research will advance the state-of-the-art in wind farm operation and
maintenance by contributing computational and data-enabled concepts, models and
algorithms. The outcomes of this research will extend how maintenance is
scheduled in wind energy systems to a new level beyond the current state of
practice by introducing: 1) data-driven optimization models for maintenance and
resource scheduling and 2) new algorithms for stochastic online optimization. In
particular, the new data-driven methodology, integrating stochastic programing
with stochastic online optimization, which are usually treated in isolation,
will give rise to a new and viable approach for stochastic data assimilation
into decision-making under uncertainty for complex multi-entity engineered
systems such as wind farms.