* 1462787
* Improving Search Efficiency in Engineering Design by Integrating Multiple Models at Different Fidelities
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Jie Xu, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 04/30/2019
* USD 459,066.00

The goal of this research is to improve search efficiency in engineering design.
Engineering designers usually rely on predictive models to provide insight into
which design alternatives to select. In this process, they must also decide
which models to use, balancing model fidelity and computation cost. High-
fidelity models usually provide a more accurate approximation but may be very
costly and may require considerable computational resources. Low-fidelity models
on the other hand tend to be much faster and can therefore be used to search
through a large number of design alternatives in a short time. This award
supports fundamental research to improve the search efficiency by integrating
multiple models at different fidelities. The new model integration framework
will enable engineering designers to combine the benefits of both fast and
inexpensive low-fidelity models with accurate but more expensive high-fidelity
models. Progress in this area will lead to the development of better engineered
systems at a lower cost. The research will bridge several disciplines including
engineering design, mathematical science and systems engineering, and contribute
to the development of a new interdisciplinary curriculum enhancing the
educational experience of engineering students.

Although significant advances have been made in multiscale design and
multidisciplinary design optimization, the theoretical foundation and practical
approaches for integrating multiple models at different fidelities still remains
to be investigated. This research will fill this knowledge gap by developing a
theoretical and algorithmic framework with two key components: ordinal
transformation and optimal sampling. The research will establish theoretical
properties of a new ordinal design space created using a low-fidelity model and
show that these properties facilitate efficient subsequent search for optimized
designs. An optimal sampling method will then be developed to guide the search
efficiently, at low-cost, taking into account both the information in the
ordinal space and the bias in the low-fidelity model. The benefit of the
extension to multiple low-fidelity models will also be investigated.