* 1462495
* A Dynamic Model for Systemic Risk in Networks Subject to Contagion
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* David Yao, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2018
* USD 302,875.00

The contagion effect in a network may arise from the collective activities of
the parties involved in the network as a whole, as well as from the interactions
among parties who are directly connected to each other. These two mutually
enhancing channels of interconnectedness can lead to cascading network failures
and catastrophe with serious societal consequences. Examples of networked
systems subject to contagion include traffic, telecommunication and financial
networks. In some environments, the network-level effect can spread the
contagion must faster and wider than the diffusion through neighboring nodes.
Instances of contagion may cause functional collapse of such networks. This
project will seek to mitigate the damaging effects of contagion via the use of a
dynamic model to discern the effects of contagion from these two channels. This
research is expected to lead to new decision tools that may be used by policy
makers and risk management professionals to address what-if questions, to design
stress tests for individual decision-making units, to monitor critical elements
in a network, and to set up firewalls to prevent or limit cascading failures.

Contagion dynamics in interconnected networks will be modeled as a high
dimensional dynamic complementarity problem, also known as Skorohod problem. An
algorithm that solves the Skorohod problem will generate all possible failure
times over any given horizon, along with the evolution dynamics of the network
state. These results will inform the development of new risk measures for
clustering of failures and contagion concentration. Additional research
objectives are: (1) conducting sensitivity analysis for the failure-clustering
and contagion measures, formulating a robust optimization model to construct the
network configuration and calibrating the model with data; (2) incorporating
stochastic shocks to state variables to study the state- and time-dependent
dynamics of failures and contagion; and (3) investigating resource control
schemes to mitigate contagion, along with utility-maximizing objectives and
fairness constraints. The project will extend the research frontier of
stochastic networks to generate new approaches to modeling and analyzing
systemic risk in networks, and new knowledge in understanding the contagion
dynamics of failures.