* 1462967
* Contested resource inputs to science: How institutional provisions on the access and use of materials and data affect research collaboration structures and outcomes
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Eric Welch, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2018
* USD 299,410.00

Biological materials and data are important components for conducing scientific
research in most fields of science in the United States and in other countries.
Biological material and data are increasingly subject to national and
international policies that monitor and regulate the ownership and sharing of
these resources. These policies may create barriers to the advancement of
science by increasing costs, reducing public access, and creating imbalances in
the availability of important resources for science production. There is little
systematic research investigating how these policies affect scientific research
collaboration and outputs. This study investigates how the international and
national rules, laws, organizations, and policies that regulate the access, use,
and exchange of biological material and data affect scientific collaboration,
resource flows, and science production (e.g. new knowledge, inventions). Results
from this research will provide an empirical basis for national and
international policy-making and implementation. The project findings will also
help the science community as it seeks to manage material and data exchange in
ways that facilitate collaboration, maintain high quality science, and
effectively respond to policy demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines how data and material sharing and collaboration networks adapt to
changing national and multinational policies. Preliminary research indicates
that scientists navigating the new rules and regulatory systems make decisions
about how best to exploit their existing networks to obtain biological resources
and data or to identify alternative resource providers. How materials and data
are shared within a scientific community depends on the attributes of the
researchers' collaborators, the capacity for developing new collaborators, the
value of the resources sought, exigencies placed on resources, research goals,
and the capacity and willingness of scientists to access new resources. This
project assesses the impact of both social exchange costs (e.g. reciprocity) and
exchange transaction costs (e.g. formal agreements and contracts) on the
different resource acquisition strategies of scientists across four different
fields of science. The research develops testable hypotheses within a research
design that applies network analysis and theory to longitudinal survey, ego
network, and bibliometric data. The findings will fill a fundamental gap in the
science of science policy literature by demonstrating how institutional controls
affect collaboration networks and outcomes. Findings and dissemination
activities will inform ongoing design and implementation of national and
multinational policies and mechanisms that affect access and exchange of data
and materials for high quality science and enable policy makers to better
identify the levers for managing the exchange and sharing of biological
materials and data to advance scientific production.