* 1462966
* Triggering Chemical Degradation of Plastics at End of Life Using Light and Environmentally-Neutral Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Laura Clarke, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 04/30/2020
* USD 299,119.00

This research focuses on developing strategies to controllably break chemical
bonds within polymeric material by adding an inexpensive particle and generating
internal heat with applied light. Potential benefits of this research include
the development of materials with an additional functionality -- the ability to
degrade upon command. Thus this knowledge could enable plastics that are strong
and robust during use and then can be triggered to quickly and efficiency break
down when the item is no longer needed. This concept follows green design
principles by enabling a robust object which can be utilized as many times as
possible (without breaking down) and then intentionally transformed into a
benign product at the end of life. This strategy would work cooperatively with
chemical degradation and provide suitably degraded material for bacterial
remediation of plastic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests the hypothesis
that the strongly inhomogeneous temperature gradients created in the interior of
polymers upon photothermal heating of embedded nanoparticles can be utilized to
efficiently trigger thermally-induced bond breaking, possible internal
fragmentation of the material, and strongly enhanced degradation as a
consequence. Metal nanoparticles strongly absorb light and generate heat as a
result. Particles will be incorporated within commercial thermoplastics and
biodegradable polymers. The degradation efficacy of photothermal protocols will
be compare with that from conventional heating. Aluminum nanoparticles are
targeted because they are inexpensive and provide additional thermal energy due
to their reaction to aluminum oxide. Aluminum is the most abundant metal on
earth and aluminum oxide is an environmentally neutral end product. Enhanced
knowledge about the photothermal effect in aluminum nanoparticles, which has
previously not been well-explored, will be an additional scientific outcome of
this work. Textile Engineering senior design teams will be funded to explore
auxiliary topics, such as bacterial remediation, that will enhance the research
objectives of this work and contribute to the education of these future
engineers and scientists. Senior design students will also develop an
interactive experience demonstrating polymer degradation for use in a summer
program for high school students, whose demographic historically contains 25% or
more STEM unrepresented minorities.