* 1462710
* Collaborative Research: The Effects of Extracellular Matrix Alignment on Cellular Mechanotransduction in 3D Architectures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Christopher Chen, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Cells in living organisms reside in a meshwork of protein fibers and other
molecules, termed the extracellular matrix, which provides both structural
support and chemical inputs that are critical to the functioning of the cells.
The structural properties of the extracellular matrix are largely determined by
how these protein fibers are aligned and organized, and changes in these
structures and are associated with the progression of many human diseases, but
in ways that in many cases are still not well understood. This award supports
fundamental research that will provide needed insights into how the organization
and resulting mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix influence and
control both the normal and pathological behavior of cells. This research is
relevant to ongoing efforts to develop methods to speed wound healing, and to
engineer artificial tissues to repair damaged organs, and so the results from
this work will have broad impact and provide critical resources to the
biomedical community. This collaborative research program involves techniques
and insights drawn from several fields, including bioengineering, physics,
microfabrication, and cell biology, and provides interdisciplinary training
needed to prepare the next generation of scientists and engineers.

The adhesion of cells to the extracellular matrix plays a major role in many
critical cellular functions important to embryonic development, adult tissue
homeostasis, and disease pathogenesis, including cell survival, migration,
proliferation, and differentiation. Yet, there have been few systems that allow
control and therefore study the specific effects of fibrillar extracellular
matrix architecture on cell function. This project use engineered microtissues
to address the key hypothesis that alterations in the alignment of matrix,
contractile activity of resident cells, geometry of boundary constraints, and
external mechanical forces are highly coupled in a mechanotransduction machinery
that will drive changes in cellular phenotype. These studies will determine how
these factors regulate the transition of fibroblasts to an activated, fibrotic
phenotype that is critical in wound healing as well as chronic fibrosis and
scarring, but will apply more broadly to many cell types that response to
mechanoadhesive cues.