* 1462110
* RAPID: Democratic State Capacity and Organizational Adaptation in Crisis Conditions
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Erik Herron, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 11/30/2016
* USD 132,670.00

This study investigates how government organizations manage and adapt to crisis
situations, and how organizational decisions affect outcomes. Specifically, the
project will assess adaptation to insurgent activity in Ukraine during the 2014
snap parliamentary election, focusing on the role of election administration, by
conducting a survey of election officials and an analysis of personnel and
results data. The survey will provide critical insights into how civil servants
perform their duties in crisis conditions. Personnel data and elections returns
will permit an analysis of government effectiveness and election quality.
Developing a better understanding of how government organizations adapt to
crises will advance theoretical knowledge about state capacity and
organizational behavior. The research also has direct applications for US
foreign policy, especially in the development of democratic practices during and
after conflict situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team, consisting
of scholars and practitioners in the United States and Ukraine, will conduct a
pre- and post-election survey, gather personnel data prior to the election, and
collect official election results at the level of polling stations following the
election. The survey will include approximately 2,000 public servants involved
in managing election processes. The sample will be designed to reflect the
distribution of polling station features (e.g., size, location) and individual
features (e.g., gender, partisanship). Personnel data for public servants
assigned to all of the polling stations (approximately 33,000) will be collected
during the pre-election period and subsequently coded. Once synthesized, the
data will permit the researchers to analyze several outcomes, including: 1) how
staff and officers are distributed across the country; 2) how staffing decisions
and political instability affect election outcomes and the quality of election
practices; and 3) how well officials manage elections under varied conditions.
The project will contribute, theoretically and empirically, to research streams
in Political Science and the Science of Organizations.