* 1462602
* Fundamental Studies on Sintering of Alloys, Composites, and Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Sandip Harimkar, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 01/31/2021
* USD 469,805.00

Sintering is the process of forming engineering components by heating material
powder under pressure. Sintering processes are widely used for the manufacturing
of metallic, ceramic, and composite components for automotive, aerospace,
defense, and machine tool industries. However, it is often very challenging to
sinter the components free from processing-related undesirable changes in
structure and properties of materials. Controlling the structure of materials
during sintering becomes particularly important for highly temperature-sensitive
materials such as amorphous alloys. These materials are being considered for
several applications due to their outstanding mechanical and electrochemical
properties. This award supports fundamental research related to the development
of sintering processes for the amorphous alloys and their composites and
coatings. The results of this research will lead to innovations in the strategic
area of advanced manufacturing of engineering materials, identified as a key to
national economic development. The research will also promote the participation
of diverse groups of students in manufacturing research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In spite of their attractive properties, actual
utilization of amorphous alloys in practical applications has been limited
primarily due to difficulties in processing of bulk shapes using conventional
solidification processing. The spark plasma sintering process involving
simultaneous application of pulsed direct current and uniaxial pressure offers
interesting possibilities of manufacturing bulk amorphous alloys without
undesirable changes in material structure. The research team will perform
experiments to investigate the fundamental mechanisms of densification for the
spark plasma sintering of bulk amorphous alloys, particle reinforced and
laminated composites, and thick amorphous alloy coatings. The research will
elucidate the mechanisms of evolution of nanocrystalline size distribution in
amorphous alloys, ductility development in composites, and tribological
corrosion behavior of amorphous composite coatings. The major objective is to
establish the processing-microstructure-properties correlations in these areas
of research. Successful completion of this research would significantly advance
the state-of-the-art in spark plasma sintering of amorphous metallic alloys
leading to wider industry acceptance of the sintering technology and engineered
amorphous materials in a wide range of applications.