* 1462544
* Dynamics of Large-scale Monsoons and their Response to Climate Changes
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Simona Bordoni, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2018
* USD 406,595.00

Monsoons are prominent features of the large-scale circulation of the Earth's
atmosphere, sustaining densely populated, rapidly growing and socially
vulnerable regions in the tropics and subtropics. This project seeks to improve
understanding of the essential processes that are involved in monsoons and that
mediate their response to climate change. The premise of the project is that
monsoons can be viewed as seasonal migrations of zones of tropical convection
and their associated large-scale overturning circulations, and that the
fundamental dynamics of such convectively-driven overturning can be understood
in terms of angular momentum and energy balance constraints. Under this premise
the research begins by examining the behavior of seasonally migrating convection
zones in simplified "aquaplanet" simulations in which the earth's surface is
entirely covered by oceans and there are no land-sea contrasts. These model
simulations are followed by further simulations with idealized continents, and
finally results from these simulations are compared with realistic climate
simulations from the Climate Model Intercomparison Project version 5 (CMIP5).
Specific issues to be addressed include the relatively sudden onset of the
monsoon, the delay of monsoon onset with increasing global mean temperature
found in model simulations, and the relationship between global mean temperature
and the strength of the overturning circulation. Goals of the project are to 1)
investigate how monsoons change in a wide range of climates, in order to place
past, present and future changes in a broad context; 2) determine how monsoons
change in simulations in which complexity is progressively increased; starting
from aquaplanet simulations with no land-masses to simulations with idealized
continental geometries; and 3) use the conceptual understanding emerging from
the idealized simulations to evaluate state-of-the-art general circulation
models, and better constrain future projections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
has broader impacts due to the importance of monsoons for agriculture and water
resources in densely populated regions of the world. Understanding how monsoons
change with changing climate is both a priority and a major challenge in climate
science, and the present work may contribute both by improving our ability to
interpret and evaluate projections of monsoon change from climate models, and in
improving the models used for such projections. In addition, the project will
support and train a graduate student, thereby providing for the next generation
of researchers in this area, and three undergraduate students will be hosted for
summer research.