* 1462121
* CAREER: Catalysis on Singly Dispersed Bimetallic Catalytic Sites
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Franklin Tao, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2019
* USD 598,329.00

Franklin (Feng) Tao of the University of Notre Dame is funded through this
CAREER award by the Chemical Catalysis program for research to develop new types
of catalysts. These catalysts show promising abilities to remove poisonous gases
such as nitrous oxide from exhaust. The new catalysts being developed through
this research consist of metal atoms bonded to an oxide support. A unique
feature of this work is the small size of the metal clusters. Good results have
been obtained from a system consisting of a single rhodium atom bonded to two
cobalt oxide molecules. These systems are much smaller than those typically used
in industrial work and this size advantage could lead to improved properties.
The investigators are extending earlier research with rhodium atoms to include
other precious metals, in particular palladium and platinum, with the hopes to
further improve catalytic activity. The broader impacts of this project include
the development of new efficient catalysts that could be used to generate new
chemical fuels or to remove gaseous contaminants from the environment. The
project is having a further impact on the education and training of the next
generation of scientists, including very young scientists still in high school
who are participating in outreach efforts of the research team.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The catalysts being developed are heterogeneous, which
means that the catalytic event occurs on a catalytic site consisting of atoms of
metal, support, or both. In this research, bimetallic catalyst particles are
being investigated. These are two-atom clusters (dimers, in other words), which
typically consist of continuous bimetallic sites that have a size in the
nanometer range. In the systems studied here, which are singly dispersed
bimetallic sites, the catalytic sites are isolated rather than continuous and
thus exhibit a different electronic state and molecular adsorption. The specific
binding configuration of a reactant molecule or intermediate on an isolated
bimetallic site has been found to enhance catalytic selectivity for specific
products. The current project focuses on the development of catalysts of singly
dispersed bimetallic sites of 3d-4d and 3d-5d metals. Good results have already
been found with RhCo2 clusters. Additional studies are being carried out with Pd
and Pt, in addition to Rh, combined with both cobalt and zinc oxide supports.