* 1462075
* Ballistic energy transport in molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Igor Rubtsov, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2018
* USD 422,022.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry is funding Professors Igor Rubtsov and
Alexander Burin of Tulane University to investigate unusually rapid movement of
energy in molecules, so-called "ballistic energy transport." Most often energy
(as heat) is transported slowly through materials as thermal diffusion.
Professor Rubtsov's research group has discovered systems where energy deposited
in long molecules is rapidly transferred to distant locations. This anomalous
transfer of energy may help scientists discover new materials with improved
thermal properties. The graduate and undergraduate students working on this
project will receive training in laser and optical science. The PI and co-PI
participate in a number of educational activities on their campus, including the
Tulane LSAMP Summer Undergraduate Research Training Program, which provides
undergraduates students from groups underrepresented in science with authentic
research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors Igor Rubtsov and Alexander
Burin and their respective research groups will combine ultrafast laser
spectroscopy (relaxation-assisted two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy)
combined with theoretical modeling to develop a better understanding of how the
very rapid energy transport over molecularly-significant distances occurs. Some
of the questions that these scientists hope to answer include: (1) What are the
main factors determining the speed and efficiency of ballistic transport? How
does temperature effect the speed of ballistic transport? How does the three
dimensional structure of a material effect the speed of ballistic transport?
Among the factors affecting transport to be examined are the primary and
secondary chain structure, chain architecture, the nature and energy of the
source vibrational mode, and the temperature. These studies will help to
establish the most likely transport mechanisms and,as such, will likely suggest
ways of reducing losses for ballistic energy transport. The ballistic transport
mechanism may have to be considered as a principal component of energy transport
in molecules, especially for molecules featuring functional groups with
repeating units, which are very common. Thus, this study has the potential of
developing new ways of understanding vibrational energy transport in molecules
at a very fundamental level and may have a broad impact on physical and
materials science and engineering.