* 1463829
* The Empathy Project: An Interdisciplinary Research Effort to Develop a Transferable Theory of Empathy in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Joachim Walther, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 339,746.00

The field of engineering will play a key role in addressing the complex,
societal challenges of the 21st century that are characterized by technical
aspects interwoven with social dimensions. In order for the profession to fully
assume this expanding responsibility, universities and engineering educators are
working towards transforming engineering programs so that they prepare students
to effectively engage in these broad, multi-disciplinary challenges. This
project contributes a crucial component to the social aspects of these
qualifications through a focus on empathy that will allow future engineers to
meaningfully consider social facets of engineering work, engage with a broad
range of stakeholders, and understand the perspectives and needs of members of
society. In this interdisciplinary educational research project, engineering
education researchers are collaborating with social work education researchers.
The field of social work contributes a longstanding history of purposefully
developing empathy as part of students' professional formation. The outcomes of
this project will provide the evidence-base necessary to inform future efforts
to broadly infuse empathy into engineering education.

Responding to a growing recognition of the socially situated nature of 21st
century engineering challenges, scholars have begun to explore the role of
empathy in preparing future engineers. However, the impact of these efforts is
impeded by a lack of conceptual clarity and a dearth of evidence-based theory
regarding the role of empathy in engineering. This project develops a
transferable theory of empathy in engineering learning and professional
formation. The inquiry leverages an interdisciplinary initiative that fosters an
empathic orientation and skills in students as a window through which to
investigate their broader experiences of empathy in engineering education
contexts. The research builds on a prior pilot study and entails the collection
of data in environmental and mechanical engineering design courses through
classroom observations, focus groups, written reflections, and project
artifacts. Narrative interviews are conducted to further explore students'
accounts as situated in their broader educational or life experiences. Data is
analyzed using two complementary interpretive lenses. First, a constructivist
grounded theory approach is used to develop a model of empathy formation in
terms of its role in students' overall educational experience and resultant
impacts on their professional way of being. Second, a narrative analysis is used
to contextualize these findings in students' diverse lived experiences through
the use of constructed narratives. In the long term, this project will enable
the systemic, evidence-based integration of empathy into engineering programs -
making the field accessible to a more diverse range of students and providing a
more meaningful educational experience.