* 1463870
* CRII: SaTC: Comprehensive and Automated Techniques for Evaluating Defenses Against Code Reuse Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* John Criswell, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 06/30/2019
* USD 189,501.00

Modern society relies on computers to manage and transmit sensitive data. These
computers run our banks, provide our telecommunications services (such as phone,
TV, and Internet), and operate critical systems found in automobiles and power
grids. The software on these systems is vulnerable to automated attacks and, if
attacked successfully, can be used to cause the loss of money, property, and
life. While researchers have developed automated, easy-to-use countermeasures to
thwart such attacks, it is unclear whether these countermeasures work. Existing
evaluations of such countermeasures are typically expensive because they are
done by hand. They are also often wrong; attackers are able to defeat such
countermeasures by increasing the sophistication of their attacks. If we do not
know how well our defenses work, we do not know if we are
safe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One common type of automated attack is the code reuse
attack. This research investigates techniques and develops a tool that
automatically determines whether a given countermeasure prevents code reuse
attacks from working. This tool uses comprehensive static analysis to
automatically determine which program instructions a code reuse attack may
employ, whether the malicious computations of an attack can be mapped to those
instructions, and whether the defense being analyzed prevents those instructions
from being executed in the required order. The tool is automated and its static
analysis is designed to aggressively consider all potential ways in which an
attacker can reuse code in an attack. With this tool, users can determine
whether existing defenses suffice to protect our computers or whether additional
defenses are necessary. The project is developing metrics to enable tool users
to compare defenses and state the level of security that a defense provides to a
given program.