* 1463679
* Collaborative Research: A Theoretical and Experimental Study of Mechanical Properties in Ultrafine-Grained Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Suveen Mathaudhu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2018
* USD 270,611.00

Magnesium alloys are the lightest of all structural metallic materials, and are
becoming of increasing interest due to their combination of low-density,
moderate strength and stiffness, availability and recyclability. In particular,
these properties are of direct relevance to the automobile, rail and aerospace
industries that seek to replace heavier components with lighter ones, and thus
minimize fuel usage. Despite the increased interest, magnesium alloys suffer
from not being strong enough, and more so, that components have to be heated and
shaped at very high temperatures, which is economically prohibitive for
transportation manufacturers. This award supports fundamental research to
acquire knowledge that will enable synergistic increases in strength and
lowering of the processing temperature to ambient temperatures, thereby solving
two important barriers to usage at one time. This research will intersect at the
boundaries of materials science, mechanics and manufacturing in a highly
relevant way. It will attract, educate and enable students from underrepresented
groups to gain the knowledge and confidence to directly address the rigorous,
evolving needs in U.S. industry and government for lightweight materials in
energy efficient transportation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cast magnesium alloys
have suffered from poor ambient temperature plasticity due to the lack of
necessary active slip systems. This problem is compounded in wrought processed
alloys wherein highly anisotropic textures limit uniform material flow. On the
other hand, nanocrystalline materials with grain sizes below 100nm have
exceptional and desirable properties when compared to their course-grained
counterparts, including concurrent increases in strength and ductility.
Motivated by this, the goals of this project are 1) to uncover the underpinning
mechanisms for ambient temperature plasticity in bulk, fully dense, nano-grained
magnesium alloys using novel processing approaches and microstructure-based
modeling; and 2) to exploit the subsequent knowledge to predictably design and
fabricate low-temperature formable magnesium alloys. In terms of broader
scientific ramifications, the development of a tractable and systematic
experimental and modeling framework will represent a major advance over current
semi-empirical methods for designing nano-grained alloys with tailored
microstructures.