* 1463301
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Effect of Stress and Heat on Magnetic Properties of Thin Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Yang-Ki Hong, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 03/31/2019
* USD 218,041.00

The properties of magnetic materials are affected by stress and heat. When a
ferromagnetic material experiences surface contact, it can degrade or change its
original magnetic properties. The magnetic stability decreases as the size of
the microscopic magnetic domain in the material decreases. In order to improve
the performance of ferromagnetic devices, the physical size of magnetic domains
needs to be reduced. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) Program collaborative research award supports fundamental research to
investigate the scientific mechanism of magnetic degradation for ferromagnetic
thin films under stress, heat, and friction. With the collaboration between
universities and industrial partner, the fundamental research activities will be
brought into actual product, i.e., magnetic recording media in a hard disk drive
(HDD), to achieve more stable and reliable design. The outcomes from this multi-
disciplinary and collaborative research will not only provide immediate
solutions to improve energy efficiency, accuracy and reliability of magneto-
mechanical applications (e.g., magnetic storage devices, magnetic sensors and
actuators, magnetic MEMS/NEMS resonator, etc.) but also deliver key design rules
for the next-generation ferromagnetic devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coupled
effects of micro-stress and thermal agitation by adiabatic/frictional heat
generation will be systematically and quantitatively examined with respect to
magnetic design parameters of materials such as magnetic domain size and
magnetic anisotropy energy density. First, in theoretical modeling, the theories
of contact mechanics and heat transfer will be incorporated into magnetic
properties, where the micro-stress tensor and spatial temperature distribution
change magnetic field and magnetization. Second, in computational simulation,
atomic level disorders obtained from the ab-initio calculation will be extended
to the macroscopic magnetization process, where Monte Carlo simulation will be
applied to minimize the system energy. Lastly, the scientific findings from the
theoretical and computational simulations will be verified through dynamic
surface contact experiment and instrumental material characterization.