* 1463006
* Three-Dimensional Characterization and Simulation of Deformation in Hexagonal Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Carl Boehlert, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2019
* USD 381,722.00

Many lightweight metals such as magnesium, titanium, and zirconium alloys have a
hexagonal crystal structure, which is unique from the cubic structures of
commonly used aluminum and steel alloys. The room-temperature deformation of
hexagonal metals is often dominated by a process known as mechanical twinning,
wherein atoms shift positions to a highly symmetric arrangement in order to
accommodate an applied stress or load. How mechanical twinning operates in such
commercially-relevant, structurally-loaded, hexagonal metals is presently not
fully understood and, therefore, limits the computational design of such
materials and their manufacturing processes. An improved understanding can
accelerate their development, reduce associated costs, and provide enhanced
reliability of manufactured components. This award supports research towards the
understanding of deformation of these technologically important materials, which
have application in lightweight automotive and aerospace components, as well as
many other structural applications where high strength and low weight are
critical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the fundamental level, the controlling factor
in the mechanical behavior of structural metals is the resistance of the crystal
lattice to motion of dislocations, formation of mechanical twins, and displacive
phase transformations. Particularly in hexagonal metals and alloys (Mg, Ti, Zr),
which lack easily activated dislocation slip systems, mechanical twinning is
prominent to accommodate plastic deformation. In this research program, the
evolving twin structure in such metals is comprehensively characterized in three
dimensions (3D) to gain novel insights and interpretations on the formation and
propagation of twins and their relation to, for instance, parent grain
orientation or grain boundary character distribution. The data will be used to
validate constitutive descriptions of twin formation by incorporating the 3D
microstructural information into full-field crystal plasticity simulations at
high spatial resolution. Thus, this work provides a more complete understanding
of how twins form and can fill in the presently missing knowledge to more
confidently model the contribution of mechanical twinning to plastic
deformation.