* 1463964
* Stochastic Dynamics: Finite and Infinite Dimensional
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Salah-Eldin Mohammed, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 120,006.00

This research program is focused on the time evolution of physical and
biological systems which develop under the influence of random external forces.
Of particular interest is the scenario when the intrinsic driving forces within
the physical system are highly irregular. Such irregularities are prevalent in
many mathematical models used in physics, fluid mechanics, epidemiology and
financial mathematics. The goal is to reach a comprehensive understanding of the
evolution of such models. In particular, the plan is to establish the existence
of a large class of mathematical models in physics and biology which is
sufficiently rich to allow for a broad range of applications and at the same
time flexible enough to accommodate unavoidable statistical errors in estimating
the parameters of the underlying models.

The proposed research consists of three major undertakings concerning stochastic
dynamical systems: 1. Existence and spatial regularity of random invariant
manifolds for singular stochastic differential equations (sdes) driven by
Brownian motion and Borel measurable linearly bounded drift coefficients. A
Stable Manifold Theorem should hold for such singular sdes. Given the extreme
roughness of the driving vector fields, the existence and differentiability of
the invariant manifolds would be striking and counter-intuitive. The results
will be attained via Malliavin calculus and multiplicative ergodic theory. 2. A
strategy for a proof of the Kupka-Smale Conjecture for stochastic differential
equations driven by smooth vector fields on compact Riemannian manifolds. The
basic intuition behind such a fundamental result is that in order for a family
of hyperbolic vector fields to represent the dynamics of viable
physical/biological models, it is imperative that the family be "rich" within
the set of all "reasonable" vector fields, and at the same time be insensitive
to perturbations in the coefficients. 3. Existence and smoothness of densities
(with respect to Lebesgue measure) for the finite-dimensional random invariant
subspaces of linear stochastic partial differential equations.