* 1463962
* Collaborative Research: FRG: Understanding and Controlling Active Fluids through Modeling, Simulation, and Experiment
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Shelley, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2019
* USD 562,502.00

Soft active materials are collections of particles, cells, or molecules that are
capable of converting chemical energy from their environment into motion and
mechanical stresses. Examples include swimming microorganisms, cellular
extracts, biological polymers, and molecular motors, as well as a wealth of
synthetic particles designed to mimic biological systems. These active systems,
which have generated considerable excitement over the last decade in many
disciplines from engineering to physics to applied mathematics, evince behaviors
that are fundamentally different from traditional passive materials, and their
understanding is just beginning to illuminate long-standing problems in biology
and to suggest new engineering devices. This research project aims to use
experiments, modeling, and simulations, to further enhance understanding of a
variety of active materials. The project will also involve training through
research involvement of postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to use a
combination of modeling, mathematical analysis, numerical simulations, and
experiments to explore the dynamics of archetypal active fluids as their
microstructural components interact with obstacles, walls, and each other.
Computational and coarse-grained models will explore the interaction of
microswimmers, individually and collectively, with boundaries and obstacles.
Microfluidic environments will be fabricated to explore how active particle
transport is affected and controlled by boundaries and obstacles, and tools of
shape optimization will be used to guide the design. Specialized particles will
be fabricated to elucidate different aspects of active matter. New types of
active matter will be explored, both by considering modifications in particle-
scale activity and system-scale confinement. These investigations will include
detailed and coarse-grained computational models of recently synthesized active
fluids in which immersed microtubules interact through motor-protein cross-
linking and pulling, as well as a new active matter system in which particle
activity couples to interfacial forces to drive large-scale flows.