* 1463198
* Field Testing and Monitoring of an Experimental Soil-Bentonite Cutoff Wall
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Jeffrey Evans, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2020
* USD 384,188.00

Soil-bentonite slurry trench cutoff walls are widely used for seepage control,
levee repair, and pollutant containment. Their widespread use in these critical
applications requires a better understanding of their as-built condition and
long-term behavior. Regarding the as-built condition, the in-place permeability
of cutoff walls is heavily influenced by the presence of defects and by the
stress within the wall. Conventional construction quality control programs are
insufficient to verify backfill homogeneity throughout the installation, and
commercial technologies are not yet available for non-destructively detecting
defects or verifying the absence of defects. Regarding long-term behavior,
several factors may cause changes in permeability of the wall over time
including changes in stress and wet-dry cycling. This project seeks to address
these questions regarding both the short-term (as-built) and long-term integrity
of cutoff walls through the design, construction, in-situ testing, and
monitoring of a fully instrumented cutoff wall to be installed near the Bucknell
University campus. Society will benefit from better understanding and
performance from our dams, levees and pollutant containment systems and from
substantial teaching, training, and mentoring through the involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students in the research, outreach to secondary
students as part of the annual engineering summer camp, and exposure of students
and practitioners to the state of the art/practice for cutoff walls via formal
seminar presentations.

The cutoff wall will be fully instrumented to monitor in-situ conditions in the
backfill (e.g., 3D state of stress, vertical and lateral deformations, and pore
water pressures) as a function of time and location. Electrical resistance
imaging will be investigated for locating defects placed within the wall at
known locations and of known size, with the goal of developing a viable
geophysical methodology for defect detection in SB walls. The monitoring will be
complemented with lab tests and in-situ tests (e.g., cone penetration, vane
shear, dilatometer, and standard penetration tests), also performed over time to
reveal time-dependent behavior. Finally, numerical model simulations to predict
the stress distribution within an SB cutoff wall will be performed and the
results compared with the measured field stresses. All field and lab data will
be managed within a geospatial information system framework that will be made
accessible to the public via the web.