* 1463820
* Practices Promoting Engineering Education in the Early Years
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Michelle Pantoya, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 323,859.00

Children's engineering books and complementary simulation games strategically
designed to complement K-2nd grade literacy and science content are examined for
their impact on engineering engagement and content learning. The research
achieves a broader impact by enabling early understanding of engineering
concepts through literature based on story board depictions from an engineering
perspective as well as computer simulation games re-enforcing the engineering
design process. By studying the impact of these stories in the classroom, new
literacy tools and educational computer games that positively transform the way
children think about engineering as well as our approach to STEM education can
be developed. Engineering provides a meaningful situational context for teaching
science and math and results from this study engineering to be a necessary
component for effectively teaching science and math in the early years. Once
this outcome is realized, results from this study can serve as a catalyst for
the development of new pedagogical strategies for engineering education and
enable children's book authors and game programmers to consider new strategies
for learning for this young population of students. In this way, the conceptual
understanding outcomes (content and vocabulary) are sustained in later years and
ultimately improve achievement in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines the following research questions: What is the impact of engineering-
centered literacy activities on K-2nd grade culturally and linguistically
diverse (CLD) student learning and engagement in engineering content? How does
participation in academic conversations impact sustained engagement in complex
engineering tasks? Does the impact vary by student characteristics (language
background and achievement level)? To what extent can engineering-centered
simulations facilitate requisite science and mathematics concept learning that
support the engineering process. What simulation design features maximize this
learning for K-2nd grade students? How does engagement with simulations impact
students' academic conversations? Specific objectives are to use a single case
study approach for studying: (1) engineering design centered computer simulation
games and engineering-focused books to promote student engagement and learning;
(2) examine growth in instructional effectiveness; (3) research methodologies
for improving student engagement; and, (4) analyze improvements in student
concept learning. This is among the first studies to address the learning and
engagement impact of children's story-book literature that is centered on
engineering principles. With an understanding of these best practices, authors
can more effectively design STEM content rich books for this age group. An
understanding of the mechanisms that advance learning through computer
simulation games are also being developed. This understanding is a first step
toward developing additional individual and/or group activities. These best
practices are examined across cultural and linguistic boundaries to better serve
all populations.