* 1463203
* GOALI: Design of Rheologically-Complex Soft Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Randy Ewoldt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 05/31/2021
* USD 471,000.00

Many everyday materials do not fit classical definitions of fluid and solid.
Instead, rheological materials can have properties of both states. While
engineers typically use traditional fluid and solid materials to achieve desired
functionality of engineering systems, there is great opportunity for novel
performance based on rheological material behavior. The focus of this Grant
Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) Program research project
is to ask the question, given a desired performance, what rheological material
behavior is needed, and what material formulations achieve this behavior? The
work here will study design and optimization techniques for these complex soft
materials. The research involves theory, computation, and experiment. The
methodology aims to transform the search for novel rheologically-complex
materials and their use in engineering design. The resulting enhanced system
performance would impact numerous application domains such as, but are not
limited to, soft robotics, vibration control, fire-suppression systems, and
prosthetics. The GOALI partnership will strengthen the relevance of the new
methods to engineering practice and provide a test bed for the new design
approach. The interaction with industry will also enhance the training of
students. Associated outreach activities will broaden the general understanding
of rheological materials via the development and use of a portal enabling
virtual experiments on rheological materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this work is to create a new paradigm for creative and rational design of
rheologically-complex materials. This project?s approach directly connects
system-level performance optimization to material-level design. A core challenge
is that rheological properties are functions, not constants. The work will
define and organize design-appropriate mathematical modeling methods that use
descriptive material functions (function-valued properties) directly.
Rheological complexity derives from time-dependent (viscoelastic) and amplitude-
dependent (nonlinear) behavior, and this two-dimensional space will be used to
organize the applicability and limitations of different constitutive models for
the purpose of design. Optimization methods for the resulting mathematical
structures will be established. A key challenge is the optimization of
functions, such as kernel functions in convolution integrals. This will be
approached with numerical optimal control methods including direct
transcription. Once target properties are identified, experiments will be used
to demonstrate rational design of rheologically-complex material compositions
that best achieve the system performance objectives. This material-level design
will leverage known structure-rheology models by considering multiple material
strategies including polymeric systems, colloidal systems, and composite
combinations. The industry GOALI partner will work closely with the academic
team to help translate the work to industry, provide insight on formulation of
new material concepts, and provide relevant material formulations. The
methodology will be tested numerically and experimentally with case studies of
shear-thinning and linear viscoelastic systems. The new paradigm will lay the
foundation for additional integrated design approaches for other materials
domains with complex function-valued properties.