* 1463705
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Agriculture And The Development Of Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Alexia Smith, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 25,198.00

Dr. Alexia Smith and Madelynn von Baeyer, of the University of Connecticut, will
use archaeobotany, the study of the relationship between plants and ancient
people, to examine how plant use contributes to the process of social
complexity. Archaeologists often cite changes in access to or control of
agricultural goods as an important factor in developing social hierarchies, and
this project will examine these assumptions. This research will contribute to
global discussions of the dynamic relationship between agricultural practices, a
range of environmental factors, and the social, political, and economic roles of
groups of people. Within this context, this project will broaden the current
cultural discourse on food and the impacts of food production by addressing the
relationship between social complexity and crop production during a time of
environmental flux. The research will provide the basis for Madelynn's doctoral
dissertation thesis and thus contribute to the intellectual and academic
development of a promising scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smith and von Baeyer
will examine Late Chalcolithic (4000 B.C.- 3100 B.C.) remains from Çadýr Höyük,
a multi-period site in central Anatolia that spans the Middle Chalcolithic to
Byzantine periods in order to identify patterns of plant use including: species
and plant parts used, the diversity of plant-related activities across the site,
household labor organization, and plant-based markers of incipient social
complexity. This project will integrate plant data with ethnographic and
ecological data, as well as data from the Çadýr Höyük excavations including
architectural context, spatial distribution of samples, and artifact
distribution. The Late Chalcolithic period in central Anatolia is an ideal
period to study how plants contribute to bourgeoning social complexity outside
of the Mesopotamian heartland owing to the emergence of rural regional centers
like Çadýr, defensive walls, and extensive trade networks at that time. This
project will contribute to the growing understanding of the variety of different
trajectories by which social complexity emerged in SW Asia and around the world.