* 1463493
* US-Ireland Partnership Programme: Bridge Health Monitoring Using Cameras and Computer Vision Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Fikret Catbas, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 11/30/2020
* USD 374,306.00

This project is a US-Ireland partnership program pursuing research in structural
health monitoring of bridges. The goal of this collaborative research project is
to use cameras and video-image processing to identify loss of load carrying
capacity of bridge structures. The camera images can be captured continuously
with minimum human intervention. The image processing algorithm can be automated
to assess significant change in structural health and load carrying capacity of
the bridge. Conversion of camera and computer images for assessment of traffic
loads and evaluation of load carrying capacity of the bridge are major research
contributions of this project. Early detection of change in load carrying
capacity will allow timely repair and thus extend life of the bridge.
Investigators from three institutions, one each from three countries of Ireland,
Northern Ireland (United Kingdom) and United States will collaborate to develop
recognition of traffic loads, changes in vibration characteristics of the
bridge, computer vision output, and algorithms to predict load capacity and
remaining life of the bridge. The developed algorithm will be validated by
observations of a bridge in Northern Ireland in the field. The project is funded
by two divisions in the National Science Foundation, the Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation and International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project will be
the development of algorithms that transforms the recorded video images of a
bridge into damage characteristics for the bridge structure. The structural
health will be assessed within the context of structural identification with
input and output characterization. This development will require new adaptations
and transformations that can manage computer vision that are continuous in space
for structural engineering applications. The novelties in this project are:
vehicle load modeling using computer vision; bridge response using image
processing; image- based structural identification using input-output signals;
and framework for remaining bridge life evaluation. The development will be
validated with laboratory and field experiments. The international activities
among the three collaborating partners in the areas of research, education, and
outreach will support the intellectual contributions and broader impact of this
research.