* 1463869
* Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Graphene Based Composites with Controllable Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Balaji Panchapakesan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2017
* USD 201,531.00

This grant supports research supporting the development of scalable
nanomanufacturing methods for graphene-based polymer nanocomposites with
controllable properties. The project involves layer dependent control of
graphene based nano-composite properties and their eventual scalable
manufacturing with an emphasis on photomechanical actuation. Microscopic models
will be developed for describing the photomechanical response of
graphene/polymer composites. Experiments involving separation of graphene based
on the number of layers, investigating the layer dependency of mechanical
strength, percolation threshold, and electrical conductivity of graphene based
composites and utilization of such controllable nanomanufacturing techniques for
creation of advanced composites with high energy conversion efficiencies will be
investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will lead to energy efficient materials and composites based on graphene with
predictable and controllable properties such as percolation threshold,
electrical conductivity, mechanical strength and photomechanical actuation.
Scalable nanomanufacturing of graphene composites could eventually lead to a
myriad of technologies such as smart artificial skins for sensing strain and
pressure and for converting solar energy into electricity, heat and mechanical
motion. The proposal will make advanced contributions to the separation of
graphene based on the number of layers, into using graphene layers as nuclei for
enhanced polymerization and cross-linking, layer dependent photomechanical
responses and rubbery elasticity of graphene composites with varying levels of
percolation threshold and nanomanufacturing techniques for advanced composites
and photomechanical actuators. The proposed will work will also make
contributions to microscopic mathematical modeling and Raman spectroscopy of
graphene composites.