* 1463900
* Bioinspired and Sustainable Catalysis for Chlorite Conversion and Dioxygen Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2016
* MAHDI ABU-OMAR, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Mahdi Abu-Omar of Purdue University is developing catalysts
to make important chemicals via greener processes. Catalysts are reagents that
accelerate and direct reactions toward desirable products without themselves
being consumed. A popular example is the catalytic converter in automobiles,
which reduces certain gaseous emissions such as carbon monoxide and renders
vehicles significantly less polluting. Often catalysts are based on precious
elements that are rare and expensive such as platinum and rhodium. In contrast,
biological catalysts or enzymes, often use abundant and inexpensive elements
such as iron and copper to carry out important physiological reactions.
Professor Abu-Omar is drawing inspiration from biology to develop and study
catalysts based on manganese and iron, earth-abundant elements, for chemical
reactions that are important for energy and the environment: making hydrogen
peroxide directly from air, decomposing an environmental contaminant made up of
chlorine and oxygen atoms into harmless table salt and oxygen, and also
converting this contaminant into a disinfectant on-demand in water and at room
temperature.

Professor Abu-Omar is developing high-valent oxo complexes of first row
transition metals, specifically manganese and iron, supported by corrole,
prophyrin, and pyridyl or amidato macrocylic ligands. Some of these complexes
are being used to study the kinetics and mechanism of proton coupled electron
transfer (PCET) in manganese(V)-oxo corrole to establish a catalytic system for
the selective two-electron reduction of dioxygen to hydrogen peroxide.
Generation of hydrogen peroxide directly from air would provide greener methods
for making this important industrial chemical and contribute to strategies for
renewable energy conversion and storage. Others of these complexes are being
used to study the reaction chemistry of the oxyanion, chlorite. Professor Abu-
Omar is developing catalysts for the selective dismutation of chlorite to
dioxygen and innocuous chloride by incorporating a hydrogen bonding pocket in
the second-coordination sphere. Picket fence porphyrin ligand designs are being
guided by computational investigations into the mechanism of catalytic chlorite
decomposition and the structural and functional features of the active pocket.
Iron non-heme catalysts are being studied for the production of chlorine dioxide
on-demand from chlorite under ambient temperature and noncorrosive conditions.
Chlorine dioxide is used in pulp bleaching as well as in disinfection and water
purification. Other broader impacts of the research include outreach activities
for a group of high school students and high and middle school teachers to
introduce them to sustainable catalysis science.