* 1463474
* Energy- and Cost- Efficient Manufacturing Employing Nanoparticle Self-Assembly with Continuous Crystallinity
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Nicholas Kotov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Additive solution-based printing of electronic devices with nanoparticle
dispersions is technologically attractive and inspires new sensing and
information processing technologies. The key impediment for its wider use in
nanomanufacturing is the presence of protective organic layer needed for their
stabilization that hampers the charge transfer between nanoparticles. Its
resolution has had considerable academic success but new strategies in this
direction are needed in order to reduce the cost, energy requirements, improve
its scalability, and alleviate environmental concerns. Realization of their low-
temperature self-assembly into films with continuous crystallinity and
competitive electrical properties will benefit energy storage/harvesting
technologies, optoelectronics, and wearable health monitoring devices. The use
of earth-abundant materials can potentially open different areas of applications
in 'smart buildings' and agriculture that are expected to have a wide ranging
ripple effect and contribute to improving the sustainability of the US economy.
Novel teaching and learning programs will engender the next generation of
innovators with a fundamental understanding of nanotechnology and the
technological thresholds for nanomanufacturing, allowing new and creative
devices to be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the objective of
forming films with continuous crystallinity and competitive electrical
properties, the projected method will take advantage of the ability of
nanoparticles to self-assemble following the oriented attachment mechanism. This
recently discovered technique leads to the self-orientation of the crystal
lattices at their boundaries, which should greatly increase conductivity. This
project will focus on the realization of oriented attachment for earth-abundant
nanoparticles exemplified by the n-type semiconductor Cu2S. This material is
attractive for nanomanufacturing not only because of its environmentally benign
nature and low cost, but also for its promising electronic, plasmonic, and ion
intercalation properties. Resolution of practical and fundamental issues
surrounding the charge transport dilemma of solution-processed nanoparticle
devices is central to this study. The findings expected for Cu2S can be extended
to other device-relevant semiconductors, such as FeS2. Within three years,
transition from basic understanding of self-assembly processes of Cu2S
nanoparticles to crafting highly conductive films and nanomanufactured devices
exemplified by lithium battery cathodes is expected.