* 1463241
* Renewal: Cooperative Mesoscopic Transitions in Finite Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Bachmann, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 344,997.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational research and education in
the interdisciplinary field of soft condensed matter, materials science, and
biophysics. It focuses on the investigation of structural properties of polymers
and proteins, with emphasis on structure formation processes such as folding,
aggregation, and adsorption at substrates under thermal conditions. Various
characteristic features of these transformations resemble phase transitions in
macroscopic matter. However, the polymeric systems that are studied in this
project are finite and sufficiently small for surface effects to be dominant or
at least significant. Traditional theories of phase transitions typically do not
include these effects, and therefore a revised approach is necessary. This is
only possible by means of computer simulations. Sophisticated algorithms are
used or still need to be developed and effectively replace mathematical methods
in order to address the complexity of these systems.

In this project, generic models are developed and simulated that capture
essential features of entire classes of soft materials. This is possible by
systematic scans of spaces of material and external control parameters. The
results are accumulated in what are called hyperphase diagrams, which contain
information about all structures that can be exhibited by a generic model
system. This is significant input for materials design, in particular for hybrid
systems composed of soft and solid matter. Such systems are interesting from a
nanotechnology point of view as they allow for a variety of biologically
inspired applications such as sensors, transport on small scales, and
photoreceptors.

Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers will be involved in this project
and learn various skills beyond the mere acquisition and dissemination of
knowledge in biophysics, polymer physics, and condensed matter physics. They are
confronted with the efficient implementation of algorithms that run on highly
parallelized computer systems, and statistical methods are needed to analyze the
large data sets generated during the simulations. With these skills, the young
scientists are well-prepared for the next stages in their career development.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational research and education aimed
to develop computational methodologies and statistical analysis tools for the
understanding of structure formation processes and functions of macromolecular
matter under thermal conditions. Generic, coarse-grained models are developed to
investigate the structural behavior of entire classes of polymer systems and
materials. Particular emphasis is dedicated to the study of the statistical
mechanics of structural transitions of macromolecules. Employing recent advances
in the development of statistical-physics based analysis tools such as the
microcanonical inflection-point method, structural transitions that occur in
finite systems can be investigated in a similar way as macroscopic phase
transitions. The major research fields in this project are:

1. Generic approaches to conformational transitions. Monte Carlo computer
simulations of coarse-grained polymer and protein models are used to understand
the kinetics and thermodynamics of structural transitions in single flexible and
semiflexible macromolecules for various model parameter settings that represent
different soft materials.

2. Macromolecular aggregation processes. Aggregation processes and cluster
formation are considered the potential cause of neurodegenerative diseases, but
may also be potentially interesting from the perspective of materials design
because of their flexibility and stability. Generic statistical properties of
cluster formation will be studied by means of simulations of simplified coarse-
grained models and microcanonical statistical data analysis.

3. Adhesion at substrates. In this project, the cooperative effects of the
interaction between soft and solid matter are investigated. Of particular
interest is understanding the processes that enable the macromolecular
recognition of substrates with a particular surface structure or pattern.

The educational components of this award enable training of graduate students
and postdocs in various interdisciplinary fields including molecular biology,
polymer chemistry, computer science, and computational and statistical physics.
This also includes the development of the ability to present and disseminate
research results.