* 1463137
* Collaborative Research: Modeling the Coupling of Epigenetic and Transcriptional Regulation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Guang Yao, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 566,062.00

Cells sharing the same genome exhibit different phenotypes. For the development
and health of the body, cells in various tissues need to faithfully maintain
their functional properties and meanwhile make necessary changes responding to
environmental cues. That is, cells need to be phenotypically stable and plastic.
Cells achieve this demand through proper regulation of gene expression,
transcriptionally and epigenetically. Gene regulation at the transcriptional
level via transcription factors has been well studied. Gene regulation at the
epigenetic level via chromatin modifications has been extensively researched
recently. Yet, the quantitative nature of epigenetic regulation remains largely
elusive, and little is known about the coupled effects of epigenetic and
transcriptional regulations. This project will develop a mathematical framework
for epigenetic regulation as well as coupled epigenetic and transcriptional
regulations. By combining modeling and quantitative experimental measurements,
this research will address the fundamental question of cell phenotype stability
and plasticity. This collaborative project will provide unique opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students to work at the interface of mathematical,
physical, and life sciences. Through a summer internship program, high school
students will have opportunities to experience integrated modeling/experimental
research, which will encourage them to explore their interests in pursuing
cross-disciplinary research careers in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapidly
accumulating evidence has revealed the critical role of epigenetic regulation of
gene expression. Epigenetic modifications refer to stable and inheritable
changes of gene expression caused by non-genetic chromatin modifications.
However, the quantitative properties of epigenetic regulation, and the coupled
effects of epigenetic and transcriptional regulation on gene expression, are
poorly understood. In this project, the investigators will first develop a
theoretical framework describing epigenetic and transcriptional regulations of
gene expression, and analyze how epigenetic dynamics and gene transcription are
coupled to control stable and plastic gene activities. Investigators will then
focus on a case study, the coupled epigenetic/transcriptional regulation of the
Rb-E2F pathway that controls the transition between two distinct cell fates,
cellular quiescence and proliferation. Guided by modeling analysis,
investigators will experimentally determine the highly needed but unresolved
function form for the coupling between epigenetic modification and gene
transcription. By integrating approaches across statistical and chemical
physics, nonlinear dynamics, and experimental biology, this project will advance
our understanding of gene expression stability and flexibility via coupled
transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms, and correspondingly, of cell fate
maintenance and transition between quiescence and proliferation.