* 1463989
* Gas Phase Ion Chemistry of PAHs and Giant PAHs: Models for Graphene Interactions and Supported Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Mohamed Samy El-Shall, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2021
* USD 501,421.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professors Samy El-Shall and
Michael Mautner of Virginia Commonwealth University and Professor Samuel Abrash
of the University of Richmond to investigate the structure and reactivity of
complex organic molecular ions in the gas phase. The systems will be studied
with a variety of mass spectrometry methods. Specific systems to be studied
include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) ions as well as Pd-graphene
catalysts for polymerization of acetylene. In an educational project supported
by this award, Prof. El-Shall is developing curriculum to expand graduate
education in chemistry to areas at the intersection of science and public
policy. The students supported with this award will come from a diverse group of
students from both Virginia Commonwealth University as well as undergraduate
students the University of Richmond. With support from this award, Prof. El-
Shall will work to develop new curriculum, based partly upon his recent
experiences as a Jefferson Science Fellow with the US Department of State, to
highlight the ways in which science and technology can inform public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Samy El-Shall and his research group will
study an interesting group of chemical systems. In one set of experiments, Dr.
El-Shall and his group will extend their past work on the chemical properties of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) and polycyclic aromatic nitrogen
heterocycle (PANH) ions. These ions are implicated in a number of contexts: from
interstellar space to potential intermediates in the formation of graphene and
soot. In the next phase of research on these systems, the El-Shall group will
study: (1) the reactivity of small PAH and PANH ions with small unsaturated and
polar molecules; (2) the reactions of protonated PAHs; (3) the structure and
energetics of dimer ions of PAH and PANH compounds; (4) the molecular properties
and ion chemistry of so-called "giant" PAH compounds, containing hundreds of
carbon atoms; and (5) related chemistry on the polymerization of acetylene with
Pd in the gas phase. The experimental methods that will be used revolve around
variations of mass-selected ion mobility measurements in specialized equipment
in the El-Shall laboratory.