* 1463627
* Collaborative Research: Friction Stir Processing of Cast Metal Matrix Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Xiaochun Li, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 06/30/2018
* USD 86,216.00

Incorporation of nanoparticles into light metals, forming metal matrix
nanocomposites, can lead to significantly enhanced properties to generate
tremendous impacts in the automotive, aerospace, and other industries that
demand lightweight structural components in order to achieve high energy
efficiency, which also means less air pollution. However, it is very difficult
to achieve a good dispersion and capture of nanoparticles during solidification
of metals. Effective nanoparticle incorporation into high temperature metal
melts also presents a severe problem. Friction stir processing can serve as a
powerful tool to disperse nanoparticles in the lightweight metal matrix
nanocomposites fabricated by semi-solid processing at a relatively low
temperature. This award supports fundamental research to provide knowledge
needed to create a simple, novel and scalable manufacturing technology to drive
metal matrix nanocomposites toward widespread applications. The research will
attract, retain, and engage students from under-represented group. K-12
students/teachers and industry partners will be exposed to the new technology.
Interdisciplinary curriculum materials will be developed to train graduate and
undergraduate students.

The objectives of this collaborative project are to (1) significantly advance
the fundamental understanding of how friction stir processing interacts with
nanoparticles in lightweight metal matrix nanocomposites, fabricated by semi-
solid casting route, through a systematic experimental study on the nanoparticle
movements and dispersion inside the grains during processing, and (2) understand
the processing-microstructure-properties relations by investigating the effects
of nanoparticle size and morphology, nanoparticle loading, and processing
parameters on the micro/nano-structural evolution and the resultant mechanical
properties of the nanocomposites. The metal matrix nanocomposites for the
experimental study will be fabricated through a combination of semi-solid
casting and friction stir processing to effectively incorporate nanoparticles in
semi-solid state at a relatively-low temperature and disperse nanoparticles and
refine microstructures in solid state to achieve superior properties. Through
micro/nano materials analysis tools, this study will characterize micro/nano-
structures, nanoparticle incorporation and distribution in alloys at semi-solid
state and the nanoparticle dispersion by friction stir processing in metal
matrix nanocomposites. Tensile and hardness (macro, micro, and nano) tests will
be conducted to characterize the mechanical properties of the nanocomposites
before and after friction stir processing.