* 1463432
* Iterative Experimental-Computational Design of Hydrogel Systems for Biomedical Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Kathryn Grande-Allen, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

This award supports fundamental research on methods for the design of engineered
biomaterials. Historically, engineering of biomaterials has focused on
biological effects but often ignored the advanced material fabrication and
characterization needed to realize the desired biomechanical behavior. This
research considers anisotropic and layered hydrogels for tissue engineering
applications. The outcome of the research would be a methodology for the design
these biomaterials. It integrates manufacturing and biomechanical
characterization with the goal to arrive at biomaterials that correspond to
complex tissues in the human body. Three target tissues are considered: trachea,
intervertebral disks and heart valves. The research outcomes would greatly
improve and accelerate the engineering process and thereby make engineered
biomaterials more readily available. The outcomes of the research endeavor will
also be integrated into educational initiatives through direct involvement of
students in research, the development of new educational materials, and
mentoring of undergraduate senior design teams.

This project's approach is an iterative design methodology for anisotropic and
layered hydrogel systems with regional dependent properties. It integrates
manufacturing processes, experimental and computational characterization of the
microstructured hydrogel systems to arrive at biomaterials that mimic connective
tissues. Tissues with fibrous reinforcements (trachea), with layered structure
(intervertebral disks), and tissue both patterned and layered (heart valves) are
considered. The combined in silico-in vitro design process relies on fundamental
advances at the interface between manufacturing, experimental and computational
mechanics of soft materials, as well as mathematics. The iterative design starts
with the preparation of samples of patterned or layered hydrogels, which will
follow the topology of the specific tissue. Molecular weights for layers and for
fiber patterns will be chosen such that the global stiffness approximates that
of the real tissue in its most common state (e.g., compression for
intervertebral disk). Photolithography and staged crosslinking will be used to
manufacture materials. Samples will be tested in tension, compression, and
bending. Computational models for the biomechanical response will be established
which integrate the experimental data through constitutive formulations. Coarse
level numerical optimization is performed in a reduced parameter space to
approach the target behavior in all possible stress and deformation states
encountered by the specific tissues. Further fabrication and experiments on
hydrogel systems with more complex heterogeneity are then enabled based on the
initial results. Hydrogel systems mimicking the tissue of interest would emerge
from exercising the approach in the full parameter space such that optimal
topologies and composition are achieved.