* 1463501
* Assessing Microstructural Damage Using Nonlinear Ultrasonics and Multiscale Numerical Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Didem Ozevin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 05/31/2019
* USD 358,294.00

Ultrasonic testing uses high frequency sound waves to determine the state of
materials without intrusion. The technique can be applied to flaw detection,
small cracks due to fatigue, material characterization, and other applications.
Nonlinear ultrasonic testing differs from its linear counterpart on the
consideration of large amplitude of sound wave; therefore it has capabilities of
detecting microstructural variations in aged steel. The measurable
characteristics in nonlinear ultrasonic testing are influenced by various types
and distribution of microstructural defects and cracks. This award supports
fundamental research to understand the correlation between ultrasonic wave
characteristics and microstructural damage. The research will develop a paradigm
to detect damage in steel using ultrasonic waves by combining numerical modeling
and experimental measurements. The research can be applied to structural health
inspection of aging civil infrastructure such as truss bridges, pipelines,
nuclear power plants, etc. Early detection of damage and subsequent repairs can
extend life of structures. The results of this research will benefit the U.S.
economy and society. This research involves disciplines of computational
mechanics, sensing and monitoring, and material science. The interdisciplinary
approach will impact the education in the Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear ultrasonic testing detects
microstructural variations through measuring high order harmonics; however, the
nonlinear coefficient extracted from high order harmonics is influenced by the
heterogeneous damage distribution and the various damage types. Although they
can be assessed using experimental methods, it is practically infeasible to
consider all variables in damage distribution and types when conducting
nonlinear ultrasonic testing in situ. The research is to predict changes in the
ultrasonic waves due to heterogeneous damage distribution in steel alloys using
multi-scale numerical modeling and experiments. The micro-scale model containing
material heterogeneity and microstructure will be created from micrographs to
obtain nonlinear properties of damaged materials, which will then be utilized in
macro scale models to assess damage. The multi-scale framework will allow
modeling microstructural changes in the material and their effects on the
behavior of the component. The changes in ultrasonic signal will be quantified
and compared with changes in mechanical properties characterized via mechanical
testing and microstructural analysis using other nondestructive evaluation
techniques.