* 1463968
* CRII: SaTC: Improving Computer Security Technologies through Analyzing Security Needs and Practices of Journalists
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Franziska Roesner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2018
* USD 175,000.00

Advances in digital communication technologies, and their proliferation in
recent decades, have had a remarkable impact on journalism. Security weaknesses
in these technologies have put journalists and their sources increasingly at
risk, hindering efforts at investigative reporting, transparency, and
whistleblowing. Because of their willingness to be early adopters, and to openly
communicate their issues, journalists provide an opportunity to identify
security issues and requirements in new communication methods. This project will
study the current computer security mental models and practices of journalists
and their sources, and to ultimately design technology to better meet their
needs. The resulting tools will be released as open source and deployed to
directly benefit journalists and their sources, as well as other users of
technology, ultimately helping to protect and improve freedoms of speech and of
the press both nationally and internationally.

The vulnerabilities in how journalists (and users in general) communicate and
store sensitive information result from several factors, including usability
problems with existing tools, a mismatch between mental models and the real
security properties of the tools they use, and technological gaps in the tools
available. To evaluate and address these issues, this project will proceed in
two phases: first, studying the current practices of journalists via in-depth
interviews and large-scale surveys, and second, designing new technologies to
better meet their computer security needs. The second phase will leverage
findings from the first phase to inform technical research, including the
development of more usable tools for journalists leveraging existing computer
security techniques, as well as the development of new computer security
technologies (e.g., protocols or systems) where necessary. For example, this
project will consider technical challenges such as protecting the metadata of
communications and bootstrapping secure communications at first contact.

For further information, see the project web site at:
https://journosec.cs.washington.edu