* 1463523
* Mechanobiological Regulation of Cortical Bone in Vertebrates
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* James DeWoody, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 05/31/2022
* USD 437,513.00

Diversity in skeletal form amongst vertebrate animals results from a combination
of genetic and environmental influences during growth and aging. Mechanical
stimuli, caused by physical activity, represent a potent environmental influence
that regulates bone growth and remodeling. "Warm-blooded" mammals and birds may
be able to maintain relatively light skeletons compared to "cold-blooded"
reptiles and amphibians because their bone cells are inherently more responsive
to mechanical loading. However, it is unclear if the differences in skeletal
response are caused by differences in the bone cells, differences in the
metabolic rate of "cold" and "warm" blooded animals, or a combination of both.
The award will investigate the relative adaptive potential of the skeleton among
different terrestrial vertebrates and determine the underlying physiological,
anatomical, and genetic regulatory factors influencing adaptive bone formation.
This work will be critical for understanding evolutionary diversity in skeletal
form among mammals and birds and the relative conservation of skeletal structure
in modern "cold-blooded" vertebrates compared to ancient (fossil) examples.
Novel molecules regulating bone formation, which could have important biomedical
applications for treating bone loss, will be measured. The results of this work
will be presented to the public through lectures, university websites, and
through learning modules to teach local elementary and junior high school
students science and engineering concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to relate regulation of the mechanosensitive Sost-Wnt/beta-
catenin pathway, specific to osteocyte-induced skeletal anabolism, to the bone
tissue response to physical stimuli in the skeletons of four species from three
terrestrial vertebrate groups (reptiles, birds, mammals) under artificial tibial
loading. The multi-scale gene- to tissue-level approach used here will utilize
in vivo bone functional adaptation models, in vitro bone tissue organ culture
models, 3D confocal microscopy, and transcriptomic analyses to establish a
comparative understanding of molecular and cellular mechanobiological mechanisms
in the vertebrate skeleton, the influence of animal metabolism on organismal
response to environmental challenges, and factors influencing structural
diversity across different vertebrate groups.