* 1463616
* A Gum-like Electrolyte Promoting Safety and Performance of Lithium Ion Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Weihong (Katie) Zhong, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

The safety of lithium ion batteries has seen an increased concern with respect
to the customers' usage, ground shipment and air transportation. Therefore, the
next generation of these batteries must be safer in addition to high
performance. The electrolyte is one of the key components in a battery. It plays
a very important role for battery safety and performance. Currently, liquid
electrolytes generally possess high ionic conductivity and good interfacial
properties but come with safety issues. Solid polymer or inorganic solid
electrolytes are essentially safe and show excellent mechanical properties.
However, they have low ionic conductivity in comparison and poor interfacial
contact/adhesion with electrodes, which limits their broad practical
applications. Gel electrolytes are usually a combination of liquid and solid
showing a promising type of high-performance electrolyte. However, several
critical issues including safety concern and inferior mechanical performance
still exist. Therefore, this study on a high performance electrolyte that will
combine safety and beneficial properties of various electrolytes is significant
and important for broad industry sectors, as well as further benefit the clean
energy driven market.

The objective of this project is to create a novel composite, gum-like (or
gummy) material for electrolytes with the desired performance for next-
generation energy storage devices including various lithium ion batteries. This
gummy material possesses the following critical properties for electrolytes;
high ionic conductivity at the liquid electrolyte level, strong adhesion to
maintain good/stable contact with solid electrodes, good mechanical properties
and the safety of solid material level. The design is based on a three-phase
network composed or liquid component, (i.e. organic liquid electrolyte), solid
particle component of thermally sensitive particles and soft matrix polar
polymer. The optimized network formation will lead to the desired multi-
functionalities for the gummy composite. The scope of the research includes: (1)
investigation of the roles of the individual component in controlling the
critical properties (conductivity, mechanical properties, adhesion etc.); (2)
establishment of structure-property relationships for the gummy composite
materials; (3) optimization of the compositions, structures and properties of
the gummy composite for high performance electrolyte application. The
intellectual merits of this project include: solving critical safety and
interfacial problems for the electrolyte, introducing a new strategy for safety
improvements in batteries especially thermal-protection capability; leading to a
new approach to fabricate functional composite materials.