* 1463344
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Manufacturing of Carbon Nanotube Contacts for High-Performance Microelectromechanical Switches
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Kevin Turner, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 188,000.00

In applications ranging from switches to electronic packaging assemblies, there
is a critical need for electrical contacts with very low resistance. Typical
metal contacts have rough surfaces that limit the size of the contact area and
thus cause high electrical contact resistance. While larger forces can be
applied to increase the contact area, this often results in failure of the
contact and thus the device. Repeated cycling of the contact, such as in
microelectromechanical switches, accelerates the failure. The poor performance
of existing metal-to-metal contacts limits the design and performance of a
number of electronic devices. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) Program project will investigate the manufacturing, performance
and integration of carbon nanotube (CNT) contacts that aim to overcome the
limitations of current metal-to-metal contacts. This collaborative project will
involve expertise in controlled carbon nanotube growth, microdevice fabrication,
and small-scale mechanical characterization. It will also involve collaboration
with industry to ensure the solutions developed are scalable and commercially
relevant. This work will have broad technical impact because improved electrical
contacts will enable high reliability microscale switches that can improve the
performance and reduce the power consumption of a range of electronic devices,
such as mobile phones, and low-power wearable devices. The project will involve
training of students in nanomanufacturing and materials engineering as well as
the education of K-12 students and the public through demonstrations that
illustrate basic principles of nanomaterials and nanomanufacturing at museums
and outreach events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
manufacturing, integration, and characterization of a new class of electrical
contact materials based on vertically aligned CNTs. These nanostructured
materials will have high electrical conductivity, high elastic recoverability,
and low elastic modulus and thus allow surface roughness to be accommodated
elastically in order to achieve high real contact area and very low electrical
resistance. Vertically aligned CNTs ('forests') will be grown on micro-patterned
conductive layers by thermal chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and then
optionally coated by secondary materials to enhance their mechanical and
electrical properties. The properties of these contact materials will be
characterized using nanoindentation and electrical measurements. The techniques
used to manufacture the contact materials allow the properties of the contacts
to be tuned over several orders of magnitude so the materials can be engineered
for specific applications by controlling process parameters. The project will
generate an understanding of how to robustly and precisely control the
properties of CNT-based contacts by our integrated nanomanufacturing approach,
leading to strategies for manufacturing contact materials with high uniformity
and yield. This project is primarily motivated by the need for new materials for
switches based on microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology, and novel
strategies for the integration of CNT contact materials into silicon MEMS, based
on low temperature growth processes, will be investigated.