* 1463991
* Expanding the Network of STEM Scholars through the ADVANCE Women of Color Summer Writing Retreat
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Deidre Wheaton, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Erika Tatiana Camacho
* 09/30/2021
* USD 898,704.00

The NSF ADVANCE Partnerships for Learning and Adaptation Networks - Institutions
of Higher Education (PLAN-IHE) funding track is designed to expand the
application of proven-successful gender-equity initiatives for STEM faculty
through networked adaptation of a specific program or initiative. Careful
evaluation is expected to expand understanding of such initiatives across
institutions and institution types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will adapt
the Jackson State University (JSU) ADVANCE Summer Writing Retreat (SWR) to six
other minority-serving institutions. The resulting network will promote the
scholarly activities of faculty women of color in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). The partner institutions include: 1)
Tennessee State University, a public Historically Black College and University
(HBCU); 2) Tougaloo College, a private HBCU in Mississippi; 3) The University of
Texas, Pan American, a public Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI); 4) Norfolk
State University, a public HBCU in Virginia; 5) Winston-Salem State University,
a public HBCU in North Carolina; and 6) The University of the Virgin Islands, a
public HBCU. The objectives of this project are to: 1) Adapt components of the
JSU ADVANCE SWR to six other minority-serving institutions; 2) Create a multi-
institutional network that expands the resources that are available to faculty
at the partner institutions; and 3) Develop a knowledge-building community that
shares data and findings about the SWR adaptation process and the impact on
scholarly productivity and career advancement. The study will also contribute to
better understanding of the career-life balance challenges among women of color
in STEM faculty from a variety of minority serving institutions that serve
African American, Hispanic, and Caribbean students, and can help inform the ways
in which universities and other agencies plan to support diverse women of color
in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute a better
understanding of the factors that contribute to, and those that inhibit the
recruitment, retention, and advancement of women of color in STEM academic
careers. Uniquely, this project focuses on women of color faculty at HBCUs and
HSIs. This project will address well-documented challenges that women of color
face in STEM related to scholarly productivity, publishing, securing of external
grant funding, tenure, promotion into full professorships, and advancement into
academic administrative leadership. The project will shed light on the ways in
which writing and collaboration communities (both face-to-face and online) can
be useful tools in promoting scholarly productivity and work-life balance among
women of color at minority serving institutions. Through the adaptations, the
objective is to learn which components of the SWR most effectively promote the
participants' scholarly productivity while also giving attention to the role of
scholarly identity and work-life balance in writing and research productivity
among STEM faculty women of color. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Partnerships for
Learning and Adaptation Networks program track supports projects that promote
the adaptation and implementation of previously effective ADVANCE programs in
new contexts and the testing of innovative strategies to promote the
participation, success, and advancement of women in STEM academic careers. PLAN
projects also contribute to the knowledge base on gender equity in STEM academic
careers.