* 1463084
* The Effects of Physical Forces on Bacteria Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Christopher Hernandez, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 03/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Bacteria are the most populous and variable form of life on Earth. Bacteria can
cause disease in humans as well as in animals and plants important to the food
supply and the environment. However, bacteria can also be beneficial
(probiotics) and are used industrially in the production of pharmaceuticals.
Controlling bacterial populations is necessary to prevent disease and for
quality control in industrial settings. Antibiotics are used to kill bacteria,
but the development of new antibiotics has not kept up with needs in medicine
and industry. Most antibiotics kill bacteria by causing mechanical failure
(rupture) of the cell wall leading to cell death. The research goal of this work
is to determine how bacterial physiology changes in response to physical forces
and to determine how well the bacterial cell wall resists physical forces. The
educational objectives of the work are to lead a week-long workshop on the
mechanical properties of biological materials targeted to high-school students
from traditionally under-represented groups and contribute to other activities
to broaden participation in science by members of under-represented groups
within the institution and at the national level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
hypotheses have been presented to explain the location and migration of
intracellular proteins involved in cell wall synthesis: a) intracellular
proteins involved in cell wall synthesis are directed by local cell wall
curvature; and b) that cell wall synthesis proteins are directed to locations of
increased cell wall stress/strain. This work addresses this question using a
microfluidics-based mechanical testing approach that can modify mechanical
stress/strain without large changes in cell wall curvature. The approach is
novel in that it makes it possible to observe intracellular proteins in live
bacteria while mechanical loading is being applied and does not require
conditions of altered bacterial physiology (altered osmolality, filamentous
growth, etc.). The research goals of this work are to: 1) Determine the
relationship between mechanical strain, regions of cell wall growth and
subcellular movement of a protein associated with cell wall synthesis (the MreB
protein); and 2) Determine the entire mechanical strain field in the bacterial
cell wall while load is applied.