* 1463759
* Renewal of Curation of ODP Legs 150X and 174AX cores: The Rutgers Core Repository
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Kenneth Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* James Allan
* 01/31/2019
* USD 245,777.00

Continuous drill cores from scientific ocean drilling provide an unparalleled
insight into the Earth. The Rutgers Core Repository archives cores obtained
during Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) Legs 150X and 174AX, as well as site survey
cores from Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) Expeditions 303/306 and the
International Ocean Discovery Program Expedition 363. Drilling completed during
Legs 150X and 174AX has provided an exceptionally well-documented series of
continuous cores from the coastal plain, which have been the basis for over 100
scientific publications and continue to contribute insights into global sea-
level change, sequence stratigraphy, basin tectonics and sedimentation, climate
change, and major events in Earth History. During the time period that the
Rutgers Core Repository has received NSF funding for curation of ODP and IODP
legs, it was designated an official IODP Repository; acquired additional space
and renovated ? purchasing two refrigerated core storage vans and building
climate controlled dedicated core splitting and description laboratories;
developed a website which includes links to metadata, datasets, and other
repositories for ODP legs; developed exhibits for the Connecticut Science Center
and the Rutgers Geology Museum, distributed over 4,000 samples from ODP and IODP
cores, and provided many outreach activities for both the scientific community
and the community at large.