* 1463482
* Guided Evolutionary Games for Influencing Interacting Agents' Behavior in Large Populations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Andrew Belmonte, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Swarm robotics is the use of a large number of small, simple robots to
accomplish common goals, mimicking the cooperative task sharing observed
naturally in hives and colonies. As this technology becomes a reality, there is
an increasing need to develop methods for guiding and controlling the swarm. The
standard approach to controlling a system of multiple agents relies on treating
them as approximately separate, however other paradigms will be needed as the
number of these agents becomes unmanageably large, and their interactions
dominate their behavior. The growing success of evolutionary game theory in
biology and ecology suggests a mechanism for control at the population level, in
which individual interactions are manipulated to drive the agent community
towards global goals. This award is concerned with developing and studying these
guided evolutionary games, and testing their consequences in simulations of
interacting agents. Applications include the control of microscopic robot swarms
in medical applications and the guided management of online social phenomena,
including the development of active influence mechanisms for decreasing negative
online behaviors like cyberbullying. This project will provide valuable
interdisciplinary training for young researchers, and target outreach activities
towards high school students, and undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project takes the first steps in bridging the gap between evolutionary game
theory, massively distributed mechanism design, and the design of control
systems. The work focuses on semi-autonomous agents who interact with each other
through localized communication, and describes their behavior via evolutionary
games using either replicator or discontinuous imitation dynamics.
Communications play out either on a network or in Euclidean space; both
topologies increase the problem complexity and can lead to organized spatial
patterns. Connections will be made systematically between microscale, agent-
based simulations, and macroscale, density-based evolutionary equations, such as
the replicator and other alternatives. The dynamics of hybrid controllers, that
modify the game played by the interacting agents, will also be considered.
Control of the population is accomplished by periodic actuation of the game
governing the interactions. The goals of this project are to understand the
control-theoretic preliminaries necessary to allow equilibrium shaping in order
to control populations, to determine the theoretical limits of control in this
setting, and finally to apply this approach to the control of autonomous agents
in high-fidelity simulations.