* 1463993
* South Dakota Working in STEM for Equity (SD-WISE): A System, Institutional, and Individual Level Approach to Policy Change
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Mary Emery, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Erika Tatiana Camacho
* 08/31/2021
* USD 856,457.00

The NSF Partnerships for Learning and Adaptation Networks: Institutions of
Higher Education (PLAN-IHE) funding track is designed to expand the application
of proven-successful gender-equity initiatives for STEM faculty through
networked adaptation of a specific program or initiative. Careful evaluation is
expected to expand understanding of such initiatives across institutions and
institution types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on producing
policy changes to support gender equity and create culture change within the
South Dakota state university system. This project will include six
institutions: South Dakota State University (SDSU), the University of South
Dakota, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, Northern State University,
Dakota State University, and Black Hills State University. This project has
system wide leadership commitment and involves teams of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) faculty in the policy review and
development. The model, if successful, could be adapted to other higher
education systems. It is expected that this project will result in: evidence of
effective top-down change mechanisms in higher education; amended or new
policies that promote gender equity in STEM; and contributions to the research
on processes for systemic change in higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will test the proposition that the central establishment of equity
policy and indicators at the system level is required not only to demonstrate
improvement in diversity but to actualize it (Blackmore, 2011; Castilla, 2008;
Kalev, Kelly and Dobbin, 2006). Research from industry indicates the
effectiveness of "top-down" change for increased gender equity. By implementing
and assessing this process in academia, new evidence and subsequent models for
centralized change will be produced for use beyond this state system. In this
project, Scott's model (1987) of change is used to demonstrate that change is
most effectively implemented through policy driven by a central authority. The
project will expand and assess understanding of the probability of gender equity
improvement in higher education state systems through policy implementation by a
centralized authority. This work will also establish evidence for how
centralized policies can change individual faculty assessment practices across a
higher education system, linking the system and institutional level in Scott's
theory of change. In addition, this project will contribute to the knowledge
base on how centralized policies can change individual norms in career planning
and aspirations, linking the system, institutional, and individual level in
Scott's theory of change. This project builds on previous ADVANCE work at the
University of Maryland in policy analysis, and work completed at Montana State
University to solicit policy innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ADVANCE PLAN
program track supports projects that promote the adaptation and implementation
of previously effective ADVANCE programs in new contexts and the testing of
innovative strategies to promote the participation, success, and advancement of
women in STEM academic careers. PLAN projects also contribute to the knowledge
base on gender equity in STEM academic careers.