* 1463825
* Understanding and Measuring Knowledge Construction in Engineers Returning to School for a Master's Degree
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Shanna Daly, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2020
* USD 375,231.00

Many undergraduate engineering students choose to pursue a master's degree, some
immediately after finishing their bachelor's degree and others after working in
industry for a period of time. These students may choose to leave the workforce
temporarily, or they might continue to work while they pursue their graduate
study. The goal of this project is to learn more about how their work influences
the way in which they learn and how they integrate new knowledge with their
previous knowledge and experiences. Understanding how industry experience
influences learning will be used to develop recommendations to improve master's
degree programs both for returners, those who are coming back from industry, and
for their classmates. Greater understanding of how these returning students
learn will allow masters' degree programs to better serve their needs, tailoring
programs so that they can take full advantage of their experience and learn more
deeply and effectively. It will also allow universities to enhance the learning
environment for those students who proceed directly from their undergraduate
institution to graduate school, because they can leverage the knowledge and
experiences of returners to enhance project teams and classroom discussions and
to situate technical knowledge in real world applications so that students can
better understand the ways they can apply what they are
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lifelong learning is widely acknowledged to be
critically important for engineers to maintain and improve their skills, and to
advance in their careers. While learning can take place in many different
settings, one avenue for continuing education is obtaining a graduate degree,
such as a master's degree in engineering. The impact of a master's degree on a
student's knowledge level and career trajectory depends, in part, on a student's
background, interests, and capabilities. Returners, those with engineering
undergraduate degrees who work for at least five years and then pursue a
graduate degree, bring a wide variety of real-world experiences to their degree
programs. These experiences can enhance their own educational experiences,
provide context for the new knowledge they obtain, and enrich the academic
climate for their fellow students. This project will focus on those returners
with an undergraduate degree in engineering who are pursuing a master's degree
in engineering, and will investigate the skills that returners and direct-
pathway students have and the approaches they take to learning new material
through a survey, and will explore knowledge construction, in both returners and
direct-pathway students, through semi-structured interviews and concept mapping
activities with a smaller number of participants. This project will create new
knowledge about returners in the master's program, particularly in the areas of
what skills are developed through work experience, and how knowledge
construction is influenced by work experience. Better understanding of how
returners construct knowledge will allow them to consciously leverage their work
experience and other strengths in order to be more successful in the classroom.
This will enhance the overall classroom learning environment, which will benefit
direct-pathway students as well. For institutions, better understanding of
knowledge construction in both groups will allow them to improve their learning
environment in general, and to specifically tailor their programs in ways that
will appeal to returners and support their success. As the returners are
successful in enhancing their knowledge, and in enriching the classroom
environment for all students, the engineering profession will benefit from more
skilled and knowledgeable engineers.