* 1463769
* Investigation of Context Across Engineering Domains: Bridging the Eye-Mind Divide
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Daniel Cox, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,999.00

This research will identify the types of contexts, including pictures, sketches
and diagrams, which are utilized in contemporary transportation and water
resources engineering practice and in undergraduate engineering curricula. The
project will investigate the influence of the identified engineering problem
contexts on students' and practicing engineers' performance in solving these
problems and what they pay attention to during the solution process. While the
problems are being solved, participants will be wearing a mobile eye-tracker and
responding to questions about what they are doing. These two sets of data will
be analyzed to determine how important different elements of the engineering
problems are to arriving at solutions. With this knowledge engineering educators
and researchers will be able to develop better materials that maximize the
learning of engineering students, better preparing them to understand what kinds
of contexts are used in authentic engineering practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing situated or authentic engineering knowledge and
ways of thinking in engineering students has been identified as a priority by
the National Research Council, with the theoretically founded expectation that
it will result in students who are more capable of innovative engineering
design. Progress in this direction requires fundamental research on how contexts
authentic to engineering practice influence cognition and learning in novices
and experts, coupled with the design of research-based curriculum. The specific
goals of this research are to synthesize novice and expert engineers' mental
representations of transportation and hydraulics engineering concepts using an
innovative research methodology combining (1) identification of engineering and
academic contexts with practicing engineers and engineering faculty, (2) real
time think-aloud interviews, (3) eye-tracking, and (4) reflective clinical
interviews. This knowledge will further our understanding of critical elements
of engineering problems and be used to develop new practices for the conduct of
engineering education research and the thoughtful inclusion of context in newly
developed engineering curricula.