* 1463024
* Advanced Hybrid Simulation for Storm Surge Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Narutoshi Nakata, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 05/31/2019
* USD 276,466.00

Coastal water related hazards such as tsunamis, floods, and high waves have
caused numerous casualties and extensive economic losses in the United States
and many parts of the world. However, current building codes and design
guidelines are lacking in details for storm surge induced loads and their impact
on structures. Due to difficulties in handling storm surge-structure interaction
and limitations in existing analysis techniques, structural performance under
storm surge loads is not well understood. This award pursues a combination of
computational fluid dynamics to assess storm surge loads on structures and
force?based hybrid experiments to validate structural response simulation. This
combination of computational fluid dynamics and force-based testing is the only
rational way of pursuing research in storm surge impact on coastal structures.
This new approach will help increase our understanding of structural performance
impacted by storm surge loads and ultimately, will lead to an improvement in
design practice. Furthermore, the proposed approach of computational fluid
dynamics is transformative to simulations of other types of fluid loads such as
strong winds, providing an enabling technology for multi-hazard analysis and
mitigation. The project team plans to integrate the research into education,
training and outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing hybrid
structural simulation techniques are predominantly developed for earthquake
loads. While these techniques fulfill displacement compatibilities at structural
nodes at each time step, they are not suitable for fluid-induced loads due to a
lack of ability to meet force equilibrium at fluid-structure boundaries. To this
date hybrid simulation for structural response for fluid loads is not well
developed. The objective of this project is to advance hybrid simulation to
storm surge loads with force-based formulation of equations of motion and
dynamic force control in structural testing. Furthermore, the proposed approach
integrates computational fluid dynamics into hybrid simulation, allowing for
accurate incorporation of fluid-structure interaction. The project team will
develop a framework and required tool sets for the advanced hybrid simulation
and validate them through laboratory experimental investigations. The techniques
developed in this project are transformative and can be further expanded to
multi-hazards including strong winds. A successful completion of the project
will advance the field of structural engineering and hazard mitigation with
needed simulation capabilities.