* 1463121
* Integrated Experiments and Modeling of Smart Polymeric Gels
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shawn Chester, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2019
* USD 315,078.00

This award supports fundamental research to provide new knowledge toward
understanding the behavior of smart polymeric gels. These materials change in
shape in response to various stimuli, and are ubiquitous in the modern world.
They find diverse use in several important applications including carriers for
drug delivery, actuators and sensors, tissue engineering matrices, and packers
for zonal isolation in oil wells and hydraulic fracturing operations.
Limitations in the fundamental understanding of the material behavior and a lack
of experimental data hinder efficient analysis. The results of this research
would further expand the use of smart polymeric gels by providing validated and
verified engineering simulation tools. In addition, engaging of underrepresented
undergraduate groups in research will broaden STEM participation. The program
provides pre-college inner city students the opportunity to participate in an
educational activity involving basic mechanics of materials and structures. This
activity will focus on the mechanics of beam bending of structures made with 3D
printed polymers. Therefore, the results from this research will have a positive
impact on society, the economy, and education at all levels from pre-college to
post-graduate. The computer code developed under this award will be shared with
the research community. The research objective of this project is to conduct
research on a new experimentally validated simulation-based capability for the
robust analysis of devices made from responsive gels, both neutral and ionic.
The research program systematically studies the multiphysics large-deformation
coupled behavior of stimulus-responsive smart polymeric gels, in which the
swelling is regulated by temperature, concentration of ions, or pH. The research
team will conduct multiphysics experiments on a number of polymeric gel systems
to obtain the material's behavior under a wide range of conditions. Based on the
experiments, new physically motivated constitute theories will be formulated in
a thermodynamically consistent continuum mechanics setting. Those theories will
be numerically implemented into a finite element simulation capability by
writing user defined elements that couple all the relevant physics, such as
fluid diffusion, large deformation elasticity, heat conduction, and the
conservation of species. Lastly, the team will validate the predictive
capability of the theories and their numerical implementation in complex three-
dimensional geometries not used for calibration. Bringing experiments, theory,
and computation together, our integrated research program provides an
indispensable experimental data set, as well as a new constitutive framework,
and transformative numerical capability for the modeling and simulation of
devices made from stimulus responsive gels.