* 1463502
* Collaborative Research: Edge Surface Topography Characterization for Precision Sensing Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,10/31/2015
* Joshua Tarbutton, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 10/31/2015
* USD 183,856.00

Surface topography is a fundamental property for the industrial products, and
the number of applications keeps increasing, making the need for adequate
control of surfaces and understanding of those topography properties. Surface
topography characterization techniques are the backbone of broad research areas
and industrial applications such as roughness and texture measurements that are
dominantly studied by using atomic force microscopes, scanning electron
microscopes or touch-triggered stylus profilers. Currently, there is no way to
measure or quantify the edge surface topography other than visually, and the
edge surface topography properties and characteristics have not been well-
documented. There is a knowledge gap in the fundamental understanding of the
edge surface topography and on methodologies for its measurement and
characterization. This fundamental research program will utilize optical knife
edge diffraction characteristics that can enhance signal-to-noise ratio of
sensing sensitivity. The successful implementation of this research will
potentially lead to a fundamental shift in measurement methodologies that can be
used for a variety of edge surface sensing, monitoring, and inspection for
atomic force microscopy probes, diamond cutting tools, grinding wheels,
spindles, and milling tools. Research findings will be disseminated through
publications, technical presentations, and educational activities, including at
the university-level and through outreach efforts spearheaded by the
investigators.

This project will test the fundamental hypothesis by creating a novel
measurement and characterization paradigm in order to find fundamental issues in
the relationship between the edge surface topography properties with edge
diffraction characteristics. The investigators will generate the edge surface
topography patterns with various roughness, sharpness, shape, and materials on
edges by using 3D printing, precision grinding, diamond scribing, silicon wet
etching, and laser scribing processes. Furthermore, the project will study
whether multiple edge sensors can be combined to improve edge detection
sensitivity, and how those topologies can be instrumented for validation using
experimental techniques. The theoretical and experimental activities in this
research will be used to discover fundamental sensing limits of edge surface
topography metrology techniques. As a result, a deterministic will be built to
enable the quantification of the edge surface topography properties and to
establish fundamental design principles in edge surface topography for precision
sensing applications.