* 1463587
* Material Removal Mechanisms in Focused Ion Beam Nanopore Drilling
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Jonathan Freund, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this project is to better understand the means by which focused
ion beam (FIB) instruments remove material from surfaces. FIB instruments,
already common tools in the semiconductor industry, use extremely narrow beams
of ions, as small as a few nanometers wide, to mill or etch surfaces. As FIB
processing finds broader applications in other areas of nanotechnology, such as
in the drilling of nanopores for DNA sequencing, which is an enabling technology
in the multi-billion dollar molecular medical diagnostics industry, there is an
emerging need for better understanding of FIB processing at the finest scales.
This project will lead to more effective use of FIB instruments through the
development of predictive models for the material response to the ion beam. The
project will involve collaboration with a leading European research group
working on improving the resolution of FIB nanopore fabrication, and regular
consultation with the leading US producer of FIB instruments. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in both the computational and
experimental science of ion interactions with materials, and an outreach program
aimed at K-12 students will be developed.

The hypothesis driving the project is that the fundamental mode of material
removal in FIB processing is strongly flux-dependent at the smallest scale,
changing from an erosion-driven process at low fluxes to a phase-change process
at high fluxes. To test this hypothesis, FIB nanopore drilling will be
investigated over a range of conditions, with particular emphasis on the effects
of ion beam flux. Large-scale parallel molecular dynamics simulations will be
carried out to simulate FIB nanopore drilling in a freestanding thin film
target. The simulations will involve up to 10 million atoms over millions of
time steps, and will be the first-ever full molecular dynamics simulations of
FIB drilling. Material removal and rearrangement mechanisms, in particular
explosive boiling and thermocapillary mass transport, will be fully
characterized and explained. A multiscale statistical model will be developed to
extend the molecular dynamics simulations to study long time-scale processes
such as low-flux FIB processing. Finally, targeted experiments on FIB nanopore
drilling will guide the development and validation of the computation-based
model. FIB nanopores, with diameters of less than 10nm, will be fabricated using
a high-resolution dual-beam FIB instrument and characterized for comparison to
the simulation results.