* 1463370
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Evolution of Design Requirements Throughout the Design Process Using Network Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Joshua Summers, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 05/31/2020
* USD 244,161.00

All design problems are constrained by a set of requirements that must be
satisfied at project delivery. However, requirements change over the span of a
project's duration, causing the "moving target phenomenon," and jeopardizing the
success of the project. Changes in requirements may occur due to changes in
technology, consumer trends, perceptions, or regulations. Such requirements
volatility is particularly important in complex systems that require several
years for design and manufacturing or those that contain tens of thousands of
requirements. Research has shown that over half of failed projects occurred due
to failure stemming from requirements and their management, hindering market
success, innovation, and engineering pursuits in the United States. The goal of
this research is to understand how requirements change, and more importantly,
their effect on other elements of design. Whereas an engineer may consider the
impact of a requirement change, it is difficult to process how this may affect
several other requirements or system components. Understanding how requirements
change, and their effect on other elements of the design process may change how
we design and utilize requirements throughout the design
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although requirements form the backbone of every
engineering project, the formal reasoning support needed to analyze requirements
is limited. Understanding their use outside of the early (elicitation) and late
(satisfying) phases of design can contribute to understanding what happens in
the interim, a volatile process recognized yet not well understood. The
objective of this research is to advance the fundamental understanding of
engineering requirements evolution within systems design. This research
addresses a gap in both describing and prescribing how engineers use and, more
importantly, could use requirements throughout the design process. A specific
exploration will focus on measuring and then predicting requirements volatility.
To this end, this research will enhance an existing Requirement Change
Propagation Prediction Method to incorporate graph theoretic metrics needed to
measure volatility. Both quantitative and qualitative data is collected during a
three-year, multi-case study spanning 2,760 different requirements documents
from varying design projects. Requirements and their change data will be
analyzed to determine if volatility metrics could be used to understand how
requirements evolve. This research will enable engineers to analyze requirements
early in the design process to assess the volatility of individual requirements
as they relate to other requirements. This adds value to the design process by
allowing engineers and designers a means to analyze change propagation and
impact before committing to changes.