* 1463287
* Collaborative Research: Design of Active Composites Enabled by 3D Printing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Kurt Maute, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 252,037.00

This award supports research in establishing a design methodology for 3D printed
active composites. In these materials constituents interact such that an object
made of the composite alters its shape upon an external stimulus, such as a
temperature change. With a 3D printing process composites with complex internal
layouts can be manufactured. The composite is printed as an initially flat sheet
which takes on a 3D shape after thermo-mechanical treatment, and deforms into
yet another 3D shape upon activation. 3D printed active composites open the door
for new solutions to a broad class of engineering problems in healthcare,
biomedical, aerospace, and automotive applications. For example, active
composites would enable novel soft surgical robots whose initial shape is suited
for insertion into the human body and which are then deployed into a desired
shape to assist a surgical procedure. Currently there exist no tools for
systematically designing these composites. This research involves several
disciplines, including mathematics, mechanics, and computer science. This
setting will provide a stimulating environment for students who will participate
in this project and broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
research. Outreach activities will bring the excitement of 3D printing into K-12
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The active composite consists of glassy
polymers embedded in an elastomeric matrix. The temperature dependence of the
mechanical properties of glassy polymers creates a shape polymer effect. The
properties of the polymer phases depend on complex processing conditions during
3D printing. The constitutive response will be described as temperature-
dependent and anisotropic nonlinear viscoelastic. Experiments on the
thermomechanical response will support the constitutive model development. The
design methodology will integrate the nonlinear material models into a multi-
material topology optimization approach. The location and shape of glassy
polymer inclusions as well as parameters defining the programming loads will be
optimized simultaneously. Consequently, the composite assumes a set of target
shapes due to thermo-mechanical treatment and upon activation. The geometry of
the material interfaces will be described by a level set method. The response of
the printed composite objects will be predicted by a generalized formulation of
the extended finite element method. To account for manufacturing constraints,
such as limitations in printer resolution, constraints for controlling the
minimum feature size in 3D material layouts will be developed. The optimization
problem will be solved by a gradient-based algorithm, computing the gradients of
objective and design constrains by the adjoint method. Experiments will be
employed for validation of the design methodology.