* 1463948
* Collaborative Research: Bulk synthesis of stishovite near ambient pressure and temperature
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Kai Landskron, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 146,098.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The project targets synthesis of stishovite, a form
of SiO2 (silica) and one of the hardest materials known to mankind at
hydrothermal conditions. Presently, this precious form of silica can only be
attained at extremely high pressure (ca. 100,000 times atmospheric pressure) in
a technically very difficult and expensive process that yields only small
quantities. The new approach of this project mimics geological conditions, and
grows the crystals from aqueous solutions in bulk quantities. The process occurs
close to ambient pressure and temperature conditions, and consequently, will be
inexpensive and scalable. This facilitates new applications of stishovite as an
abrasive, in cutting tools, and as a hard ceramic material in other
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Stishovite, a polymorph
of silica (SiO2), is - together with cubic boron nitride - only second in
hardness to diamond. Moreover, among the hardest materials known it is the only
oxide, thus naturally resistant against degradation through oxidation. Despite
these outstanding properties, stishovite is not used as an engineering material,
because it can be synthesized only at pressures above 8 GPa. Although
technically feasible, the high-pressure route is not scalable and rather
expensive. In this project, a kinetically controlled hydrothermal synthesis
approach for stishovite is being developed. The process occurs near ambient
pressure and temperature conditions and is similar to the industrial production
of quartz crystals. The difference to industrial quartz growth is that instead
of quartz seed crystals, stishovite seed crystals are employed. The temperature
gradient in the autoclave system allows for the supersaturation of the silicate
solution in the growth chamber and the kinetically controlled growth of the
stishovite seed crystals from the supersaturated solution. The experiments are
guided by computations that explore and predict optimal synthesis conditions.
The research is a seminal approach to synthesize high pressure phases near
ambient conditions from solution which suggests a transformational impact on the
synthesis of high-pressure phases. The project is training graduate students in
high-pressure and hydrothermal synthesis techniques and computational materials
chemistry. The results from the research are part of the graduate level course
"Solid State Chemistry".