* 1463809
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Differences Between Professional Expert Engineers and Engineering Students Designing: Empirical Foundations for Improved Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Kurt Becker, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2019
* USD 311,867.00

Engineering design is recognized as a critical element of engineering thinking
and is what differentiates engineering from other problem solving approaches in
science and mathematics. One of the primary goals of engineering design
education is to equip students with the capability to become expert design
engineers. To develop this capability in students, educators require a detailed
knowledge of the thinking process of both undergraduate students and expert
design engineers. This project will measure and compare the design thinking of
engineering students and expert professional engineers while designing. This
research uses techniques and processes developed in previously funded NSF
projects to compare students and experts that is independent of the educational
and experiential background of the participants. The project is significant in
its ability to gain access to engineering design thinking and lay the foundation
for engineering education decision-making. Understanding the differences between
developing learners and an experts' knowledge is essential to the identification
of appropriate learning experiences to reduce this performance gap. To address
this gap in knowledge, this project proposes a controlled study of teams of
students from two universities with different diversity profiles and of teams of
engineering design experts, to measure their respective designing thinking while
designing. It utilizes the protocol analysis method, where videos are
transcribed, segmented, coded, and analyzed to produce the base data.
Understanding the relationship between design teaching and outcomes, and
engineering expert behavior is not fully understood. As a consequence there is
insufficient knowledge of the long-term performance expected as a result of
engineering design education. Results from this research have the potential to
transform engineering education nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
the differences between developing learners in engineering and an expert
engineers' target performance is essential to identify appropriate learning
experiences to move novice learners along the trajectory to becoming experts.
However, the design cognition of expert design engineers is inadequately
characterized. This project will measure and compare the design thinking of
engineering students and expert professional engineers through a study of their
cognitive processes while designing. It will use tools and processes developed
in previously funded NSF projects to provide a uniform basis for comparing
students and experts that is independent of the educational and experiential
background of the participants. The project has the ability to lay the
foundation for engineering education decision-making. The results of prior
research showed that there is a gap between engineering students and engineering
experts. To address this gap in knowledge, this project proposes a controlled
study of cohorts of teams of students from two universities with different
diversity profiles and of teams of engineering design experts, to measure their
respective design thinking. It utilizes the protocol analysis method, where
videos are transcribed, segmented, coded, and analyzed to produce the base data
and uses the Function-Behavior-Structure ontology as the basis of the coding
scheme. In order to better prepare students for future careers, it is extremely
important to incorporate this content into engineering education. There is a
need to develop supplemental teaching materials featuring problem decomposition
and problem recomposition. A workshop of engineering educators is proposed where
these results can be developed as the basis of educational interventions.