* 1463577
* Bondline Integrity Monitoring of Adhesively Bonded Joints in Aircraft Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Fu-Kuo Chang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Bondline integrity monitoring is one of the most critical concerns in the design
of aircraft structures up to date. Although adhesively bonded joints have
demonstrated superior properties over mechanically fastened joints, current
standards still require fasteners even with bonded joints because of the lack of
confidence on the bondline integrity both during fabrication and service. This
award supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the
investigation of a novel approach for bondline integrity monitoring of
adhesively bonded joints. If successful, this project will lead to greatly
benefit the design of aerospace and mechanical structures by providing increased
confidence on the use of bonded joints leading to a significant weight
reductions when compared to bolted joints, reduced assembly cost, increased fuel
efficiency, and improved aircraft performance. Therefore, this technology will
enhance the economic competitiveness of the US on the novel structural systems
front across all industries. This research involves several disciplines
including sensor technologies, manufacturing, computational models, and signal
processing. Therefore, this multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research and will promote
partnerships between academia and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this project is to develop an innovative "intelligent" adhesive for the
integrity monitoring and self-diagnosis of adhesively bonded joints in aircraft
structures. The implementation will be based on the development of a stretchable
micro/nano-sensor network that can be embedded inside the adhesive layer and is
capable of monitoring the integrity of the adhesive bondline interfaces and
diagnose their integrity status. Throughout this research special emphasis will
be given to the early detection and monitoring of weak ("kissing") bonds, for
which no mature solutions have been so far proposed by the nondestructive
evaluation and structural health monitoring communities. The work involves: (i)
development of new types of nano/micro active sensors and actuators that can be
integrated into adhesive films without causing adhesive degradation, (ii)
characterization of the presence of sensor arrays on the integrity of the
intelligent adhesive, and (iii) development of appropriate diagnostic signal
processing techniques to detect bondline degradation, and particularly to
identify the existence of weak bonds. The diagnostic algorithms as well as the
analytical models to be developed will lead to the comprehensive understanding
of complex interaction between embedded micro-sensors and the bonded structure
and the postulation of a complete structural health monitoring system for
bondline monitoring of adhesively bonded structures.