* 1463451
* Large-Scale Fabrication of Multi-Nanopillar Transistors for Energy-Efficient Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Seong Jin Koh, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

A technology that enables substantial reduction of energy consumption in the
operation of electronic devices would promise numerous commercial, military and
space applications. For example, ten-fold reduction of energy consumption for
smart phones, laptops and tablets could result in ten-fold reduction in
frequency of battery recharging. However, obtaining such reductions in device
energy consumption has been challenging due to limitations of the transistor
architecture that current electronic devices commonly use. This award will
investigate a new transistor technology in which the transistor components are
made within a single nanoscale pillar and whose operating principle allows
electrons to flow with very little energy consumption. A successful execution of
this project will enable significant reductions in energy consumption by
electronic systems at home, office, store, airport, etc., which will benefit the
U.S. economy, environment and society, in general. Various military benefits are
also expected, such as, lightweight, more energy-efficient electronic equipment
that soldiers carry in their missions, increasing their combat capabilities,
enhancing the security of our nation at home and abroad. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
large amount of energy consumption or heat dissipation in the large-scale
integrated circuits of modern electronic devices is a critical problem that
inhibits the advancement of electronic device technology. Its root cause is the
thermal excitation of electrons, which imposes limitations on enabling steep
ON/OFF switching, resulting in a large amount of energy consumption. This
project investigates a new transistor in which the electron thermal excitation
is effectively suppressed so that steep ON/OFF switching capability can be
obtained at room temperature, leading to substantial reduction of energy
consumption in the transistor operation. The transistors will be constructed as
single nanopillars, with each nanopillar containing all the transistor
components, such as source, quantum well, tunneling barrier, semiconductor
island and drain. A discrete state in the quantum well will serve as an energy
filter, which blocks the transport of energetic electrons and effectively
suppresses the electron thermal excitation. Importantly, the nanopillar
transistors will be fabricated on a large scale combining CMOS-compatible
parallel processes and bottom-up assembly of nanoparticles that utilizes self-
limiting electrostatic nanoparticle placement technique, where the nanoparticles
are used as etch hard masks for producing individually addressable nanopillars.