* 1463122
* DMUU: Center for Research on Environmental Decisions: Understanding and Improving Environmental Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Benjamin Orlove, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 650,000.00

This collaborative group will continue ongoing efforts to study individual and
group decision making under climate uncertainty and decision making in the face
of environmental risk. The researchers will focus on synthesizing theoretical
and empirical results of studies conducted over the last ten years in areas such
as agriculture and water management. Three themes have connected the various
research projects: the presentation and use of scientific information, the role
of social context across different scales, and the effects of decision
architecture. The collaborative group will synthesize project results generated
across different sectors, cultures, and theoretical frameworks. The focus will
be on the development of products that benefit the broad academic and
practitioner communities, such as a book, educational videos, and tutorials.
These materials will be available to inform future studies of environmental
decision goals and processes and the communication of scientific information
related to environmental science in order to motivate sustainability. The
collaborative group will maintain its international network of expertise and
researchers through virtual connections.

The investigators will synthesize theoretical and empirical results from their
prior research generated across different sectors, cultures, and theoretical
frameworks and translate those results into a form accessible to other
researchers. Synthesis and integration efforts of sector-based field project
results (in the areas of climate, water, hazards, energy) will enable
researchers to infer the influence of central constructs from cognitive and
social psychology in environmental perception and decisions. Comparing findings
across sectors, particularly pertaining to the description-experience gap, will
allow researchers to disentangle the effect of different elements of personal
experience. Synthesis activities will focus on choice architecture, where
behavioral decision theories and insights are turned into interventions. A meta-
analysis of the relative effectiveness of different choice architecture
interventions in different domains and with different populations of decision
makers will generate a matrix, including data from this collaborative group and
others. This collaborative group project is supported by the NSF Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences through its Decision Making Under
Uncertainty (DMUU) funding opportunity.