* 1463819
* Advancing Synthetic Methodology through Total Synthesis of Complex Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Armen Zakarian, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2018
* USD 390,000.00

ABSTRACT

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division of the National Science Foundation, Professor Armen Zakarian of the
University of California, Santa Barbara, is developing new methods and synthetic
strategies for the preparation of a broad range of organic materials with useful
properties. These methods are designed to make the synthesis of such materials
from readily available sources shorter, and therefore more economical, energy-
efficient, and less wasteful. The types of compounds that can be prepared using
the new chemical tools find application primarily in pharmaceutical research and
industry, and secondarily in materials and agricultural sciences.

The goals of this research project are two-fold. The first major goal is the
development of modern C-H functionalization methods for the synthesis of
benzofurans and benzofuran-containing natural products of biomedical
significance, such as galanthamine. A copper-catalyzed direct aryl C-H
functionalization method has been identified as highly promising to provide a
path to functionalized benzofurans under mild conditions. Studies of its scope
and application in the concise synthesis of galanthamine are being currently
pursued. The second goal is the development of lanthanide catalysis for
activation of dienes in the Diels Alder reaction. This approach features in the
total synthesis of muironolide A, an exceedingly rare marine natural product
with promising but unexplored biomedical potential. An outreach program is being
developed between graduate students in the Zakarian group and area elementary
school students and teachers involved in the SciTrak program hosted at UC Santa
Barbara.