* 1463636
* GOALI: Nanomanufacturing of Ultrahigh-Performance Continuous Carbon Nanofibers and Their Assemblies
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Raouf Loutfy, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2020
* USD 299,947.00

Continuous carbon nanofibers have advantages over other nanomaterials in terms
of cost, ease of handling, processing into useful applications, and possibility
of their integration into multi-scale assemblies. However, their mechanical
properties need to be substantially improved to improve processability. Due to
the small scale of the nanofibers, it is difficult or impossible to use external
mechanical constraints during processing that have been successfully utilized in
manufacturing conventional larger-scale carbon fibers. Properly constrained
nanofibers can match or exceed mechanical properties of conventional fibers;
high mechanical performance coupled with low cost processing, small diameter,
and ultrahigh surface area will open up broad new areas of nanofiber
applications. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
Program award supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the
development of an alternative approach utilizing internal constraints. Unlike
the classical external constraint that is only applicable to aligned (one-
dimensional) fiber tows, the new process will be applicable to both one-
dimensional and two- and three-dimensional nanofiber constructs that can lead to
revolutionary affordable high-performance bulk nanostructured carbon products.
These multi-scale nanofilamentary structures can be used in a broad range of
applications in aerospace, energy, environmental protection, healthcare,
biomedical, and automotive industries. Therefore, results from this research
will benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research involves several
disciplines including manufacturing, electrodynamics process control, and
materials science. The multi-disciplinary approach and collaboration with two
companies will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research
and positively impact engineering education.

This project's concept of internal constraint during nanomanufacturing of
nanofibers can overcome the issues with the classical external mechanical
constraint that is instrumental for high mechanical properties of conventional
carbon fibers. However, several scientific barriers still need to be resolved to
achieve carbon nanofibers? full potential. This research will study the
mechanisms of nanofiber structure formation as a result of addition of small
quantities of constraining nano-scale inclusions such as carbon nanotubes in all
three stages of nanofiber manufacturing, i.e. electrospinning of nanofiber
precursors, their oxidative stabilization, and high-temperature carbonization.
The research team will perform extensive parametric studies to analyze
processing-structure-properties relationships and to select optimal processing
parameters for individual nanofibers and their aligned one-dimensional
assemblies. Applicability of these parameters to nanomanufacture two- and three-
dimensional macroscopic carbon nanofiber constructs in an integrated process
will be then explored. The partnership of academic researchers with two
companies will help focus this fundamental research on practical issues and will
accelerate nanomanufacturing scale-up.