* 1463141
* GOALI: Melt Processable Polymer Nanocomposites for Low Friction and Low Wear Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Gregory Blackman, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2019
* USD 385,593.00

Nearly every machine has at least one performance-critical sliding interface.
Joints, bushings and bearings must operate reliably with low friction and low
wear in order for the machine to move and perform desired tasks. The costs of
friction and wear are estimated to be greater than $500 billion per year in the
U.S. alone. There is a broad and substantial need to develop new materials for
sustainable sliding applications. This award supports the development of an
ultralow-wearing polymer system that can be manufactured by injection molding
and other desirable manufacturing techniques. The relationship between DuPont
and Lehigh University will enable the technical, industrial and commercial
development of this material. Finally, despite the obvious impacts, education on
tribology (friction and wear) is insufficient in the US, falling behind many
countries. This project addresses these challenges through increased education,
exposure and interest in tribology at all levels of society, including: 1)
hands-on K-12 tribology experiments, 2) incorporating tribology in Lehigh
engineering curriculum, 3) graduate and undergraduate student training at Lehigh
and DuPont labs, and 4) provide industry engineers with seminars and online
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) Program award supports a collaboration among researchers at
Lehigh University and DuPont, to develop and study ultralow-wear melt
processable fluoropolymer composites with goals of 1) understanding the
relationship between tribological performance and material structure,
composition, processing and operating conditions and 2) developing a complete
mechanistic understanding of the complex tribomechanical and tribochemical
processes in the sliding wear of ultralow wear perfluoropolymers. The
intellectual merit is rooted in a mechanistic understanding of the substantial
(&gt;10,000 x) improvement in wear performance of perfluoropolymers (e.g.
perfluoroalkoxy -a melt processable fluoropolymer) with &lt; 5 vol percent
nanofillers. The coupled, multi-scale, physical, material, mechanical and
chemical mechanisms have been largely elusive. The hypothesized mechanism
includes tribochemical chain scission of the fluoropolymer resulting in a
transfer film that is covalently attached to the surface of a countersample as
well as formation of virtual crosslinks (multiple end groups bonded to the
nanofiller) that stabilize the wear surface of the polymer. The research will
use student-built instruments to directly validate the hypothesized mechanism
that in situ tribochemical reaction products alter the properties of otherwise
inert fluoropolymers. A multi-faceted characterization approach will
systematically test the hypotheses and discover new mechanisms of these
materials that could, ultimately, enable science-based design of materials.