* 1463492
* DMUU: Climate and Energy Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2023
* M. Granger Morgan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,500,000.00

This collaborative research group will develop tools to help decision makers
address energy and other environmentally related decision problems; develop and
demonstrate new theory and interdisciplinary methods; and conduct highly
interdisciplinary research that merges behavioral and decision science with
engineering and other technical analysis. To mitigate the negative consequences
of environmental change, such as extreme events, the energy system will have to
be fundamentally transformed from its current carbon-intensive form. The
research will address challenges and potential solutions for a cost-effective
transition of the energy system and the likely consequences of different
pathways for the future of that system. This collaborative group is based at
Carnegie Mellon University and includes researchers from eleven other
institutions. The collaborative group will (1) publish results in leading
scientific and engineering journals; (2) brief and otherwise assist a wide range
of energy and environmentally-related decision makers; and (3) educate
interdisciplinary PhD students. In addition, the investigators will use the
final year of the project to prepare a book that summarizes results that have
been obtained by this collaborative group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A first part of
the proposed work will explore public understanding of air pollution and
greenhouse gases. It also will explore public understanding of what is involved
in making the transition to a future energy system composed of a broad portfolio
of technologies and strategies. Research on public understanding and the
development of strategies to improve fact-based communication will build upon
"mental model" methods. A second part of the proposed work will involve the
assessment of technologies and strategies that could: (1) facilitate or impede
the transition of the energy system; (2) develop more sources of energy that are
safe, clean, affordable, and secure; (3) increase the security and efficiency of
the energy system; and (4) facilitate innovation in both technology and in
organizations, regulation, and public policy. Strategies pursued in the short
term in the name of transforming the energy system could be detrimental to
longer-term progress (for example, shutting down clean nuclear power plants
because, at the moment, natural gas is inexpensive, or developing an
overreliance on natural gas). Activities undertaken in the third part of the
proposed work will identify such potential problems and explore strategies to
minimize the chances of getting stuck in future situations that block continued
progress. Analysis of technical and regulatory issues associated with
facilitating a more efficient and cost-effective transformation of the energy
system will build upon a range of tools in engineering-economic and policy
assessment. This collaborative group project is supported by the NSF Directorate
for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences through its Decision Making Under
Uncertainty (DMUU) funding opportunity.