* 1463913
* Intramolecular Anodic Olefin Coupling Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Kevin Moeller, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 07/31/2019
* USD 465,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry is
funding Professor Kevin Moeller of the Department of Chemistry at Washington
University in St. Louis to use electrochemical methods to probe the highly
reactive intermediates central to synthetic reactions that increase the
functionality of organic molecules. The effort serves to build a foundation for
the design of new, more efficient synthetic routes to molecules of interest to
the pharmaceutical and chemical industries and to develop electrochemistry as a
sustainable tool for accomplishing those transformations. The broader impacts of
the work are both scientific and educational. On the science front, this project
illustrates for others the overall utility of electrochemistry as a sustainable
technique. The reactions can be run in a manner that uses sunlight (or any other
clean source of electricity) as the only source of energy and generates hydrogen
gas as the only byproduct. For this reason, scientists from around the world
enlist Professor Moeller to aid their own efforts to capitalize on
electrochemical methods. On the education front, the project will support the
training of young scientists in both chemical and electrochemical techniques,
the development of undergraduate laboratory experiments that expose students to
their first electrochemical reactions, and the continued implementation of
outreach activities that utilize zoo educational programs to teach science to
the general public.

The specific science being pursued in this project capitalizes on a combination
of competition studies and cyclic voltammetry to probe the mechanistic
underpinnings of new radical cation-triggered cyclizations. The mechanistic
insight is used to develop new synthetic methods that demonstrate how to best
take advantage of the reactions. Both the mechanistic and synthetic studies
benefit greatly from the use of electrochemistry. Electrochemical methods allow
for generation of the reactive radical cations from a wide variety of substrates
with nearly identical reaction conditions. This enables the Moeller group to
make systematic changes to the structure of a radical cation and then probe how
those changes alter the chemical reactivity of the intermediate. The same
technique is employed to conduct scalable synthetic reactions, an effort that
demonstrates the synthetic utility of electrochemistry and one that is expected
to generate interest in electrochemical methods by others in the synthetic
community.