* 1463220
* Computational Simulation of Ductile Fracture in Structural Steel System
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Matthew Eatherton, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 01/31/2020
* USD 305,676.00

This research project will create a computational simulation framework to
capture the effect of ductile fracture on structural steel components in
buildings. Steel structures constitute a significant portion of the building and
bridge inventory in the United States. Ductile fracture occurs when a member
goes beyond elastic limit and receives cyclic loading. Extreme loading due to
earthquakes, tsunamis and hurricanes can cause structural failure associated
with ductile fracture. The determination of structural safety in steel
structures critically hinges on the ability to predict the effect of ductile
fracture. Currently, the primary means to evaluate ductile fracture initiation
and propagation is through full-scale experiments. However, it is economically
and physically prohibitive to conduct large-scale experiments for various cases.
Existing analytical expressions to predict ductile fracture initiation do not
produce information about the subsequent fracture propagation and require the
prior identification of the exact locations where fracture will occur in a
structure. This research will employ computational simulation to fill a critical
gap in knowledge about how to predict ductile fracture initiation and
propagation, thus leading to improved safety and performance of the built
environment. The integrated education and outreach activities will be beneficial
for undergraduate and graduate students and will stir the interest of K-12
students in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will capture the
effect of low-cycle fatigue and ductile fracture on structural steel components
and systems by implementing a new version of the Extended Finite Element Method.
The fracture criterion will depend on quantities associated with inelastic work
and damage accumulation. The analysis method will be calibrated using novel
experimental test methods for thin steel elements that better produce the stress
and strain states which occur at buckling locations. These new test techniques
will be investigated and refined to overcome challenges with applying standard
low-cycle fatigue test methods to thin steel elements while also capturing the
effect of surface conditions, cold-working, and material variations.
Furthermore, structural component tests will be conducted to allow validation of
the computational simulation framework. The new analysis method will allow the
description of damage accumulation, fracture initiation and fracture propagation
in computational simulation, while removing the requirements for an extremely
fine mesh to capture the sharp stress and strain gradients introduced by a
crack.