* 1463252
* Collaborative Research: Semi-Active Controlled Cladding Panels for Multi-Hazard Resilient Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Simon Laflamme, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 05/31/2020
* USD 199,986.00

Building facades typically consist of cladding that is placed on the outside
perimeter of the structure. Traditionally, cladding serves purposes of providing
architectural envelope and protection to the occupants from the outside
elements. The goal of this research project is to rethink cladding systems as
multi-functional structural units. Not only would the cladding serve its
traditional purposes, but it would also be engaged as an engineered system to
protect the structure against multiple hazards, including seismic, wind, and
blast loads. Cladding serves both as the point of application of externally
applied lateral loads such as wind and blast as well as a contributor of added
inertia to seismic or wind-induced vibrations. This project will explore the use
of semi-active controlled connections between cladding and the structural
framing of a building - these connections will be capable of providing variable
damping to mitigate the effects of extreme loading. The results of the project
will engage the cladding on a building to enhance a structure's resilience to
multiple hazards. The professions of architecture and structural engineering
will need to collaborate in design of cladding in the future.

The focus of this project is to develop computational simulation of a prototype
semi-active damping device, installed between the cladding and structural frame,
to the varying loading frequencies and intensities from multiple hazards. The
objective of the system is twofold: (1) to engage the cladding as a mass damper
to mitigate inter-story drift due to lateral load vibrations; and (2) to utilize
the device as an energy dissipator under lateral loads. An innovative semi-
active device with decentralized control laws will be developed to satisfy the
varying energy dissipation and control objectives associated with each hazard.
The research team will perform advanced nonlinear numerical simulations of
realistic buildings with semi-active damping devices to assess the various
parameters that influence the control laws and performance of the devices. The
simulations will be validated through large-scale experiments in the laboratory.
The experiments will include real-time hybrid simulations for wind and seismic
loading that account for the complete building system and its interactions with
the semi-active damping devices and cladding. Air-blast shock tube tests will be
conducted to simulate blast loading. Performance-based design procedures will be
established to integrate the design of semi-active cladding within a holistic
structural design approach.