* 1463440
* Collaborative Research: Intentionally Nonlinear Design of High-frequency Atomic Force Microscopy for Enhanced Material Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Hanna Cho, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 01/31/2016
* USD 204,773.00

Since its development in the early 1980s, atomic force microscopy (AFM) has been
one of the most useful imaging tools in the fields of nano- and biosciences.
This award supports theoretical and experimental studies of a new type of AFM
realized through constructive use of intentional nonlinear resonance enabling
the utilization of high-frequency measurements for sensing. Apart from proving
the efficacy of the concept of constructive utilization of intentional
nonlinearity in nano/micro designs to achieve performance not otherwise
attainable, in a broader sense this project's approach can act as a testbed for
assessing how strong nonlinearity incorporated into a complex mechanical system
can lead to drastic performance gains. This work can be potentially
transformative, since it can provide a new paradigm of intentionally nonlinear
AFM technology based on higher-frequency sensing, with demonstrated capacity for
drastically enhanced sensitivity and performance. The gained AFM sensing
capability will be an incomparable tool in fields such as nano- and bio-
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed analytical, computational and
experimental studies will be performed of a new, microcantilever beam design
enabling higher-frequency nonlinear AFM. Under dynamic mode operation an
intentionally designed 1:n internal resonance between the two leading bending
modes of the AFM microcantilever incorporating an inner Silicon paddle, leads to
magnification of high-frequency harmonics in the paddle response, which is the
basis for AFM of improved sensitivity. The research team will develop the
significantly enhanced AFM measurements of sample material properties and
topography, achieved through sensing of higher harmonics in the response. The
research team will systematically study, optimize, extend and validate this
promising concept through theoretical studies to characterize the paddle's
response to different types of interaction forces, and will perform an extended
series of experimental tests to assess the sensitivity of high-order internal
resonance designs to changes in topology and material properties. Moreover,
multi-paddle AFM designs incorporating multiple simultaneous internal resonances
will be analyzed for quantitative characterization, whereas related
microfabrication issues will also be addressed.