* 1463009
* Understanding The Impact of Product Dissection on Design Innovation and Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Samuel Hunter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 08/31/2019
* USD 363,443.00

Product dissection, or the systematic disassembly of products, is used as a
means to help designers discover the inner workings of products and inspire new
design ideas. While product dissection has been widely adopted in both
engineering education and industry, there are many widely varying approaches of
dissecting products for encouraging creativity and design learning. However,
almost all dissection activities currently require products to be dissected
physically which limits the utility of these activities due to the cost of the
materials, space requirements, and the effort required to dissect the product.
This award supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the
development of cognitive models of product dissection innovation and learning
practices. These new models will enable the development of sustainable, low-cost
dissection practices that promote, rather than inhibit, novel idea generation in
engineering education and industry. Therefore, results from this research will
benefit the U.S. society and economy. This research involves several disciplines
including engineering, psychology and management. The multidisciplinary approach
will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and
positively impact engineering education. The new cognitive models developed
through this award can overcome several limitations of existing dissection
practices, ranging from design fixation, reduced innovation potential, and
increased cognitive load. However, some scientific barriers are yet to be
overcome to realize the full application potential of product dissection
activities for design innovation and learning. This research is to fill the
knowledge gap on the factor(s) of product dissection that support the creative
potential of students and practicing designers. The research team will perform
controlled experimental investigations to understand the impact of the medium of
dissection, the complexity of the product selected for dissection, the cognitive
load requirements of the activity, and the impact of team training. Based on the
results of these experiments, cognitive models of the impact of these factors on
design learning and innovation will be established.