* 1463646
* A New Sustainable Binder for Concretes Based on Carbonation of Waste Metallic Iron Powder
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Kiran Solanki, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2020
* USD 363,000.00

This research advances a method to design and develop a carbon-negative binding
material for concrete based on the carbonation of waste metallic iron powder.
This approach will result in beneficial utilization of tens of thousands of tons
of waste iron powder that are being landfilled, along with permanent
sequestration of carbon dioxide as stable carbonates. A conservative estimate of
usage of 3 million tons of waste iron powder to produce this novel binder
annually will result in CO2 emission reduction in the order of 2.5 million tons
and generation of 4 million m3 of concrete. The application scenarios considered
here are blast and impact resistance, and electromagnetic shielding, the
concurrent attainment of which is unheard of in conventional building materials.
Thus this novel material fills a unique niche, making it applicable for
sensitive and high-profile structures, data and communication centers,
hospitals, and schools. This binder can also be used for strengthening of
concrete structures, as blast curtains in shielding critical structures, and in
oil and gas industry. The transformational concepts envisaged have the potential
to accelerate materials innovation and discovery and provide germination beds
for sustainable industrial ventures. Students at the graduate and undergraduate
level will be trained, along with many high-school students through on-going
workshops on sustainable materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research attempts
to redefine the very nature of the strength-imparting medium for concretes. The
material design and performance evaluation will be accomplished through
coordinated experimental and computational tasks including: (i) composition
selection, binder synthesis and characterization, (ii) microstructural and
multi-scale mechanical characterization, and (iii) microstructure-guided finite
element modeling, to develop structure-processing-property relationships.
Specifically, studies will focus on the contribution of multiple chemical
species and the processing environment to carbonation and its kinetics. This
will be followed by concurrent experimental studies to establish the performance
of these binders, considering applications as diverse as blast mitigation and
electromagnetic shielding, which will be attained through careful
microstructural design. Micromechanical experiments will feed into high-fidelity
finite-element models for bulk property prediction of this random heterogeneous
composite containing unreacted iron particles, cationic dopants, carbonates of
varying density based on reaction kinetics, and pores. Optimization techniques
will be used in conjunction with the finite-element model to develop optimal
material designs for targeted properties, and thus complete the material design
continuum.