* 1463707
* Multiple Metal-Carbon Bonds, Metallacycles and Catalytic Olefin Metathesis Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Richard Schrock, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
funding Professor Richard R. Schrock of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology to carry out fundamental studies on olefin metathesis catalysts based
on the two earth abundant elements, molybdenum and tungsten. Olefin metathesis
is a reaction that consists of breaking and rearranging carbon-carbon double
bonds in organic molecules. The olefin metathesis reaction has revolutionized
the synthesis of organic molecules relevant to natural and unnatural products
for treatment of diseases such as cancers and AIDS, as well as the synthesis of
specialty materials. Professor Schrock is studying ways to make the catalysts
more reactive, selective, and durable than any previous catalysts. The broader
impacts of the research could be wide ranging in terms of furthering the role of
olefin metathesis in chemical science, advancing commercial uses of olefin
metathesis, and training and educating students.

The Schrock research group is performing synthetic, mechanistic, structural, and
reactivity studies of newly designed catalysts for the olefin metathesis
reaction. Four new catalyst classes are being investigated with a focus on
several specific challenges in olefin metathesis catalysis: synthesizing new oxo
alkylidene complexes of tungsten that are activated through binding of a Lewis
acid to the oxo ligand; supporting well-defined oxo alkylidene metathesis
catalysts on silica; developing imido alkylidene catalysts that contain a
sterically demanding 2,6-disubstituted phenylimido ligands in order to limit
reactions to ones in which only anti-alkylidene isomers can form; and creating
potentially more reactive, coordinatively unsaturated cationic complexes paired
with a weakly coordinating anion. Heterogeneous metathesis catalysts are
employed for the largest volume metathesis reactions, but the least is known
about how to prepare them as single, well-defined species on the surface and to
control their reactivity at a molecular level. This research has the potential
to generate new classes of metathesis catalysts and advance the general
understanding of metathesis chemistry.