* 1463724
* Towards Catalytic, Asymmetric (4+3)-Cycloadditions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Michael Harmata, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2019
* USD 443,742.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Chemistry Division is
supporting the research of Professor Michael Harmata at the University of
Missouri-Columbia to develop (4+3)-cycloaddition chemistry. In such
cycloadditions, two molecular fragments, a four-carbon piece (the diene) and a
three-carbon piece (the allylic cation)are joined in a single reaction. The key
feature is the generation of the allylic cation, which possesses a positive
charge, and is paired with a partner (negatively-charged) anion that is also
chiral. Chirality is the condition of any object that cannot be superimposed on
its mirror image. For example, left and right hands are mirror images, but
cannot be superimposed. The idea is that this chirality can be used to induce
chirality in the formation of the products of the (4+3)-cycloaddition reaction.
This is significant because the molecules of life, as well as many drugs are
chiral and occur not as mixtures of right and left handed molecules, but as
either right or left. This is generally known as asymmetry. The development of
reactions that are asymmetric, producing only right or left handed products, is
of great current interest across science and the chemical industry. Professor
Harmata will integrate the research and educational components of this project
within a new outreach program for middle school students. Through a series of
workshops aimed at highlighting the connections between everyday experience and
chemistry advances, this program provides middle school students with a
discovery-based experience that captures the creativity of the STEM fields
through experiments. Professor Harmata has established partnerships with local
school districts and charter schools to reach an underprivileged community,
which is underrepresented in the sciences. The program promotes the pursuit of
higher education in the STEM fields by providing an opportunity for middle-
school students to discuss scientific observations while interacting with
college students. This concept will be demonstrated through the process of
dyeing, in which charged dyes will selectively dye oppositely charge fabrics.
Procedures will be developed by middle school teachers who will test and refine
the ideas on 4H members during the summers and then transfer the teaching
technology back to their classrooms during academic years. Targets classrooms
are particularly those that are rural or otherwise underserved in the context of
exposure to STEM programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific program will
consist of the generation of allylic cations from allylic alcohols using chiral
phosphoric acids that have been designed to ion pair with allylic cations. These
species are anticipated to react with dienes in a diastereoselective fashion,
resulting in a net enantioselectivity in the cycloadducts. This will provide new
methodology for the enantioselective synthesis of seven-membered carbocyclic
rings. Some screening will also be conducted as part of the reaction development
process. Both inter- and intramolecular reactions will be examined. Optimization
protocols will be pursued in an effort to maximize enantioselectivity.