* 1463709
* EAGER: Cosmogenic Nuclide Measurement of Surface Uplift Rate and Paleoelevation
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Gregory Hoke, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2016
* USD 147,053.00

Understanding the tectonic forces that drive uplift of large continental
plateaus and mountain belts depends on measurement of how fast the surfaces in
those physiographic domains have been uplifted and, consequently, how surface
elevation has changed with time. Different models of uplift predict different
rates or past elevations. Various methods have been used to measure uplift rates
and paleoelevation to varying success and with varying degrees of uncertainty.
In this project, the research team aims to test a new and novel technique that
has the potential to reduce these uncertainties, which could potentially better
constrain the understanding of the fundamental forces operating within the Earth
that generate these major features. The method relies on precise measurement of
cosmogenic nuclides, which are produced in minerals during exposure to cosmic
rays. This exploratory project relies on the dependence of cosmogenic nuclide
production on elevation to determine uplift rates and paleoelevation in a test
on samples from a well-constrained field setting in South America. The
engagement of a post-doctoral fellow in the project promotes development of the
STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory project develops of a new
measure of surface uplift rate using terrestrial cosmogenic nuclides (TCN).
Because the method measures uplift rate over a defined timescale, it also yields
paleoelevation. The method exploits the well-established dependence of TCN
production rates on elevation. The premise is that a stable surface will always
have a higher TCN concentration than an otherwise identical surface that has
been recently uplifted to the same elevation. Uplifting surfaces exhibit this
deficit because most TCN production occurred at a lower elevation - and
therefore lower production rate. The size of the deficit depends on the uplift
rate and duration of production. The method solves for both erosion rate and
surface uplift rate simultaneously over a defined time interval by using
multiple samples and multiple isotope pairs, along with independent surface age
constraints, in order to gain precision. In order to assess the precision and
applicability of this technique, the research team will sample and measure TCN
concentrations (21Ne, 10Be, and 26Al) for Miocene to Pliocene ignimbrites of the
Atacama Desert (Chile and Peru), where independently determined surface uplift
data are available to verify TCN results. The goal is to understand (1) how the
method performs at a range of uplift rates; (2) how increasing the number of
samples may reduce uncertainty; and (3) whether the approach is internally
consistent over different timescales and using different isotope pairs. The
research would enhance post-doctoral training thus contributing to the
development of a globally competitive STEM workforce and involve the significant
international collaboration with the GeoForschungsZentrum in Potsdam, Germany. A
successful outcome will be a new novel paleoaltimetry tool that will be widely
applicable over much or the Earth?s surface and will transform the ability to
determine paleoelevation and surface uplift rates in active orogens or areas
experiencing uplift due to dynamic topography or glacial isostatic adjustment.