* 1463990
* CRII: CHS: Toward Meaningful Information Transfer: Role of Interdepartmental Communication
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Joanna Abraham, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2018
* USD 174,997.00

This study advances the development of new collaborative communication tools
that promote effective handoffs, assesses the use of these tools to streamline
communication, and contributes to a medical school and health informatics
curricula of handoff strategies to improve collaboration. Handoffs are a shift-
based communication activity in round-the-clock settings such as space mission
controls, nuclear power plants, and healthcare settings that help in maintaining
the continuity of work activities. In healthcare settings, patient handoffs
involve the transfer of information, responsibility and authority, from one care
provider to another. Despite their importance, patient handoffs are often of
poor quality leading to adverse events and patient harm. To improve handoff
quality, structured handoff tools should be used for ensuring consistent
communication between care providers. However, we know very little about how
such structured tools support collaborative communication between care
providers. This study will conduct a systematic evaluation of handoff
communication at two acute care settings to characterize the role of structured
handoff tools for sustaining collaborative activities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This multi-site pilot study will investigate the impact of
standardized handoff tools on: (a) effective information transfer, (b) symmetric
and balanced social interaction, and (c) resilient communication. It will be
carried out within the context of interdepartmental physician handoffs between
Emergency Departments (ED) and Medical Intensive Care Units (MICU). Multi-
faceted research methods will be used, including (a) clinician shadowing and
audio-recording of ED-MICU handoffs, (b) a post-handoff interaction
questionnaire with participating ED and MICU physicians, (c) handoff tool
collection, and (d) handoff evaluation huddles to perform a situated in-depth
evaluation of handoff tools within the context of patient handoffs. This
research will contribute towards developing an integrated perspective on the
development of structured physician handoffs tools and communication in three
ways. First, it will strengthen our empirical insights of the collaborative
processes that underlie handoff activities. This will involve a comprehensive
understanding of the nuances of interactive communication and the role of social
interactions and communication resilience for supporting effective handoffs.
Second, it will inform the design of handoff tools. This will involve the
identification of information organization aspects for handoff tools that will
facilitate effective interactive and error-free communication. Third, it will
integrate theoretical and methodological implications of this work into graduate
courses on patient safety and communication to expose and also attract students
in a health informatics program to research careers in information sciences and
computing. Additionally, handoff scenarios from this study will be incorporated
into hands-on training exercises for medical students to support the development
of their skills for effective social interaction and resilient communication.