* 1463204
* Collaborative Research: Fundamentals of Material Behavior and Structure in Making Laminated Metal Composites with Assistance of Electrical Current in Bonding Operation
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Yoosuf Picard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2017
* USD 111,761.00

Laminated metal composites are critical to reducing the weight and energy
demands of transportation vehicles. However, the manufacture of these composites
is difficult, costly, and energy intensive. To make laminated metal composites,
existing methods involve applying large stresses or pressures to bond multiple
metal sheets through a deformation process. Using heat can soften the metal
sheets during manufacturing, reducing the amount of required force. A
potentially cheaper, less energy intensive, and more controllable approach is to
use applied electrical current instead of pure heat. The act of driving
electrical current into a metal part during deformation can localize the heat to
exactly where it is needed, temporarily softening the metal during a
manufacturing process. However, how and why local current flow softens metals is
not completely understood, particularly when force is simultaneously applied.
This award supports fundamental research to provide the understanding of how
metals soften and bond under simultaneous electrical current and pressure. Such
understanding will enable the development of manufacturing processes that
produce cheaper and high quality laminated metal composites. In turn, this will
facilitate low-cost production of transportation vehicles with better fuel
efficiency, including aircraft and automobiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective is to uncover the fundamental phenomena associated with the
reduction of material flow stress under the combined electrical current and
mechanical loads through the investigations at the micro- and meso- scales. In
this study, electrically-assisted static bonding of laminated metal composites
will be carried out at Northwestern University. Laminated metal composites will
be fabricated under a range of pressure and continuous electrical current
conditions. These samples will then be tested for quality, in terms of bond
strength, and analyzed by advanced characterization techniques. These
characterization approaches, carried out at Carnegie Mellon University, will use
electron microscopy to correlate aspects of the metal microstructure to bond
strength and to determine electrically-assisted deformation mechanisms.
Furthermore, experiments will be conducted inside the microscope in order to
visualize the dynamics of metal deformation under in situ applied continuous
electrical current and pressure. Such experiments will provide new understanding
on the effects of electrical current on microstructures, deformation behavior,
and metal bonding.