* 1463103
* 3D Printing of Smart Structural Composites by Thermoelectric Extrusion with Molecular Precision
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Vishnu Baba Sundaresan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 03/31/2018
* USD 299,816.00

A smart structural composite provides structural support with built-in sensing
(temperature, pressure, flow and load) functionalities. Recent advances in
intelligent infrastructure and the proliferation of wearable gadgets and smart
prosthetics have created a need for manufacturing affordable, customizable, and
precise smart structural composites. Among current manufacturing methods, 3D
printing can directly build customizable parts from computer models, but lack
the ability to incorporate additives (such as piezoelectric nanoparticles) that
provide sensing functionality. Most polymer-based 3D printing methods build
parts by layer-by-layer deposition of a polymer extruded out of a nozzle above
its melting temperature and have limited control of the polymer microstructure
as it cools down. This leads to poor dimensional accuracy of 3D printed parts in
comparison with parts fabricated from traditional manufacturing processes. This
award supports fundamental research to create new knowledge in 3D printing and
its application in healthcare, education, and engineering will foster new
economic activity. This award also supports participation of women and
underrepresented groups in engineering research and outreach efforts by the
investigators with middle and high school students.

The objective of this research is to formulate relationships between an applied
electric field during the extrusion of thermoplastic ionomer/piezoelectric
composite and its resulting material properties (e.g., optical clarity,
strength, piezoelectric strain coefficient, and interfacial adhesion between
polymer matrix and nanoparticles). In a thermoplastic ionomer, the difference in
polarity between the hydrocarbon chain and ionic group creates an electrostatic
driving force and results in aggregation of ions. In this context, there exists
a knowledge gap on the aggregation of ions in a thermoplastic ionomer above its
melting temperature under the influence of an externally applied electric field.
In order to understand how an electric field (greater than the electrostatic
force of aggregation) applied to a mixture of thermoplastic
ionomer/piezoelectric additive affects aggregation morphology (size,
distribution in the matrix and around nanoscale additives), the research team
will conduct experimental research and coarse-grained molecular dynamics
simulations of a representative thermoplastic ionomer with piezoelectric
additives (ethylene/methacrylic acid with PZT-5H and PVDF).