* 1463572
* The Role of Mechanical Interactions in Tissue Formation and Body Axis Specification
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Eva-Maria Collins, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 12/31/2018
* USD 414,575.00

Despite their remarkable diversity, all animals begin as a single, fertilized
egg. How patterns are established from an initially near uniform system, the
egg, is a fundamental question in biology. Mechanical interactions between cells
and their environment are thought to play an important role in tissue and axis
formation, but this has been difficult to dissect experimentally because of the
complexity of developing embryos. The award will investigate the role of
mechanical forces in the formation of body form of the Hydra from a solution of
separated cells. How the tension at the cell surface and the stiffness of layers
of tissue fibers that the cells secrete change how the animal structure develops
also will be measured. This award supports fundamental research aimed at
studying a simple animal that can regenerate its body after dissociation into
individual cells. The core mechanical mechanisms of cell-cell interactions
during body plan development are universal during early development.
Understanding how these mechanisms work in a simple organism will lead to
insight into these mechanisms in more complex beings. This research may reveal
general guiding principles for tissue assembly and organ formation and thus has
implications for medicine in the context of engineering tissues and organs for
transplantation. Understanding how an organism can emerge from an aggregation of
cells sparks human imagination. Therefore this project will offer exciting
research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. The
interdisciplinary nature of the project requires the application of tools from
physics, biology, engineering, and computer science, and thus will enable
students from diverse backgrounds to make significant
contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is experimentally challenging to dissect
the mechanical interactions involved in animal development. A novel system which
promises to allow such a dissection is the freshwater polyp Hydra, which self-
organizes and regenerates after dissociation into a suspension of single cells.
Because of this remarkable ability and its structural simplicity, regenerating
Hydra aggregates are fully accessible to quantitative measurements and
controlled perturbations while providing an in vivo environment that makes the
measurements meaningful. This research will elucidate how tissue formation
occurs from a cell suspension and determine the mechanisms that lead to body
axis specification. For both processes, the research team will apply a
multiscale approach from the molecular to the organismal level and test the
importance of mechanical interactions using physical measurements, chemical
manipulations, visualization of gene expression using transgenic animals and
immunohistochemistry, and fluorescent time-lapse microscopy. This study will
provide insight into how macroscopic organism-level patterning emerges from
interactions on the cellular level.