* 1463170
* Hybrid Carbon-Polymer Supercapacitors for High Energy Storage and Power Delivery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Kenneth Lau, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This project aims to develop enhanced energy storage devices, in particular,
supercapacitors, that can store large amounts of energy or charge per unit
weight of the material and deliver them at high power. The ability to store
large amounts of charge will enable their use in high-demand applications such
as electric and hybrid vehicles. High power will ensure that these devices can
be charged at a fast rate with charging times of a few seconds to a few minutes
(unlike rechargeable batteries that require several hours for charging). The
potential improvement in energy storage attributes will, for example, contribute
very significantly to technology that supports electric vehicles. This project
will provide two PhD graduate and several undergraduate students with an
interdisciplinary educational experience in nanomaterials and renewable
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research objective of this project is
to fabricate and study process-structure-performance correlation in a novel
hybrid supercapacitor electrode composed of porous carbon-electroactive polymer
core-shell nanofibers. The fabrication will be conducted via a simple two-step
process. In Step 1, nanofibers of blends of two polymers; carbon precursor and
sacrificial polymer, will be fabricated via electrospinning followed by high
temperature pyrolysis to convert the carbon precursor to carbon and decompose
out the sacrificial polymer, resulting in hierarchically-porous carbon
nanofibers exhibiting high specific surface area (&gt;1500 m2/g). In Step 2, the
porous carbon nanofibers will be shrink-wrapped with an ultrathin shell of
conducting polymer of thiophene, pyrrole or aniline using a novel "liquid-free"
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) approach. The aim is integrate electric double
layer capacitance from porous carbon nanofibers with pseudocapacitance from thin
and conformal polymer coatings to achieve synergistic performance effects
including optimized energy density and power delivery and improved cycling
performance. Collaboration with industrial partners will enable a feasible path
for future manufacturing.