* 1463455
* Collaborative Research: Mechanics of Granular Acoustic Meta-materials with Engineered Particles and Packings
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Mark Shattuck, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2020
* USD 196,802.00

Acoustic meta-materials are engineered materials enabling the control of sound
waves. Granular acoustic meta-materials are constructs of particles in periodic
and disordered arrangements. This project seeks a fundamental understanding of
the acoustic and mechanical response of granular packings where the particles
possess specific engineered properties. These materials exhibit a key acoustical
property, that is acoustic band gaps. Band gaps prevent sound of certain
frequencies to propagate. Meta-materials exhibiting acoustic band gaps have
applications for vibration isolation, sound wave communication, acoustic super-
lenses, acoustic diodes, and acoustic cloaking devices. This project will
combine engineered particle shapes and materials with specially designed spatial
arrangements of the particles to allow detailed control over the acoustic
properties of the material. This project will involve several undergraduates in
research each year through partnerships between the collaborating institutions,
one of which is minority-serving. Outreach initiatives include an annual lecture
series on granular media. Teaching modules for use by the International Centre
for Theoretical Physics will be developed for teaching basic computational
research skills to graduate students from developing countries.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In granular media, the discrete nature of the material allows
optimization on both the grain and network scales. Also, the speed of sound in
granular materials depends on the confining pressure due to changes in the
particle-particle contact area. The objective of this research is to gain
understanding of the acoustic response of engineered granular meta-materials,
and to exploit their unique features to tune the mechanical response. Variations
of the confining pressure will be employed to actively control the acoustic
properties of granular meta-materials. Novel direct visualization techniques and
discrete element simulations of individual particle motions and forces will
enable close feedback between the predicted and measured mechanical response.
The team will use 3D printing and other fabrication techniques to engineer
particles with varied elastic properties, surface treatments, and complex
shapes. In both experiments and simulations, the team will construct disordered
and crystalline granular packings in both two- and three-dimensions using direct
assembly methods. The team will also explore the effects of boundary conditions
on the internal stress networks of granular packings with the goal of tuning
their acoustic properties. Realistic inter-particle force laws obtained from
direct measurements will be implemented into discrete element simulations of the
mechanical response and compared to the results from experiments. Attainment of
these goals will provide unprecedented insight into the acoustic properties of
granular meta-materials.