* 1463431
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Efficient Multiline Mooring Systems for Floating Wind Turbines
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Charles Aubeny, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2020
* USD 214,088.00

This collaborative Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) project seeks to develop a novel, integrated, and networked multiline
mooring system for floating offshore wind turbines that can provide significant
capital cost savings in terms of materials and installation, and thereby
contribute to making offshore wind energy cost competitive with other sources.
Reducing the cost of energy generated from offshore wind sources is critical to
meeting national renewable energy goals and for meeting the needs of a robustly
growing economy. The industry partner, Vryhof Anchors, is a world leader in
anchor systems for offshore structures and has become increasingly involved in
the offshore wind industry, including providing the anchoring system for the
world's first floating offshore wind turbine. Vryhof, through its subsidiary
Vryhof Americas, will work closely with the academic research team to ensure
that research tasks are closely aligned with industrial needs, and that the
academic research is informed by the latest industrial advances. Vryhof will
also act as a liaison between the academic team and other industry contacts. To
successfully develop the proposed multiline mooring system, the research must
address issues of dynamics of floating platforms in irregular wind and wave
states, mooring line actions, and the mechanics of anchor-soil interaction for a
variety of anchor types, soil stratigraphies, and mooring
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal goal of this research is to provide
a path to transformation of offshore floating wind farm design from one in which
turbines mooring systems are designed and constructed individually to one in
which the mooring system for the entire wind farm is designed as a networked
system with greatly increased material and installation efficiency. Specific
research objectives are to: (1) generate idealized soil stratigraphies; (2)
explore the geometric design space for wind farm layout compatible with the
multiline concept; (3) develop spatially correlated wind wave models for the
extent of an offshore wind farm; (4) model mooring line forces as correlated
random processes; (5) analyze anchor behavior using 3D finite element analysis;
(6) evaluate candidate multiline anchor designs for feasibility and cost. The
project achieves broad impact through the Vryhof industrial collaboration and
partnership with demonstration projects based at UMaine. Educational synergy
occurs through the graduate education activities of the UMass Wind Energy IGERT
program and the UMass STEM Diversity Institute and Texas A&amp;M AGEP programs.