* 1463918
* I-Corps:  Blocking-, Censorship-, Surveillance-, and Disaster-Resistant Communication for Normal Smartphone Users
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Robert Dick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Free speech eases access to information necessary for rational individual and
collective decision making. Currently, communication technologies are
susceptible to blocking, censorship, or surveillance because no easy to-use
technologies that run on commodity hardware exist. Direct and transitive
smartphone-to-smartphone communication technologies, however, have the potential
to make it easier for normal people to efficiently communicate without being
subject to blocking, censorship, or surveillance. The proposed work will support
freedom of speech by enabling censorship-resistant communication among normal
people. The proposed work also has humanitarian application such as enabling
continued communication when man-made or natural disasters have partially or
fully disabled infrastructure-based communication systems. It also has the
potential to benefit communities and families by enabling reliable, private
communication. Wider access to information and reduced propaganda increases the
likelihood of correct economic and personal decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
key is breaking dependence on easily subverted Internet infrastructure.
Individual smartphones automatically link up into a local wireless network
without dependence on cellular base stations or wireless access points, so
messages hop across towns through a community of smartphone users. Recently the
team has developed power models that can relate communication protocol design
decisions to smartphone battery life, yet again improving efficiency.
Specifically, the team has developed technologies that can enable direct phone-
to-phone communication among Android-platform smartphones without changes to
hardware or operating system, can now gather data on time-varying communication
network topologies for smartphone-based infrastructureless networks, and can
automatically identify spam sources in authority-less networks based on the
message retransmission decisions made by other network participants