* 1463644
* DMUU:  Center for Robust Decision-Making Tools for Climate and Energy Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Ian Foster, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2022
* USD 4,499,970.00

This collaborative research group will undertake research aimed at improving the
models needed to evaluate environmental and energy policy and to make robust
decisions based on outcomes. Addressing the consequences of a changing
environment for the economy, food and water security, and energy supply is an
increasingly urgent challenge. New understanding and analysis tools are needed
that can allow decision makers to act in the presence of uncertainty. The models
to be developed will provide deeper understanding and actionable information
about the potential future of Earth and human society, improve capabilities to
forecast future conditions, and quantify the uncertainty around projections so
that decision makers can balance risk and reward. This collaborative group
includes experts in economics, physical sciences, energy technologies, law,
computational mathematics, statistics, and computer science to improve and
connect the methods and models needed to evaluate energy, economics,
agriculture, and other sectors. The collaborative group will engage high school
students, undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars in its
work, contributing to the education of a diverse population. All models, data,
and tools developed by the collaborative group will be openly available to the
research, policy, and citizen communities to encourage use and
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative group will work to
realize opportunities inherent in new data sources, computational capabilities,
participants, and collaborations. The collaborative group will conduct research
in five key areas: (1) Improved characterizations of future climate. The
collaborative group will develop new understanding of what state-of-the-art
models have to say about likely changes in climate extremes and variability. (2)
Characterization of environmental impacts. The collaborative group will develop
more powerful computational tools to forecast the influence of environmental
change upon economics, agriculture, land use, demographics, and other sectors.
Experts from multiple disciplines will collaborate on building new computational
models, conducting comparisons of existing models, distributing historical data
for model evaluation and validation, and using multiple models for impact
assessments. (3) Integrating uncertain information. The best policies for
preventing environmental damage are likely to be those that best balance return
and risk in the face of many uncertainties. The collaborative group will develop
models to identify robust strategies that perform well over a wide range of
scenarios. (4) Evaluation of models. The collaborative group will develop
methods for evaluating the confidence that can be placed in different
projections of future climate and impacts. (5) Computational technologies. The
collaborative group will develop new web tools, numerical solution methods, and
large-scale models that make full use of modern supercomputers. These tools will
allow researchers to add additional detail to models, explore uncertainty, and
deliver previously impossible results. This collaborative group project is
supported by the NSF Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
through its Decision Making Under Uncertainty (DMUU) funding opportunity.