* 1463957
* 2015 Redbud Geometry/Topology Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Henry Segerman, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 01/31/2016
* USD 25,108.00

2015 Redbud Geometry/Topology Conference, 02/01/15 - 01/31/16, Oklahoma State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports participation in the Redbud
Geometry and Topology Conferences, to be held in the Spring and Fall of 2015.
The conferences focus on three-dimensional geometry and topology, the study of
different kinds of geometry and shapes of three-dimensional spaces. The
conferences are part of an ongoing series of meetings held at universities in
Arkansas and Oklahoma, intended to increase interaction and collaboration among
young and senior mathematicians in the area. The Spring conference will be held
at Oklahoma State University and will feature prominent speakers from across the
country and abroad, as well as a graduate student workshop. The Fall conference
will be held at the University of Arkansas, with speakers and participants
mainly from the University of Arkansas, the University of Oklahoma, and Oklahoma
State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Spring conference will take place
April 3-5 2015. The focus of the conference is contact geometry and hyperbolic
geometry on low dimensional manifolds. In the hyperbolic thread, the conference
will have several talks (by David Futer (Temple U), Efstratia Kalfagianni
(Michigan State U), and Jessica Purcell (Brigham Young U)) on the relationships
between the combinatorics of knot diagrams and the hyperbolic geometry of their
complements, and the connections to quantum invariants such as the Jones
polynomial. In the contact thread, the conference will have talks (by Ken Baker
(U of Miami), John Etnyre (Georgia Tech), Matt Hedden (Michigan State U), Emmy
Murphy (MIT), Sinem Onaran (Hacettepe U), Laura Starkston (U of Texas, Austin),
and Andy Wand (U of Nantes)) on recent developments in contact topology, in
particular the characterization of tight contact structures in terms of the
supporting open book decomposition, the support genus of a knot, and the
existence and classification of contact structures in higher dimensions. The
first day of the conference will consist of a graduate workshop intended to give
background, to help junior researchers engage more fully with the rest of the
conference. The meeting will foster increased interaction among young
mathematicians in the region. Conference website: http://math.okstate.edu/redbud