* 1463960
* NRI-Small: Context-Driven Haptic Inquiry of Objects Based on Task Requirements for Artificial Grasp and Manipulation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Veronica Santos, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2018
* USD 454,632.00

PI: Santos, Veronica Proposal Number: 1208519

Intellectual Merit: Human-like dexterous manipulation is featured prominently as
a grand challenge in the 2009 Roadmap for U.S. Robotics' report. Human dexterity
relies heavily on tactile sensation and is influenced by proprioceptive and
visual feedback. The proposed work aims to advance artificial manipulators by
integrating a new class of multimodal tactile sensors with anthropomorphic
artificial hands and developing generalizable routines for context-driven haptic
inquiry of objects based on task requirements for artificial grasp and
manipulation. A primary goal is the development of capabilities for a robot hand
to efficiently learn about objects in its unstructured environment through
touch, specifically for cases where computer vision would fail to provide
critical information about the physical hand-object interactions. While computer
vision provides preliminary information about an object and its environment,
vision alone cannot provide all essential information necessary for successful
physical hand-object interactions. This is especially true when digits are
occluded by the grasped object, and when the hand-object interaction is
completely out of view. Inspiration for the haptic inquiry framework will be
drawn from a suite of human haptic exploration procedures. In contrast to haptic
exploration, haptic inquiry will require that the order and time spent on each
exploratory procedure depend on task goals. The order and type of questions to
be asked haptically will be context-dependent and designed to yield high-level,
task-directed information at a low cost of inquiry. The weight given to each
mode of tactile sensing (force, vibration, temperature) will also be tuned
according to the context of the task. This proposal aims to strengthen the
robustness of co-robot systems by developing a framework for context-driven,
task-directed haptic inquiry that integrates multi-digit tactile and
proprioception data in a task-appropriate manner. The framework will be
developed and deployed on an anthropomorphic robot hand outfitted with a new
class of commercially-available multimodal tactile sensors. The work is
transformative because it will enable co-robot systems to remain functional even
in the absence of visual feedback, which is typically the primary form of
feedback for robotic systems. The long-term research objective of this proposal
is to reduce the cognitive burden on the user of an artificial manipulator.

Broader Impacts: The proposed translational research could enhance the
functional capabilities of co-robot systems in which humans use artificial
manipulators to work in unstructured, unsafe, or limited access environments
(prosthetic, rehabilitative, assistive, space, underwater, military, rescue,
surgery). The proposed work could benefit the human user of a co-robot system by
empowering the robot with the ability to control low-level perception-action
loops autonomously without burdening the human. The ROS operating system may be
used to simulate and control an anthropomorphic robot hand outfitted with
commercially-available tactile sensors using commercially-available actuators.
Custom source code (C, MATLAB, ROS) and an open source haptic library for a
commercially-available tactile sensor (suitable for data mining) will be made
publicly available for the benefit and advancement of the robotics community.