* 1463412
* Low-Voltage, Low-Waste Fabrication of Semiconducting Thin Films by Continuous Flow Electrophoretic Deposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jason Baxter, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 306,031.00

One of the most significant impediments to the widespread use of solar energy is
the manufacturing cost of the solar cell modules. Electrophoretic deposition,
which uses an electric field to drive charged particles to a surface and which
is scalable and low cost, presents a compelling solution to this manufacturing
problem. This project will study electrophoretic deposition of inorganic
semiconducting materials. The objective of this project is to
electrophoretically deposit thin films from an ink comprised of nanometer-scale
semiconductor crystals dispersed in a solvent. This research could lead to
inexpensive, efficient, and sustainable processing methods for manufacturing
solar cells from earth-abundant, non-toxic materials. The project will provide
graduate and undergraduate students multidisciplinary training in cutting edge
nanomanufacturing processes. The research results and accomplishments will be
shared at public events, integrated into lectures and lab-based undergraduate
courses and brought into the classrooms of a local public school.

The objective of this project is to use colloidal, all-inorganic, nanocrystal
dispersions in polar, non-aqueous electrolytes for low-voltage electrophoretic
deposition. The hypothesis will be tested that the threshold voltage for
electrophoretic deposition can be lowered by an order of magnitude to less than
1 volt under conditions in which electrolysis of the electrolyte is coupled with
deposition of the electrophoresing particles. Such low voltages would lead to
low deposition rates in conventional reactors. Therefore, a second hypothesis
will be tested that continuously flowing the nanocrystal dispersion through an
electrophoretic deposition microreactor can achieve both high deposition rate
and thick films. Flow rate, reactor geometry, and applied bias can be tuned to
achieve near-complete utilization of the nanocrystal feedstock and minimal waste
generation. Work will focus on earth-abundant, non-toxic nanocrystals of copper
zinc tin sulfide and lead sulfide, which have been used in the highest
efficiency quantum dot solar cells. This research will deepen understanding of
directed- and self-assembly processes under the influence of applied electric
fields, focusing on the poorly understood, non-equilibrium behavior of
chemically reactive ions at the intersection of bulk and nanoscale charged
surfaces. Specifically it will probe the fundamental mechanism of
electrophoretic deposition at low voltage.