* 1463234
* Mechano-Biologically Informed Molecular Models of Flow Sensitive Biopolymers
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Alparslan Oztekin, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,161,993.00

In human bodies, bleeding is stopped by forming a clot at the site of vascular
damage. Under rapid blood flow conditions associated with injury, the plasma
protein von Willebrand Factor (vWF) plays an indispensable role in sticking to
both platelets and collagen on damaged vessel walls, allowing the formation of
platelet plugs. vWF effectively senses blood flow, changing conformation in high
flow from a compact globule to an elongated shape; this reveals binding sites on
vWF for platelets and collagen. Abnormalities in vWF adhesion are involved in
the pathogenesis of many cardiovascular diseases, such as von Willebrand disease
(affecting 1 to 2% of world's population), thrombosis and arteriosclerosis.
Although basic biological properties of vWF have been elucidated, little is
known about the detailed biomechanical properties of vWF and how these
properties dictate its structure and function in varying flow environments. Such
information can abet not only better understanding of vWF; it can provide
insight for the design of synthetic molecules in pursuit of targeted drug
therapies, advancing federal interests in health and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish, for the first time,
a generalized experimental and theoretical platform to investigate the
mechanical properties of complicated, multi-domain molecules such as vWF. The
platform advanced will provide transformative predictive capability for how flow
sensitive biopolymers behave in specific vascular flow scenarios and how that
behavior depends on molecular architecture and biological surface chemistry. A
single-molecule force spectroscopy will be implemented to systematically probe
the mechanical response of vWF monomer fragments, monomers, and multimers; data
so obtained will be used to optimize new coarse grain molecular models that
predict vWF mechanical behavior with unprecedented quantitative accuracy. The
model's predictive capabilities will be further enhanced via fluorescence
microscopy analysis of vWF in microfluidic flow chambers with systematically
functionalized surfaces. The optimized model will be used to explore how changes
to molecular architecture influence biological functionality in varying flow
conditions. This work will enable a detailed understanding of the molecular
mechanisms underlying conformational changes of vWF and lay crucial groundwork
toward biologically inspired materials design and the development of biomimetic
devices that resemble the functionality of known biopolymers. In addition, the
study will fill the long-standing knowledge gap on the mechanobiology of vWF,
and potentially offer new therapeutic approaches to treat von Willebrand
disease. This project will educate both undergraduate and graduate STEM students
in experimental and theoretical aspects of biomolecular investigation,
emphasizing the need for multi-disciplinary, diverse collaborations between
practitioners of experiment, computation, and theory. Such immersive STEM
educational experiences will best prepare students to confront technological
challenges of the future. Through associated outreach efforts, this work will
showcase for both technical and non-technical societal audiences the power of
high performance computing in exploring complex molecular behavior and advancing
new solutions in human health and wellness.