* 1463205
* Collaborative Research: Generating Electricity from Deformation: Multiscale Modeling and Characterization of Flexoelectricity from Atoms to Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Pradeep Sharma, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 05/31/2019
* USD 154,355.00

Small sensors -- at the micro or nanoscale -- promise to extend human perception
to extreme and previously inaccessible environments. How will these next-
generation stand-alone sensor systems be powered? Many existing solutions use
piezoelectric materials to convert mechanical vibration into electricity.
However, only a small class of materials exhibits practically useful levels of
this form of electromechanical coupling, and those typically lose their
piezoelectricity at higher temperatures. This precludes their use in precisely
the environments where the new classes of sensors are needed most. Furthermore,
the highest performing piezoelectric materials contain lead, which creates
manufacturing and disposal hazards. This project investigates generation of
electricity by an entirely different phenomenon, called flexoelectricity. Unlike
piezoelectricity, flexoelectricity is present in all dielectric solids, and thus
offers an environmentally compatible alternative to piezoelectrics. This project
combines complementary computational and experimental research studies to
explore and understand flexoelectricity from atomistic scales to the device
level. This work will enable a novel framework for the dramatically enhanced
performance of energy harvesting devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research program combines atomistic and continuum electroelastic
modeling, nonlinear dynamic phenomena, nanofabrication, multi-scale experiments,
and device characterization to facilitate the establishment of a novel class of
revolutionary self-powered sensors and sensing systems at small scales. By
bridging the atomistic and continuum theories with rigorous experiments, a fully
coupled flexoelectric energy harvester framework will be established to explore
the scaling laws for conversion efficiency and power density. For high
excitation levels, nonlinear elastic, electroelastic, and dissipative effects in
flexoelectric energy harvesting will also be characterized. Based on this
fundamentally transformative approach to electromechanical energy harvesting,
atomistic modeling of flexoelectricity and continuum-based energy harvesting
models will be synergistically coupled with experiments to establish next-
generation energy harvesters. Both linear and nonlinear broadband architectures
will be explored for harvesting deterministic and stochastic vibrational energy.
This research will also establish a framework and thorough understanding of the
electroelastic dynamics of nanostructures for use in a variety of other problems
involving two-way electromechanical coupling (e.g. sensing, actuation, control)
at submicron scales.