* 1463808
* Exploring Non-Normative Forms of Capital, Wealth and Knowledge Used by Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* Julie Martin, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 05/31/2021
* USD 143,956.00

Uncovering the Assets that Diverse Students Bring to Engineering Higher
Education The culture of today's engineering higher education has been
influenced by its historical and sociological roots as a dominantly male,
middle-to-upper class profession. As a result, there is often the assumption
that there is a single "normal" student experience. However, students from
underrepresented or socially marginalized groups often have educational
experiences that that are distinct from the mainstream engineering culture.
Generally speaking, engineering curricula and individual courses are designed
and often taught in traditional ways that do not take into account the many
assets that diverse students bring to their engineering studies. The current
system of education does not readily recognize and leverage these experiences in
producing new ways of teaching and learning engineering or developing different
ways of thinking about how engineers create processes and products for today's
diverse society. This project contributes to diversifying the field of
engineering by illuminating the distinct experiences of students from socially
marginalized groups. The project's goal is to help educators recognize and value
a variety of distinct experiences, making the field of engineering more
inclusive. The objective of this project is to answer the research question: "In
the varying experiences of students who are underrepresented and/or socially
marginalized, what forms of capital, wealth, and knowledge are identified as
significant?" Using a testimonial interview method, the researchers
qualitatively investigate recent engineering graduates' experiences of "unearned
advantages" and "unearned disadvantages," and the relationship of these unearned
traits to engineering higher education. The qualitative research approach allows
the collection of rich descriptions of participants' experiences to discover
if/how differences from the engineering cultural norm may result in models of
success that help students persist and succeed. Phenomenographic data analysis
and asset-based theoretical frameworks including Community Cultural Wealth (CCW)
and Funds of Knowledge (FoK) are used to discover variations in the way that
participants experience their engineering education. Through leveraging the
expertise of an advisory panel, the project develops the capacity and research
infrastructure to develop scaleable mechanisms that can facilitate validation of
"non-traditional" or "unexpected" forms of wealth among engineering educators.