* 1463316
* Methods for Dynamic Network Identification with Application to the Control of Smart Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Prabir Barooah, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 07/31/2020
* USD 354,895.00

A dynamic network consists of interacting dynamic sub-systems. Such networks
occur in many domains: living cells, financial markets, the Internet and the
power grid are some examples. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HAVC)
systems in buildings can also be modeled through dynamic networks since each
room's climate depends on that of nearby spaces. Knowledge of such dynamic
network models is essential to design and deploy control strategies devoted to
the improvement of energy efficiency and occupant comfort. Yet, in practice the
structure and dynamics of these networks are either unknown or imprecisely
known. For instance, information on the thermal interaction among rooms is
difficult to obtain from laws of physics due to the complexity of the physical
processes involved. The goal of this project is to formulate algorithms for the
identification of dynamic sparse network models from measured data. The research
results will support the study of advanced controls for HVAC systems to reduce
their energy use and to provide demand-side flexibility to the power grid. Since
buildings consume 75% of the nation's electricity, improvement of energy
efficiency through smart building control systems will contribute to the
sustainability of the nation's energy system. Although 'dynamic system
identification' is a well-developed field, the field of identification of
dynamic networks is not at all well-developed. Traditional dynamic system
identification techniques cannot exploit the inherent sparseness of the network
identification problem, while traditional machine learning techniques are mostly
applicable to only static networks. In this project we combine ideas from
traditional dynamic system identification, L1 optimization for sparse vector
recovery (from compressed sensing), and graphical modeling from machine learning
to address the challenges in dynamic network identification. If successful, the
research will (1) provide fundamental contribution to the nascent field of
dynamic network identification through new algorithms, and (2) enable speedy
deployment of 'smart building' technologies in commercial buildings. In
addition, the project will support a number of educational innovations for
attracting students from under-represented groups to engineering and generating
excitement about engineering.