* 1463164
* Tailoring of the Elastic Postbucking Response of Cylindrical Shells:  A Route for Exploiting Instabilities in Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Rigoberto Burgueno, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2020
* USD 274,416.00

Elastic instability, which refers to the sudden loss of compression load
carrying capacity of a structural element, is traditionally considered a failure
limit. Yet, unstable behavior involves a sudden change of the structure's
geometry and the release of accumulated energy. Thus, a new way of thinking is
emerging for using the unstable response of slender structures for purposes that
seem to be rapidly increasing and diversifying. Cylindrical shells are among the
structural elements most affected by instabilities (commonly seen as a negative
trait) but their geometry provides unique opportunities for controlling their
unstable response, which can display multiple unstable transitions in a
recoverable manner. The research hypothesis is that cylindrical shells can be
designed such that their unstable response is controlled through optimal
geometric and material stiffness distributions on the shell surface. The
research findings will create new possibilities for the development of materials
and devices that use instabilities for applications such as sensing, actuation,
control, energy harvesting, and energy dissipation; advances that in turn could
also facilitate the development of novel smart, active and multifunctional
materials and structures. The project will allow training of a Ph.D. student and
educational and outreach components will broaden access to the project's core
knowledge to undergraduate and high-school students.

The core research idea is that the features in the far elastic postbuckling
response of cylindrical shells can be fully characterized, modified, and
potentially tailored. The features of interest are not the initial elastic
stiffness or the first bifurcation load, but a response with multiple stable to
unstable transitions, the equilibrium path loading stiffnesses, the released
kinetic energy at critical point transitions, and the dissipated energy during
cyclic loading. Topology and shape optimization techniques will be expanded to
achieve the desired response and experiments will validate computational designs
and finite-element based simulations. Analysis and design frameworks will be
developed for axially loaded cylinders with controllable elastic postbuckling
behavior. The key innovation will be proving that the elastic postbuckling
response of cylindrical shells can be tailored through the design of material
and geometric features on the shell's surface, thus transforming a behavior
traditionally seen as undesirable into an opportunity for use in smart materials
and structures. The research will generate new knowledge on the extent and means
to control and design the elastic postbuckling response of cylindrical shells,
which will provide new concepts and guidance for the use of tailorable
structural instabilities.