* 1463083
* Scalable Assembly of Flexible and Thermally Conductive Graphene Paper Macroscopic Structures for Effective Thermal Management in Electronic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Jie Lian, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Innovative thermal management solutions to address ever-increasing challenges of
heat generation are critical for future higher power, more compact and ultra-
lightweight electronics. Current state-of-the-art materials such as flexible
graphitic films for thermal management of high power electronics are not cost-
effective since they are expensive to manufacture. Graphene, a single layer of
carbon atoms bonded in a hexagonal lattice, is one of the thinnest and strongest
of materials, and also displays intrinsically exceptional thermal conductivity.
Macroscopic graphene structures, assembled from single layer graphene
nanosheets, offer immense potential as advanced materials for effective thermal
management. However, key challenges exist for the scalable assembly of two-
dimensional graphene nanosheets into three-dimensional macroscopic structures,
which is usually accompanied by a significant reduction of the thermal
properties. To find solutions to address these key challenges, this award
supports fundamental nano-scale manufacturing science of effectively assembling
graphene nanosheets into large-scale three-dimensional architectures that are
designed for performance in a cost-effective manner. These assembled macroscopic
structures are highly flexible, mechanically robust and exceptionally thermal
conductive, unlocking the enormous commercial potential of graphene as advanced
materials for nano-scale thermal management. The results from this project will
benefit the US economy and society. This project has synergistic educational and
outreach impacts through integration of research and education and engaging
participation of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop innovative approaches of integrating two well-established industrial
processes of electrospray deposition and roll-to-roll processing for
manufacturing flexible graphene papers with breakthrough thermal properties. The
research will establish process-microstructure-property relationships in
electrospray deposited and assembled graphene papers through experimentation.
Post-assembly high temperature annealing and mechanical compaction for
microstructural optimization and graphene sheet alignment will be performed in
order to improve properties. A game-changer is the direct manufacturing of the
graphene nanosheets from defect-free graphene using electrospray deposition.
Superior properties will be achieved in the macroscopic graphene structure
without the penalty of traditional energy-intensive high temperature annealing.
The scalable and cost-effective approach developed in assembling two-dimensional
nanosheets into three-dimensional functional architectures will have a broader
impact on controllable assembly and design of functional architectures of other
two-dimensional single atomic layer materials beyond graphene.