* 1463306
* Understanding the Mechanical Behavior of Novel High-Strength Nanoscale Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Min Zou, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 04/30/2020
* USD 448,317.00

One application of nanostructured materials is incorporation into solid
surfaces, to alter the properties and behavior of these surfaces. These
nanostructures, however, often deform very easily under contact stresses
encountered in typical applications, which severely limits their durability. A
novel nanoscale "core-shell" structure was recently discovered to have unusually
high strength and deformation resistance; however, the nanoscale mechanisms that
contribute to this unusual mechanical behavior are not currently known. This
award supports research to gain a fundamental understanding of the mechanical
behavior of the novel high-strength nanoscale structures, in order to design
nano-textured surfaces using these structures for optimized mechanical
performance. This research will provide valuable information to guide the
rational design of nano-textured surfaces employing nanoscale these core-shell
structures for micro/nano-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS and NEMS), and
provide potential solutions for this multi-billion dollar industry to solve
plaguing issues of wear and contact mechanics. The novel nanoscale core-shell
structure concept can also be applied to other applications, including magnetic
recording, nanoimprinting, surface wetting, and biomedical applications, where
mechanical integrity of the nanostructures is of paramount importance.
Comprehensive education and outreach activities will be implemented which will
significantly stimulate the next generation's interest in nanomaterials and
nanomechanics and will improve America's future competitiveness in
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an integrated
experimental and modeling approach to bridge material length scales, to (1)
perform nanoindentation experiments to investigate the effects of core and shell
materials, core size and microstructure, and shell thickness and shell/core
volume ratio on the mechanical behavior of nanoscale core-shell structures,
including strain hardening and fatigue, (2) to develop and validate molecular
dynamics and coupled atomistic-continuum multiscale simulation models to
understand the role of the core/shell interface, core/substrate interface, core
microstructure, core material, and substrate thickness; and determine the
mechanisms contributing to the large recoverable deformation and high strength
of the nanoscale core-shell structures, and (3) after model validation, to
computationally explore a sufficient core/shell parametric space so that the
fundamental understanding provided by the simulations can guide the fabrication
of nanoscale core-shell structures with optimal behavior, beyond the original
experimental space. The research will result in a fundamental understanding of
the unique mechanical behavior of nanoscale core-shell structures attached to
substrates and identify the mechanisms that provide the novel mechanical
behavior of these structures. The research can also result in molecular dynamics
and multiscale models that can be used as design tools for surface engineering
with nanoscale core-shell structures.