* 1463390
* Unraveling the Structural and Biomechanical Roles of Proteoglycans in Arterial Wall
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Katherine Y. Zhang, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 12/31/2019
* USD 373,715.00

Proteoglycans (PGs) contribute to the basic development and maintenance of
arteries. While other structural molecules and cells, such as the elastic
fibers, smooth muscle cells, and collagen fibers have received extensive
attention, little is known about the structural and biomechanical roles of PGs
in arteries. This ignorance is likely linked to the low mass fraction of PGs,
and that they are thought to be most important mechanically in resisting
compressive stresses. Using natural chemicals that can dissolve away only the
proteoglycans the investigators will measure the changes of artery stiffness as
the proteoglycans are removed. Also, a mathematical model will be created that
includes how the proteoglycans connect between the other molecules in the tissue
understand and predict how the preoteoglycan's work to create tissue stiffness.
There is a pressing need for such information in order to understand diseases of
the arteries and heart. Undergraduate and graduate students who work in the
project will learn to work with biology and mathematical theory to prepare them
for careers in biomedical research.

Given the complex interactions between PGs and other structural components, the
overall goal of this research is to explore how PGs contribute to the structural
and biomechanical integrity of arteries through coupled mechanical testing,
advanced optical imaging, and microstructure-based constitutive modeling for
charged hydrated tissues. With carefully designed experiments including local
extracellular matrix structural and biochemical modification, this research
takes a unique approach that integrates expertise in multi-photon microscopy,
biaxial tensile testing, and structure-based mixture constitutive modeling to
explore the contributions of PGs to the structural and biomechanical integrity
of human arteries, and to understand alterations in structural and biomechanical
roles of PGs in atherosclerosis. The important interplay between PGs and other
extracellular matrix constituents will be incorporated into constitutive
modeling by considering key structural information and osmotic effect. Results
from the research will establish a solid foundation to investigate the
mechanical roles of extracellular matrix constituents in the functionality of
arteries, and launch quantitative mechanobiological understandings of vascular
mechanics.