* 1463898
* Faculty Workload and Rewards Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Elizabeth Beise, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Erika Tatiana Camacho
* 08/31/2021
* USD 750,000.00

The Faculty Workload and Rewards Project aims to study and transform workplace
structures and cultures that result in inequality between science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) men and women faculty in campus service,
teaching, and mentoring workloads. The project will test whether departments
that undergo a three-year intervention to address workload inequality show
improvements in STEM women faculty members' sense of procedural and distributive
justice, retention, satisfaction, organizational commitment, and satisfaction
with time spent on teaching and service versus research. The project will also
measure changes in organizational practices that result from the interventions
such as dashboards and new workload and reward system policies. The outcomes of
this project will have broad potential impact for other public state
institutions, which are critical to improving the number of women and
underrepresented racial and ethnic minority students in STEM fields. The project
will create a repository of dashboard templates that can be used by other
departments, colleges, and institutions to assess micro-equities in workload and
establish department-based organizational practices that make campus service,
teaching, and mentoring workloads fairer and more transparent. The study has the
potential to make long-term shifts possible through structural change in
workload assignments and accountability, and cultural changes in transparency
and bias regarding those assignments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study includes a
randomized trial of forty-two STEM and Social Science academic departments from
Maryland, North Carolina, and Massachusetts. Twenty-one departments will act as
controls and twenty-one departments will be experimental departments that will
engage in four workload interventions over three years. These interventions
include: (1) the creation of workload dashboards to enhance transparency; (2)
workload and reward system adjustments to remedy inequitable workloads by
gender, race, and career stage; (3) individual career training and peer support
for management of workload; and (4) department-wide faculty training on how
unconscious bias and department organizational practices can affect workloads
and harm careers. The design allows systematic diagnosis and measurement of
workload and gender and race inequality in new ways in a range of diverse
departments and institutions. By engaging a stratified random assignment design
and collecting both climate and workload data from each control and experimental
department, the project will measure both changes in faculty perceptions of
workload fairness (procedural justice) and actual workload, policies and rewards
(distributive justice). This project takes an important issue and studies it
systematically, with a large sample, using multiple methods and clear focus.
This approach is a rigorous design for the study of faculty workload and rewards
and offers an approach that can be replicated in future studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE Partnerships for Learning and Adaptation
Networks (PLAN) program track supports projects that promote the adaptation and
implementation of previously effective ADVANCE programs in new contexts and the
testing of innovative strategies to promote the participation, success, and
advancement of women in STEM academic careers. PLAN projects also contribute to
the knowledge base on gender equity in STEM academic careers.