* 1463520
* Evacuating with Others Virtually
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Peter Luh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2019
* USD 619,125.00

Triggered by fire/smoke alarms, chemical spill alerts, bomb threats, etc.,
emergency evacuations are faced daily by modern buildings. Although most of
these cases turn out to be false alarms and most evacuations are orderly, some
end tragically and cost greatly to those involved and to the society.
Difficulties during evacuations include deciding what to do with very limited
time but serious consequences, understanding the dynamic nature of threats
(e.g., propagation of fire/smoke or chemical spills), and finding safe passages
which are not over-crowded. Cutting across these issues is the fact that all
such evacuations involve the simultaneous movement of multiple evacuees. As
such, human social psychological behaviors under stress are of paramount
importance, and there is a critical need to design and conduct social
psychological experiments under controlled circumstances and to formulate
verifiable theories. This research will use immersive virtual reality (VR)
experiments - a sufficiently engaging way of embedding an individual in a
building emergency - with treadmills and physiological assessments to submit to
scientific test hypotheses that are otherwise impossible to test experimentally.
Moreover, we will establish mathematical evacuation models taking into account
the key social psychological features identified in the experiments to predict
how evacuees will behave when evacuating with others. A new generation of
optimization methodology will then be developed to determine how evacuees should
be effectively guided to safe locations in a computationally efficient manner.
Models and methods will be partially validated through simulation, VR
experiments and fire drills. By bringing together a cross-disciplinary team of
engineers, social and perception psychologists, and experts in security issues,
the project will establish well-tested principles about social influences during
evacuation to bear on creating an evacuation program that can determine what is
likely to happen and how to effectively guide evacuees to safety, either exits
or fire refuge areas. The project will also have the broader impact of providing
a unique and fertile context for educating students, professionals and
communities about safe evacuations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, VR
experiments will contain two parts in the research. In the first part,
individual-participant experiments will provide rigorous tests of a number of
ways in which information and social influence processes have been hypothesized
to affect evacuation. In the second part, small group participant experiments
will offer a moderately controlled setting for exploring the conditions under
which certain phenomena will occur when groups of evacuees evacuate, phenomena
that are impossible to examine by a focus on individual participants alone, and
impossible to otherwise watch unfold except in uncontrolled settings such as
actual disasters. Key issues to be examined include hypotheses on information-
based anxiety reduction, familiarity of the environment (or habitual evacuation
tendencies), herding (or pull to affiliate with others), responses to guidance,
and social bond factors. Mathematical evacuation formulations will be
established to capture the essence of social psychological features identified
in VR experiments. A new generation of stochastic mixed-integer optimization
methods will then be developed to optimize guidance in a computationally
efficient manner using our latest Surrogate Lagrangian Relaxation within the
decomposition and coordination framework. Egress routes for individual groups
will be separately optimized, and resulting routes will be coordinated so that
passages and rooms with limited capacities are properly shared to meet the total
needs for joint movement. Simulation, VR experiments and fire drills will then
provide partial validations of models and methods. We expect to be able to see
bottlenecks appearing and dissipating, and to examine how experimental
manipulations affect these and other phenomena. We also expect to be able to
model and predict such phenomena, and develop optimized solutions to alleviate
blocking and other detrimental behaviors for effective evacuation.