* 1463889
* 2015 CSU-LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate at California State University, Los Angeles (Cohort XII)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Margaret Jefferson, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2017
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities" For the
U.S. to remain competitive globally, it must provide exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. California
State University, Los Angeles, one of the 23 California State University
campuses included in The California State University-Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (CSU-LSAMP), will implement a comprehensive BD Program,
which will result in the production of well-trained, highly skilled STEM
professionals from underrepresented groups. Therefore, the project will
contribute significantly to increasing the diversity and representation in
academia and the STEM workforce, thereby increasing the nation's
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the National Science
Foundation, California State University, Los Angeles, will provide a Master's
level "bridge" to doctoral-level study for twelve students who have participated
in the LSAMP undergraduate programs. The Master's-level experience is designed
to increase participant persistence and competencies in STEM and their
advancement to Ph.D. programs following completion of the Master's degree. The
project will increase the number of Ph.D. level scientists by identifying and
developing the talent of students who would be unlikely to pursue graduate-level
study at either the Master's or the doctorate level without the project's
support. In addition to providing substantial financial support to enable
students to focus full-time on a two-year program of Master's-level course work
and research, the BD Program will provide an integrated set of activities
designed to advance BD students toward completion of doctoral level studies.