* 1463689
* Strain-Activated Signaling within Cell Adhesions Dictates Cell Fate
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Adam Engler, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 03/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Just like steel girders hold up buildings, extracellular matrix fibers help hold
tissues together. Cells within tissues act like people in buildings: they adhere
to and crawl on extracellular matrix like people walk on the floors. Unlike
people however, cells also pull against their matrix and can respond to the
stiffness of this adjacent matrix. Normally, stem cells respond simply by
maturing into the cells already present in the tissue. However diseases often
cause these fibers to become stiffer than normal, which makes the stem cells
within these tissues respond inappropriately; cells that typically become muscle
instead mature into bone. While we have made such observations, our
understanding of why this occurs is limited. Thus a systematic examination of
how physical cues like stiffness are converted into biochemical cues that a stem
cell can interpret is greatly needed. One of the ways that cells can sense the
stiffness of the tissues that surround them is through the unfolding of
particular molecules from the forces of cellular contraction. Using computer
analysis of known protein structures, the investigator has identified two strong
candidates for molecules that will unfold and allow the cells to measure force.
Cell chemical pathways identified through this study could be targeted in
genetic therapies to treat diseases that stiffen tissues such as cancer and
heart disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells sense extracellular matrix properties
by contracting against it and converting that information into biochemical
readouts in a process called mechanotransduction. Despite understanding the
inputs and outputs of this process, little is known about mechanically induced
signaling that occurs in between these observations. Stem cells are ideally
suited to elucidate these molecular details because they present a "blank slate"
where maturation into specific tissues can describe the sensitivity of a
physical-to-chemical sensor, i.e. fat cells are less contractile than muscle and
bone cells. This research will combine current molecular tools and engineering
approaches to test whether proteins within a cell adhesion act as a "molecular
strain gauge," i.e. it exposes cryptic kinase binding sites under strain. A
bioinformatics-based screen has identified 3 proteins with cryptic kinase
binding sites, e.g. SORBS1, SORBS3, and vinculin; project objectives will use in
situ fluorescence resonance energy transfer assays to describe cellular strain-
induced conformational changes in these proteins and validate the "molecular
strain gauge" model for signaling. It will also confirm the function of new
mechanosensors, which could be used as therapeutic targets to make stem cells
insensitive to tissue stiffening.