* 1463098
* I-Corps:  CELLDIPS-Cell Discovery Platforms for commercial and educational applications
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2016
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Cells are the basis of our whole bodies, and also communicate with each other.
Therefore, cells contain many lessons about populations, change, and
adaptations. Developing an artificial cell product that gains entrance into the
classrooms of students will benefit their learning and provide expanded choices
of teaching tools. More advance artificial cell platforms may impact applied and
basic research sectors by also providing expanded choices for looking at dynamic
processes. This project aims to commercialize artificial (manufactured) cells
and cell platforms for educational, research, and industry needs. The technology
will include the use of 3D printers to make these artificial cells, since these
printers are becoming increasingly available and cost-effective for construction
purposes. The technology developed in this project will be paired with
educational and visualization software so that the artificial cells will provide
hands-on experiments and testing to students, assisted by the software learning
tools. Due to the complex nature and cost of living cells, this artificial cell
technology is needed to cost-effectively teach students the dynamics of cellular
processes and at the same time let them carry out experiments and test ideas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technological components of this project will utilize
3D printers to make artificial cells that are hollow and structured to allow for
visualization and testing of the dynamic processes of cells in aqueous
environments. Plastics will be the initial materials base, since they can be 3D
printed, but other materials will also be incorporated into the platforms such
as dyes and chemicals that will define the dynamic processes. The artificial
cell kits will also include instructional and experimental software based on
"predator-prey" and other dynamic processes that will guide experimentation and
testing. Constructed artificial cells will be generated initially that are large
enough to be held and visualized with digital cameras without the need of
microscopes. Future generations of artificial cells will include dynamic
processes for more advanced testing to include fluorescence- and microscopy-
based measurements. Ultimately a technology "library" of artificial cells and
cell components is envisioned for learning and research tools.