* 1463411
* Electric Field Guided Micro Additive Manufacturing Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Jian Cao, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Products with micron- and sub-micron-sized features find widespread applications
in the electronic, biomedical, aeronautics, and energy industries for enhanced
efficiency and functionality, yet existing techniques are limited in their
ability to generate complex structures with the required features. The goal of
this project is to enable a new micro-additive manufacturing process in which an
electric field guides the deposition of particles into three-dimensional
structures. The process is characterized by micron-level resolution, wide
material selection, and superior processing time. The scientific findings of
this work can also potentially contribute to overcoming challenges related to
contact handling of micro-components and offer a new tool for contactless micro-
assembly. This interdisciplinary research will promote the training of new
generations of engineers and scientists with broad and deep knowledge in modern
micro-manufacturing science and technology, which will have derivative effects
on the US economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach is based on the
use of electrophoretic deposition in which an externally applied electric field
governs the movement, agglomeration, and deposition of dispersed particles in a
solvent, without requiring expensive and complex tooling and processing
equipment. This research will provide the knowledge needed to establish the new
micro additive manufacturing technology by completing the following tasks:
creating reliable models for force field control of particle trajectories in a
dielectrophoretic deposition process with arrays of micro electrodes;
understanding the underlying physics behind the guided self-assembly of the
particles in the deposition phase of the dielectrophoretic deposition;
establishing a numerical model to characterize the influence of the electric
field on the already deposited structure's stability; and verifying the
developed model on a laboratory-scale prototyping system. The control of the
force field will be based on an extended effective field method that is based on
the modified Nernst-Planck equations to account for particle and particle charge
concentration. Particle adhesion to the substrate surface and consecutive self-
organization mechanics will be modeled as an electric charge redistribution and
energy minimization problem, respectively. A streamlined numerical model for
structural stability of the particle layer during new layer deposition will be
implemented to characterize the deposited layer as a new deposition surface. The
numerical models will facilitate the optimization of the electrode geometry and
electrode array topology with respect to process accuracy, repeatability of the
builds, and electrode durability.