* 1464440
* Workshop:  Community Integrated Environmental Models  Location:  University of California at Davis     Date:      Early 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Jay Lund, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 01/31/2016
* USD 49,949.00

1464440&lt;br/&gt;Medellin-Azuara&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop: Community
Integrated Environmental Models &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a persistent
schism between scientific understanding and implications for management and
policy in the California Bay-Delta. Advanced and progressing water supply and
ecosystem models are typically siloed among various government, consultant, and
university groups. Outputs are often narrowly framed, with little context and
recognition of linkages to other processes. Model skill and sensitivity is
seldom explored and uncertainty is not characterized in ways that decision
makers can understand or react to. Open source repositories and integrated
ecological and water supply modeling systems promise not only to link water
system component models, but also foster deeper community collaboration and
insights meeting common goals. Component model frameworks knit disparate members
of the community together by improving communication between experts as insights
and data are shared. An emphasis is placed in enabling Early Career researchers
and modelers to participate in the development of the White Paper under the
tutelage of senior mentors. This is important as young researchers will build
their career around the framework and any future research center dedicated to
this initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium's objective is to produce
strategies for open-source community data, shared model repositories, and
interoperable component modeling systems for complex water system analysis and
decision support. The symposium will produce a white paper to guide the future
of integrated modeling for the California Bay-Delta system with relevance to the
wider international modeling community. The paper will be published in the
Journal of San Francisco Estuary and Watershed Science, an open-access peer
reviewed journal. The symposium will host plenary comments from international
leaders in integrated environmental modeling to educate and invigorate
discussion. It will convene multiple group discussions on key topics like open
source model repositories, component modeling systems, decision support systems
for managers and decision makers, and effective institutional arrangements. The
science community working on California Bay-Delta watershed issues has developed
advanced statistical and deterministic tools for understanding physical,
chemical, and biological processes. Yet the complexity of the system, and the
societal desire to expand water supply while protecting the environment, demands
strengthened connections between disparate process models for more integrative
insights. Products from the symposium will directly inform and support new and
more effective ways to use data and models for managing ecosystem restoration
and water supply system operations.