* 1464829
* The International Symposium on Gas Transfer at Water Surfaces
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Andrew Jessup, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/29/2016
* USD 19,550.00

The International Symposium on Gas Transfer at Water Surfaces has occurred
roughly every five years since 1983 and is organized and hosted on a voluntary
basis by members of the community. The Symposium objectives to understand,
quantify, and parameterize the mixing and biogeochemical processes governing
air-sea gas exchange are central to the investigation of ocean fluxes of
greenhouse gases. Although the role of the global ocean as a major sink of
anthropogenic carbon dioxide is well established, the impact of global warming
on the mechanisms that drive air-sea gas exchange is a major source of
uncertainty. Thus it is essential to improve our understanding of the physical
and biogeochemical mechanisms responsible for carbon uptake and their
sensitivity to changing environmental conditions. The opportunity for the
community to exchange recent research results will advance our knowledge of air-
water gas exchange. This award provides travel support for students,
postdoctoral fellows, and early career scientists to attend the 7th
International Symposium on Gas Transfer at Water Surfaces in Seattle, WA on
18-21 May 2015. Attendance by students, postdocs, and early career scientists
will provide a valuable opportunity to meet and interact with a wide range of
leading scientists in the gas transfer community. The community itself will also
benefit by the opportunity to engage and entrain the next generation of
scientists. An on-line open access service that specializes in conference
proceedings will be used to provide a wide and timely distribution of the
reported research.

The Symposium periodically brings together the international scientific and
engineering community investigating the mechanisms, parameterizations, and
implications of gas transfer at water surfaces. The focus is on the physical and
biogeochemical processes that govern gas flux, which include turbulence due to
wind, wave breaking, and currents and the effect of natural and anthropogenic
surfactants. These are the same mechanisms that govern the flux of heat and
momentum and thus the conference is attended by many in the community studying a
wide range of air- and water-side mixing processes that occur at or near the
ocean surface. The topics covered by the Symposium encompass field, laboratory,
and modeling investigations of the physics governing air-water transfer,
development and testing of parameterizations for use in global climate models,
and mapping and assessment of the global distribution of air-sea Carbon Dioxide
fluxes. In addition to these core topics, the 2015 Symposium will include the
topics of ocean acidification due to increased Carbon Dioxide uptake and the
impact of reducing sea-ice extent on gas transfer in Polar Regions.
Presentations by researchers from the geosciences (oceanography, atmospheric
sciences, hydrology), engineering disciplines (civil, mechanical, chemical,
environmental), and the basic sciences related to all aspects of transport to,
and transfer across, gas-water boundaries will be included.