* 1464957
* Spectroscopic Probes of Molecular Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Patrick Vaccaro, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Peebles
* 06/30/2021
* USD 558,174.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Patrick Vaccaro of
Yale University to investigate subtle effects in the way molecules interact with
light and with other molecules. One of the two thrusts in the work supported by
this award looks at the way light interacts with molecules with "handedness" --
for example, many molecules, especially biologically important molecules have
non-superimposable mirror images, which is one kind of "handedness." The
spectroscopic methods being developed in the Vaccaro laboratory aim to
discriminate between different handed isomers of these molecules, as well as
providing accurate benchmarks for theorists interested in modelling this
phenomena. In the other thrust, the work will look at weakly interacting
molecules in order to improve our understanding of the very subtle forces that
molecules feel for each other. Professor Vaccaro's research students will be
trained in optical and vacuum science as well as instrument design and
construction. In an outreach project supported by this award, Professor Vaccaro
and his students will work with students and teachers in the New Haven Public
Schools. The Vaccaro research group is diverse, and has historically had a large
number of female scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Patrick Vaccaro and
his research group will study an interesting set of spectroscopic systems. In
one set of experiments, Vaccaro and his group will extend their past work on the
chiroptical spectroscopy of isolated molecules in the gas phase. In the next
phase of this work, the Vaccaro group will use cavity ringdown polarimetry to
probe the electronic circular dichroism and electronic circular dichroism of
some fairly complex chiral molecules in the gas phase, including molecules like
(R) - norbornenone and the very weakly optically active species
cyclopropane-1,2-d2. This work benefits from the collaboration with a number of
prominent theoretical groups. New chiroptical investigations will look at chiral
solutes dissolved in a rare-gas matrix. These later studies hope to investigate
the changes in chiroptical response for molecules in weakly perturbing solvents.
In a separate thrust, the Vaccaro group will investigate the weak interactions
between aromatic molecules by studying benzene-tropolone dimers with a variety
of spectroscopic methods, including two-color resonant four-wave mixing
spectroscopy.