* 1464852
* SusCHEM: New Redox-Active Pincer Ligands for Sustainable Base Metal Cross Coupling Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Jake Soper, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2018
* USD 286,270.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
funding Professor Jake Soper of the Georgia Institute of Technology to develop
new sustainable, inexpensive and environmentally benign catalysts for the
formation of carbon-carbon bonds. Selective carbon-carbon bond forming reactions
are important for the synthesis of pharmaceuticals, specialty and commodity
chemicals, materials, and fuels. Most state-of-the-art catalysts for carbon-
carbon bond forming reactions are based on expensive and rare precious metals,
such as palladium, platinum and iridium, and routes to carbon-carbon bonds often
require toxic or expensive precursor molecules. This project is addressing both
of these issues by developing catalysts based on more abundant and benign
metals, such as iron, cobalt, and nickel. To accomplish this goal, Professor
Soper's team is developing new ligands, to bind the base metal centers and
impart the desired reactivity. The research team includes high school students,
undergraduate students, graduate students, and high school chemistry teachers.
In addition, an educational outreach program is developing a series of online
education modules with accompanying demonstrations, experiments and in-class
discussions for Atlanta AP chemistry classrooms.

Redox-active ligands can bring about precious metal-like organometallic
reactions at later 3d transition metals. With this award, Professor Soper is
preparing new pincer-type redox-active ligands that harness these ligand-
mediated redox steps for functional base metal cross coupling catalysis. Target
reactions include cobalt-catalyzed cross coupling of alkyl ether electrophiles
and iron, cobalt and nickel-catalyzed aerobic dehydrogenative carbon-carbon
cross coupling via direct carbon-hydrogen activation. All of these coupling
reactions address issues of sustainability by replacing palladium with base
metal catalysts that are inexpensive and environmentally benign, as well as
replacing halogen-containing stoichiometric oxidants and pre-functionalized
substrates with dioxygen and carbon-hydrogen bonds, respectively.