* 1464828
* Electronic Structure Methods for Small-Gap Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Filipp Furche, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2018
* USD 493,362.00

Filipp Furche of the University of California, Irvine is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program (Division of
Chemistry), the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program (Division of
Materials Research) and the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering Program (CDS&amp;E) to develop, implement, test, and apply
computational methods that deliver predictive accuracy for an important class of
molecular systems that are very difficult to characterize either by experiment
or by current computational approaches. These systems, known as small band-gap
systems, have a small energy gap between the highest occupied molecular orbital
(HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). Molecules and ions
containing transition metals such as iron or platinum or the even heavier
lanthanides and actinides can fall into this category. The rational design of
catalysts crucially relies on our ability to model such molecules. However,
accurate simulations of small-gap systems with more than a few atoms have been
very elusive. The methods and computer programs developed by Furche and his
research group enable simulations of chemical structures, processes, and
materials of fundamental and technological importance. The methods developed in
this project are made available to the public through the Turbomole quantum
chemistry software. This project also involves undergraduate curriculum
development at UC Irvine and an outreach program for high school students in
disadvantaged neighborhoods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work in the Furche
group has established that random phase approximation (RPA)-Renormalized many-
body perturbation theory is capable of systematically improving semi-local DFT
results for small-gap systems. The proposed project builds on these results and
aims to transform the way computational and experimental chemists and materials
scientists approach small-gap molecules by developing an armamentarium of robust
and widely applicable computational tools. A frequency-dependent RPA
renormalized Bethe-Salpeter kernel is proposed to boost the accuracy of RPA-type
methods. Electronically excited states and frequency-dependent response
properties are accessed via time-dependent response theory. Algorithmic
developments aim to further reduce the cost of RPA and beyond-RPA calculations
and extend their scope to systems with hundreds of atoms.