* 1464596
* Studies of the Activation and Functionalization of Hydrocarbons at Multinuclear Metal Sites in Transition Metal-Gold Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Richard Adams, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 02/28/2019
* USD 460,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Richard D. Adams of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at the University of South Carolina is developing new methods for
the synthesis of bimetallic transition metal cluster complexes containing gold
to be used to create new catalysts for the transformations and reforming of
hydrocarbons. Simple hydrocarbons such as methane and ethane are now available
from today's abundant supplies of natural gas. There is a great need to develop
catalysts to transform these resources efficiently into higher value commodity
chemicals. Studies will be focused on the development of new catalysts for
selective oxidation reactions that will convert simple hydrocarbons into
oxygenated compounds, such as alcohols and carboxylic acids, via
environmentally-friendly chemical processes. Precious metal elements, such as
ruthenium, rhodium, rhenium, iridium, and platinum will be studied because of
their well-known ability to activate the CH bonds of hydrocarbons. Gold will be
chemically incorporated into the new catalysts because of its recently
discovered ability to active oxygen and transfer it to carbon atoms. Broader
impacts include the development of new processes for the conversion of natural
gas and related resources into valuable chemicals for use as additives to
produce higher octane fuels and for feedstocks for the synthesis of new polymers
and materials. Graduate and undergraduate students are trained in the latest
methods of scientific inquiry and analysis as preparation for careers in
academia or the chemical industry.

Hydrocarbyl containing gold-transtion metal clusters are prepared by the
reaction of organogold compounds with metal carbonyl cluster complexes of the
precious transition metals. These heterometallic cluster complexes are converted
into bi- and multimetallic nanoparticles for use as nanocatalysts for the
selective oxidation of hydrocarbons. The controlled addition of oxygen to the
carbon atoms is central understanding the nature of metal-catalyzed selective
oxidation reactions. Mechanistic studies are carried out and focus on
understanding the nature of transformations of the CH bonds of the hydrocarbon
by complexes containing two or more metal atoms. These studies include
investigations of the formation of C - O bonds. The complexes and catalysts are
studied by X-ray diffraction and high resolution transmission electron
microscopy.