* 1464157
* CRII: SHF: Optimizing Program Executions on Non-uniform Threaded Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Xu Liu, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 02/28/2018
* USD 174,973.00

Modern computer systems employ multiple threads to exploit multiple cores with
multiple functional units. High thread-level parallelism arises from having
multiple threads per core (simultaneous or fine-grained multithreading, SMT),
multiple cores per processor (chip multithreaded processor, CMP), and multiple
processors per node (non-uniform memory access, NUMA). Threads share different
levels of hardware resources depending on where they execute. An architecture
with hybrid SMT, CMP and NUMA threads is a non-uniform threaded architecture.
Most multi-socket systems today are of this form. Due to the thread abstraction
in operating systems and programming models, software developers often treat all
threads in the system as symmetric, ignoring their non-uniformity in hardware.
As a result, multithreaded code running on non-uniform threaded architectures
performs at a level far below the theoretical peak, which can degrade
productivity and increase energy consumption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
focus of this project is to investigate both static and dynamic software methods
to exploit non-uniformity between hardware threads. For the static optimization,
the PI aims to introduce thread non-uniformity in software via code
transformations. This will also include improving existing applications by
identifying opportunities in application source code to apply such
transformations. For the dynamic optimization, the PI plans to study online
scheduling methods to match non-uniform threads in software and hardware. Given
an executable, it will be analyzed online to characterize resource sharing
between its threads and appropriate scheduling strategies will be applied for
both threads and data. This project will tightly integrate static and dynamic
optimization methods for programs running on non-uniform threaded architectures.
This research can dramatically improve the performance of large-scale
multithreaded applications running on today?s and emerging parallel
architectures. More broadly, this project will have a strong impact in designing
performance tools and parallel programming frameworks for non-uniform threads.
It will likely attract broad interest from industry and academia. An important
part of this project is its integration with teaching undergraduate and graduate
courses as well as student mentoring.