* 1464924
* Integrated studies of nanodroplet freezing
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Barbara Wyslouzil, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Peebles
* 08/31/2020
* USD 475,025.00

With this award,the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A) Program
of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Barbara Wyslouzil at Ohio
State University to pursue an integrated experimental and molecular modeling
program exploring the physics of freezing. This includes determining the limits
to which liquids can be supercooled, the transformation kinetics, and the
structure of the emerging solid phase. The focus is on short chain-like
molecules, i.e. n-alkanes and n-alcohols with less than 12 carbons, confined in
nanodroplets. These chain molecules are the building blocks of materials as
diverse as lipids, surfactants, and polymers. Freezing is a fundamental physical
process that plays a central role in both industry and nature, such as in
atmospheric aerosols. The freezing transitions will be quantitatively
investigated with extremely well characterized samples under conditions that are
far from equilibrium, and a powerful set of experimental tools probes conditions
very close to the still idealized requirements of molecular simulations. Prof.
Wyslouzil will also engage with high school students in her research and conduct
public outreach in collaboration with the Steam Factory, an initiative at her
institution to promote interdisciplinary collaboration across Science,
Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Wyslouzil
and her research group will pursue the following specific experimental
objectives: (1) measure liquid to solid nucleation rates as nanodroplets freeze,
(2) explore the role of molecular structure on the relative importance of
surface versus bulk freezing, and (3) further develop X-ray scattering
techniques to follow this transformation directly. The objectives of the
molecular modeling work are to (1) understand the driving force for surface
freezing in chain-like molecules, and (2) calculate liquid-solid nucleation
rates to compare directly to the measured values. Supersonic nozzle flows are to
generate liquid droplets in highly non-equilibrium states with static pressure
measurements to characterize the flow, spatially resolved small and wide angle
X-ray scattering (SAXS/WAXS) to characterize the aerosol, and infrared
spectroscopy to quantify the distribution of the condensable fraction among the
vapor, liquid and solid states. Efforts to develop single
nanodroplet/nanocrystal X-ray diffraction measurements to measure the structure
of freezing clusters on a particle-by-particle basis using free electron lasers
are to be extended. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are to directly test
competing theories of surface freezing, and develop molecular level insight into
homogeneous liquid-solid nucleation using available interaction potentials for
both n-alcohols and n-alkanes at the united atom or all-atom level.