* 1464862
* Compact wave function methods for chemical systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Alan Aspuru-Guzik, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2019
* USD 472,296.00

With this award, the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Chemistry Division is supporting Dr. Alan Aspuru-Guzik of Harvard
University to develop an efficient and accurate method to study the electronic
structure of molecules and solids that are difficult to study by existing
approaches. The Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering programs
in Chemistry and Physics, as well the CISE/ACI CIF21 Venture Fund for Software
Reuse will contribute to the award. The exact quantum mechanical description of
the electronic structure of atoms, molecules and solids is computationally
intractable. Accurate computational descriptions that can be carried out with
current computers for systems of practically relevant sizes remains a challenge.
If available, accurate descriptions promise a transformative acceleration in the
cycle of materials design. The proposed work advances a new idea for the compact
representation of the wave functions of atoms, molecules and materials by
borrowing ideas of the field of signal processing. The Aspuru-Guzik group is
working to optimize the computer code, and then to release it both as open
source and incorporated in popular quantum chemistry computer packages. The
ideas and software developed in this project will be incorporated into a massive
open online course (MOOC), entitled " The Quantum World", that Aspuru-Guzik is
developing under the HarvardX platform.

A technique borrowed from the field of signal processing, matching pursuit, is
combined with a non-orthogonal orbital expansion. Preliminary results show that
the method is competitive with the state-of-the-art methods but still requires
considerable software development and theoretical extension. The main objective
of the current project is to advance the proposed method, namely the non-
orthogonal multicomponent adaptive greedy iterative compression (NOMAGIC).
NOMAGIC already has shown excellent wave function compression of the order of
tens of determinants for obtaining chemically accurate solutions. Aspuru-Guzik
and coworkers are developing the NOMAGIC method as a black box method to be
incorporated with several electronic structure packages. The researchers are
developing methods for excited state simulation as well as to extend the ansatz
considered by the approach to tensor networks.