* 1464774
* SusChEM: Magnesium-catalyzed hydrosilylation and hydroboration for efficient carbon-silicon and carbon-boron bond formation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Aaron Sadow, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 559,994.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Aaron Sadow of Iowa State University is developing new
catalytic reactions to construct complex systems. The products of these
reactions are reagents commonly used as synthetic intermediates for materials
and fine chemical technologies. Current processes to create important synthetic
intermediates often generate significant quantities of waste or employ expensive
metals. The catalysts being studied in this project are instead based on
abundant magnesium, calcium or zinc compounds. This chemistry should yield
catalytic processes with greater efficiency, reduced demand for precious metals,
and diversified synthetic routes to important compounds. Professor Sadow is also
studying the reaction mechanisms and the factors that control the chemistry of
the catalytic reactions, which will help to optimize the outcomes of the
catalysis and to add to fundamental knowledge of the chemistry. Additionally,
outreach activities are being pursued to disseminate information on chemical
sustainability to public audiences through university and public seminar series.
Graduate and undergraduate students are receiving broad training in chemical
synthesis, characterization, mechanistic study, and molecular design, which are
important for success in any scientific problem-solving endeavor related to
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Sadow is studying the catalytic
conversion of oxygen-containing organic molecules. Early transition-metal
alkoxides do not readily transfer to weak electrophiles such as silanes due to
limiting factors of the strong, polar metal-oxygen bonds in these compounds. The
transfer of alkyl groups from main group metal compounds, such as Grignard
reagents, is well established and useful in synthetic chemistry for silicon-
carbon and boron-carbon bond formations. Instead, the limitations on magnesium-
carbon bond formations hinder the application of facile alkyl group transfer
reactions in catalytic transformations that employ main group metal catalysts.
Professor Sadow is studying group transfer reactions centered on magnesium and
calcium, along with related oxophilic metal centers. These studies are being
accomplished through the development of early-metal catalytic sites and reagents
to efficiently and selectively transform oxygenates as well as through kinetic
studies of organoelement bond formations involving group transfer from oxophilic
main group metal centers. The work involves the synthesis of main group metal
complexes with ligand environments that labilize strong metal-element bonds and
while stabilizing reactive intermediates.