* 1464966
* Collaborative Research: Intrinsic Gas-phase Properties of Amino Acids and Peptides: Thermochemistry, Fragmentation Mechanisms, H/D exchange and IRMPD Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jennifer Poutsma, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2018
* USD 30,042.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms program is
supporting the Collaborative research of Professor John C. Poutsma at the
College of William and Mary and Professor Jennifer Poutsma at Old Dominion
University. Professor John Poutsma employs mass spectrometry-based experiments
to study the subtle interplay between the structure of amino acids and their
gas-phase energetic properties. He is studying a class of compounds known as
non-protein amino acids (NPAA), which are found naturally in plants and fungi,
but are not used in protein synthesis. Many NPAAs are toxic to humans and other
animals in part due to structural similarity to one or more of the twenty common
protein amino acids (PAA). NPAAs can compete with PAAs in a variety of
biological pathways including being mis-incorporated into proteins and peptides.
These experiments will further understanding of the intrinsic chemistry of NPAAs
as isolated entities and when incorporated into small peptides. Professor
Jennifer Poutsma is performing density functional theory calculations that
support and guide the experimental studies. Both research programs integrate
research and educational components through the training of undergraduate
researchers. The vast majority of the research projects outlined in this
proposal are being performed by undergraduates at William and Mary and Old
Dominion University. Performing independent research helps to teach these
students not only the joy of discovery but also how to handle and work though
the inevitable failures that accompany real-world science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the intrinsic gas-phase thermochemical
properties of di-peptides are being determined using the extended kinetic method
in a triple quadrupole instrument. Specifically, the PIs are studying the gas-
phase acid-base chemistry of dipeptides that contain proline or one of its non-
protein amino acid analogs azetidine-2-carboxylic acid or pipecolic acid. Thar
are working to determine the effects of ring-size and conformational flexibility
on the acid-base properties of these species with the goal of applying this
knowledge towards a better understanding the mechanisms for selective
fragmentations in low-energy tandem mass spectrometry experiments of proline-
containing peptides.