* 1464641
* Collaborative Research:  Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Next Generation Nanomaterial and Device Engineering (NGeNE)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Pamela Norris, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2017
* USD 16,239.00

The mission of the proposed Next Generation Nanomaterial and Device Engineering
(NGeNE) center is to develop a science, engineering, and technology base for the
rational design of next generation computers, starting from their underlying
material embodiments and fundamental physical principles. To build a chip for
information &lt;br/&gt;processing, we must explore nanoscale logic and memory,
photonics for high speed on-chip communication and thermal engineering to handle
energy dissipation in 3D. The NGeNE center will address all these components,
along with computational modeling, scientific training and education.
&lt;br/&gt;Various industrial sectors such as the semiconductor chip industry,
optoelectronics, mobile and wireless technology, energy, photonics, chemical,
biological and packaging industry, as well as the civilian and defense
infrastructure, healthcare and the energy sector will directly benefit from this
effort. The goal of the center will be to (a) form a critical University
Industry Government nexus on emerging nanotechnology, (b) carry out industry
relevant research using state of the art modeling, simulation, growth,
characterization, fabrication and integration of &lt;br/&gt;emerging
nanomaterials and devices, (c) provide a competitive edge to industry and
national labs by leveraging the multi-university intellectual resources for cost
effective innovative solutions to their current problems, and (d) develop
supporting curricula, create databases and train students and industry
affiliates with the tools and knowledge infrastructure to meet their future work
force requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed center for Next Generation
Nanomaterial and Device Engineering (NGeNE) aims to form a University-Industry-
Government (UIG) nexus towards the design and engineering of next generation
nanomaterials and devices &lt;br/&gt;with an emphasis on post-CMOS computing.
This will rest on four pillars: Nanoelectronics and NanoMagnetism for Logic and
Memory (Computation), Thermal for power management, and Photonics for on chip
communication. The research thrusts span a large phase space from novel
switching schemes to non-Boolean logic, beyond silicon to advanced magnetic,
thermal and photonic materials. They combine physical models with computational
software, compact models and architecture, heterogeneous growth and integration,
nanofabrication, characterization, testing and reliability. The goal of the
center will be to (a) form a critical University Industry Government nexus on
emerging nanotechnology, (b) carry out industry relevant research using state of
the art modeling, simulation, growth, characterization, fabrication and
integration of emerging nanomaterials and devices, (c) provide a competitive
edge to industry and national labs by leveraging the multi-university
intellectual resources for cost effective innovative solutions to their current
problems, and (d) develop supporting curricula, create databases and train
students and industry affiliates with the tools and knowledge infrastructure to
meet their future work force requirements.