* 1464417
* Attosecond Time-Resolved Quantum Dynamics: From Atoms Towards Nanostructures
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Uwe Thumm, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 05/31/2020
* USD 270,000.00

Over the past decade, extraordinary advances in the field of time-resolved
photoelectron spectroscopy have enabled investigations of simple atoms with an
unprecedented time resolution of the electron motion within the atoms,
resolution that approaches one attosecond (one attosecond is a billionth of a
billionth of a second). This project extends these investigations to more
complex targets, such as adsorbate-covered solid surfaces and nanoparticles.
These investigations of the dynamics of electron emission from atoms and complex
target at the natural time scale of the electronic motion in matter relates to
both established and emerging fields of research and technology. Time-resolved
studies of the electronic dynamics in matter will promote the comprehensive
understanding of i) elementary physical processes, such as single-electron and
collective electronic excitations and ii) the dynamics of electrons and electric
fields in metals, semiconductors, and catalytic surfaces, (bio-) molecules, and
nanoparticles. These research projects are thus likely to deepen our insight
into photochemical processes and chemical reaction dynamics at surfaces. They
have a strong educational component by training students and postdocs in
applying concepts as well as mathematical and numerical techniques used in
modern atomic, optical, surface, and computational physics. Our research efforts
may have a transformative impact on emerging technologies, such as ultrafast
light-wave computing, nanocatalysis, and artificial photosynthesis, thereby
contributing to the development of novel ultrafast computers and efficient
catalytic devices needed to secure our energy
supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attosecond streaking spectroscopy has led to
impressive time-resolved studies of atomic ionization and is anticipated to
significantly advance our understanding of electronic properties of molecules,
layered--semiconductor structures, and nanoparticles. However, the detailed
physical interpretation of streaked spectra faces significant conceptual
challenges and necessitates comprehensive theoretical investigations, even for
simple atomic systems. For complex systems, additional severe technical
difficulties in describing the transiently photoexcited electronic dynamics in
molecules and solids must be overcome. This research addresses these challenges
and focuses on the modeling of time-resolved photoemission from atoms,
adsorbate-covered metal surfaces, and nanoparticles. It examines streaked
photoemission spectra in order to systematically analyze the role of (i)
electronic correlation, (ii) electron propagation, and (iii) collective
electronic excitation and relaxation effects during and after the photoemission
process. We will develop and apply complementary quantum--mechanical methods:
exact numerical solutions of the time--dependent Schr√∂dinger equation and
physically more transparent analytical (S--matrix) quantum-mechanical methods.
Effective potentials for surfaces and nanoparticles will be modeled based on
density-functional theory. They will serve as input for full three--dimensional
calculations of the electronic dynamics during the interaction of intense IR and
XUV light pulses with matter. New numerical methods will be explored and
implemented, allowing for the modeling of increasingly complex samples.
Furthermore, we will assess the degree to which streaked photoelectron
spectroscopy can reveal information on (a) electronic forces and dynamics in
solids and at solid interfaces and (b) non?homogenous nanoplasmonic electric--
field enhancements in response to an incident IR streaking pulse. Supported by
numerical modeling, attosecond time-resolved measurements promise novel methods
to prepare, probe, and control electronic excitations and the formation and
breaking of chemical bonds in complex systems.