* 1464654
* Collaborative Research:  I/UCRC Phase II:  Security and Software Engineering Research Center (S2ERC)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2022
* Shaoen Wu, Ball State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,609,108.00

The Security and Software Engineering Research Center (S2ERC) is an
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center devoted to applied and basic
research addressing security and software engineering issues that plague both
industrial (defense and commercial) companies and government agencies. Nearly
all companies market products and services that involve software. The software
is either a commercial product or a supporting technology for other products or
services. Advances in software engineering are critical to the technical
dominance and market performance not only of IT companies, but also of producers
of products such as aircraft and their components, automobiles, medical devices,
sensors, computer-aided diagnostics and robotics. Software developers and
customers desire software that costs less, matches users needs, is secure, has
credible defenses and fewer defects, executes faster, is easier to update and is
completed on time. With societies growing dependence on software, it is
important that software engineers build secure software cost-effectively and
reliably. The investment in S2ERC has the potential to produce significant
results given the expertise at the university sites, the many technical
affiliate partners, and the importance of software to our national security and
competitiveness. S2ERC researchers are focused on discovering unique solutions
for security and software engineering issues which in turn benefits the whole of
society as technology is properly constructed and
managed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The S2ERC's technical goals are the creation and
transfer of innovative software technologies and engineering skills to its
affiliates and the training of both graduate and undergraduate students in
promising research directions. The S2ERC research initiatives include intrusion
detection, ad-hoc network security, wireless security, attack-tolerant systems,
trustworthiness in cloud and mobile applications, security and vulnerability
analyses, information protection, requirements capturing, software design,
software metrics, software feature analysis, software testing, software
reliability, user interface design, usability issues, global software
development, migrating software to multi-core architectures, visualization
environments, interactive collaborative environments, dynamic and static
analyses, and testing and model checking for concurrent programs. As S2ERC
partners with industry and federal agencies, it is expected that security and
software engineering research will continue to integrate into broader programs
and activities of national interest.