* 1464454
* Travel Support for "Polymeric Biomaterials" Symposium at the 249th American Chemical Society (ACS) National Meeting
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Melissa Grunlan, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 03/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

This conference award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials
Research to University of Delaware is in support of a symposium titled
"Polymeric Biomaterials" to be held in March 22-26, 2015 at the American
Chemical Society Meeting in Denver, Colorado. This symposium would provide
opportunity to bring together scientists working in design, synthesis,
modification and characterization of polymeric biomaterials, and share their
recent ideas and approaches in gaining insights into this multidisciplinary
area. The participants of the symposium are expected to include leading
scientists in the field, in addition to junior faculty members, postdoctoral
fellows and graduate students. Furthermore, the size, structure and format of
the conference would facilitate networking and developing future
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium will cover recent advances
in the design, synthesis, modification, and characterization of polymeric
biomaterials that have the potential to improve human health and welfare. New
synthetic strategies and characterization tools to prepare novel biopolymer
systems that permit control of the biological interaction and response of these
biomaterials will be presented at this meeting. The current dilemma in the field
of polymeric biomaterials is that sophisticated chemical synthesis and
fabrication processes, although scientifically intriguing, do not necessarily
result in biomaterials with the desired stability and functional properties such
as interaction with and viability of cells. The objectives of the symposium are:
1) to highlight recent advances in the design, synthesis and application of
tailored polymeric materials for health and medicine; 2) to provide a platform
for polymer scientists, materials scientists, and biologists to establish
connections and exchange ideas; and 3) to facilitate opportunities for junior
faculty, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate as well as undergraduate students to
present their most recently updated research results. The proposed symposium is
expected to stimulate the development of novel biomaterials with enhanced
functional properties and applications.