* 1464701
* Experimental Studies Into Chiral Induced Spin Selectivity
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2018
* David Waldeck, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2018
* USD 439,099.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor David H. Waldeck of the Department
of Chemistry at the University Pittsburgh will explore how electrons have their
magnetic dipoles aligned with respect to the direction of their velocity by very
thin films of material (either metal oxides or polypeptides). The goal of this
research is to understand how the helical structure of molecules affects the
direction of an electron's magnetic moment and to examine whether those
characteristics can be incorporated in thin metal oxide films for creating
electron currents that have a preferred direction for the spin magnetic moments.
The alignment of electron magnetic moments and their manipulation in circuits
could have important implications for the design and creation of new types of
information memory devices. The project lies at the interface of materials
chemistry and physical chemistry, and it is well suited to the education of
scientists at all levels. Outreach activities to Pittsburgh area schools (middle
school and high school) through a Science Kit Lending Library will also be part
of the funded project. The collaboration with a German group and an Israeli
group will provide a beneficial international experience for the student
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent experiments (and theory) show that as
electrons move through a chiral molecule (or structure) they generate an
effective magnetic field which acts to align the electrons' magnetic moment to
the propagation direction. The proposed experimental studies aim to elucidate
how structural features of chiral thin films affect the degree of spin
alignment. In one thrust of the work, monolayer thick films of helical molecules
will be examined to see how the spin alignment is affected by the helix
structure (pitch, length, etc.). In a second thrust of the work, the focus is on
how the spin alignment for electrons transmitted by ultrathin chiral films of
metal oxides depends on the metal oxides energy band location and the film's
thickness. These latter studies could have important implications for the design
of new electronic devices, such as spin-torque memories. These studies are
designed to identify the important features that will need to be incorporated to
achieve a quantitatively accurate theoretical model of the chiral induced spin
selectivity effect.