* 1464171
* Study on singlet oxygen-mediated oxidation mechanism, dynamics and consequences of the guanine base of DNA using gas- and solution-phase techniques and dynamics simulations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jianbo Liu, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 392,820.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Jianbo Liu of CUNY
Queens College to study the reaction of an excited form of oxygen with the
guanine base of DNA. Oxygen damage to guanine is a key chemical step with
biological consequences that range from photocleavage, mutagenesis and
carcinogenesis to cellular lethality. Specifically, the oxidation products are
involved in the basic chemistry of neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's
and Parkinson's diseases. This project will investigate the oxidation mechanisms
in different environments, and will determine the consequences of guanine
oxidative modifications on base pairing and DNA-protein cross-links. The project
also has a strong educational component, bringing undergraduate and graduate
students into the research laboratory. This is expected to help broaden
participation as Queens College serves a large number (40%) of first generation
college students; about half of these are of minority background.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses electrospray mass spectrometry (ESI-MS)
and guided-ion-beam scattering to probe the singlet oxygen oxidation of guanine
and its derivatives in the gas phase. Reaction cross sections are measured as a
function of collision energy for protonated/deprotonated guanine ions and for
guanine ions clustering with water. Following the gas-phase experiments, the
same systems are to be investigated in aqueous solutions using on-line
spectroscopy and ESI-MS/MS. The other major experimental thrust is to study the
consequences of guanine oxidation on its base pairing with cytosine and on
cross-linking reactions with lysine. These experiments are complemented by
electronic structure calculations of reaction coordinates, RRKM modeling of
complex mediated pathways, and trajectory simulations of dynamics behaviors.
These studies are directed at exploring and elucidating the mechanism of these
singlet oxygen reactions.