* 1464898
* Total Synthesis of Complex Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Neil Garg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 05/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis program is supporting fundamental
research of Professor Garg at the University of California, Los Angeles.
Professor Garg will pursue the chemical synthesis of several naturally occurring
small molecules that possess challenging chemical structures and promising
biological activities. The ability of scientists to build molecules with
increased complexities, in a controlled and efficient manner, plays an important
role across all of the fields that are impacted by chemical synthesis, such as
drug discovery, agrochemistry, and materials science. Professor Garg will also
continue his ongoing efforts to promote science to young people and the general
public. This will be performed primarily through outreach activities and through
initiatives that are intended to challenge existing paradigms in undergraduate
education.

The research involves an important class of indole alkaloids called the
akuammilines. Over 30 molecules in this family have been isolated during the
past century, all of which possess intricate chemical structures. However,
relatively little progress has been made in the area of akuammiline alkaloid
synthesis to date, especially in comparison to structural relatives such as the
well-studied strychnos alkaloids. Professor Garg aims to establish a unified
synthetic approach that will provide access to various structural subclasses of
the akuammilines in an asymmetric fashion. In addition to delivering several
akuammilines that have not been accessed previously, the proposed efforts will
allow Garg's laboratory to probe the intricacies and complexities of late-stage
transformations and establish the scope and limitations of synthetic
methodologies, such as interrupted Fischer indolization reactions.