* 1464569
* Altering the Course of Quantum Dynamics Phenomena
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Herschel Rabitz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2018
* USD 549,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
Program in the Chemistry Division is supporting Professor Hershel Rabitz of
Princeton University to conduct theoretical studies on the control of quantum
dynamics in molecules. This award is cofunded by two other programs in the
Chemistry Division; namley Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms-A (CSDM A)
and Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI). Ever since lasers were invented in
the 1960's, scientists have speculated that it may someday be possible to use
these special light sources to manipulate molecules and even selectively break
chemical bonds. This prospect holds out promise of essentially "performing laser
surgery" on molecules, whereby one portion of the molecule is altered while
simultaneously leaving other areas untouched. The research in the Rabitz
laboratory seeks to begin to lay the foundation for this vision to become a
practical reality. The effort involves theoretical studies establishing the key
principles for the creation of laser designs affecting precise manipulation of
molecules. The theoretical principles take into consideration both the nature of
laboratory laser resources as well as the structure and other features of
molecules and how they interact with laser light. The outcome of this research
is expected to provide a more thorough understanding of laser-molecule
interactions and the practical attainable molecular goals lying ahead in the
coming years using advanced laser light resources. Students trained in the
Rabitz laboratory receive a high broad and highly inter-disciplinary education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of tailored laser pulses capable of
achieving specific manipulations of molecules is performed as an optimization
process working within the laws of quantum mechanics. Professor Rabitz aims to
explore the features of what is called the quantum control landscape, which is
the molecular observable property of interest as a function of the laser control
field. The structure of these landscapes is essential to understand, as the
search for an optimal control field entails a climb of the landscape to the
highest attainable chemical product yield. The possible presence of complex
hindering features on the landscape could impede such searches. Rabitz and
coworkers develop special theoretical tools to reveal the true landscape
structure and explore its implications for practical laser control of molecules.
Concomitantly, the team will develop theoretical tools to investigate the
mechanisms by which laser fields manipulate quantum dynamics phenomena including
for chemical bond-breaking. Moreover, the mechanistic studies performed by the
Rabitz group aim to lay a foundation for extracting physical models of laser
driven dynamics extracted from experimental data.