* 1464327
* CRII: III: Managing Preference Data
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Julia Stoyanovich, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2019
* USD 190,888.00

Preferences are orders among a collection of items attributed to a population of
judges. Preference data comes in a variety of forms, such as ranked lists and
pairwise comparisons, and is ubiquitous in a plethora of applications across
different domains. Over the past decade, there has been a sharp increase in the
volume of preference data, in the diversity of applications that use it, and in
the richness of preference data analysis methods. Examples of applications
include rank aggregation in genomic data analysis, management of votes in
elections, and recommendation systems in e-commerce. The goal of this project is
to streamline the management and analysis of preference data. Towards this goal
the PI and her team will develop a framework called DB4Pref, providing support
to computational and data scientists who work with preference data. Models,
algorithms, data and software products developed as part of this project will be
made publicly available. The work will have an impact on the scientific
community, in particular on the analysis of functional genomics data, which is
central to many areas of bioinformatics, and on social applications, where it
will enable efficient and effective analysis of user preferences. The PI will
involve graduate and undergraduate students in her research, and will continue
to work with women and under-represented minorities. Both the process and the
outcome of this research will be integrated into data management and data
science courses taught by the PI.

The work will adopt the relational database model, and will enrich it with
extensions that are specialized for handling preference data. Specifically, the
PI and her team will introduce a special type of a relation that is designed for
preference data, and will propose composable operators on preference relations
that can be embedded in SQL statements, for convenient reuse across
applications. Scalable implementations of preference relations will be
developed, along with analytics such as preference clustering and rank
aggregation. Treating preferences, and preference analytics, as first-class
citizen in a relational database, and making these available through (augmented)
SQL queries, will brings two important advantages. The first is usability: since
SQL queries are specified declaratively, users need not worry about data formats
and implementation details of data manipulation methods. The second advantage is
efficiency: the system is free to choose an appropriate query execution plan,
and an efficient implementation of a specific analysis method, exploiting a
trade-off between processing time and answer quality. To evaluate results of
this work, and to invite contributions to this area by other members of the
community, the PI and her team will develop a set of performance benchmarks
based on real and synthetic datasets.

For further information see the project website at
https://www.cs.drexel.edu/dbgroup/db4pref