* 1464644
* Collaborative Research:  Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Assured and SCAlable Data Engineering (CASCADE)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Louiqa Raschid, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 03/31/2017
* USD 11,426.00

A data and information revolution is transforming all aspects of our life, all
disciplines, and all sectors of the economy. The "big data" market is predicted
to reach $50 billion by 2017, with 40% and 22% market share for services and
software, respectively. While products and services continue to mature, assured
and scalable data services remain major challenges. This necessitates data
architectures and tools that can match the scale of the data and support timely
and assured decision making. The vision of the proposed NSF I/UCRC Center for
Assured and SCAlable Data Engineering (CASCADE) is to enable a fundamental shift
from current ad hoc approaches to the engineering of data systems, towards a
principled framework for the engineering of data systems that support reliable
and timely data-driven decision making. The center will support the innovation
of data architectures and tools that can match the scale of the data, and that
support timely and assured decision making. Methods for information integration,
analytics and visualization will help non-data-experts (in governmental and
commercial sectors) to make decisions and to generate value. The key audience
for the proposed NSF I/UCRC Center for Assured and SCAlable Data Engineering
(CASCADE) include (a) small, medium, and large companies that rely heavily on
data services (especially in the finance and energy sectors), (b) small, medium,
and large companies in data technologies, and (c) government agencies and
regulators. CASCADE will play an important role in developing assured and
scalable data technologies that in turn will enable applications and services
with significant economic and environmental impact. This includes financial
fraud prevention, monitoring financial supply chains and applications in the
energy and sustainability sectors. The broader impacts of the proposed project
will include technology and knowledge transfer to the industrial sector,
graduate and undergraduate education through mentoring of PhD students, and
updates to the CSE curriculum through the incorporation of research into
existing undergraduate and graduate classes. CASCADE activities will train
computer science students in the methodologies that support scalable and secure
data engineering and will familiarize them with real world challenges in
critical domains including the financial sector and clean energy. CASCADE will
also contribute to diversity on the workforce through recruitment of female and
minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If we want to fundamentally alter the
way data systems are designed and significantly change current practices, we
need to ensure that data analysis, data assurance, and data management
technology components are developed synergistically to achieve the following
targets: (1) The design and development of each component is informed by the
requirements and limitations of the others; (2) Each takes full advantage of the
services and capabilities provided by the others; (3) They continuously adapt as
the analysis, assurance, and management contexts evolve with the needs of the
deployed application systems that they all support. A key CASCADE goal is to
empower domain experts and decision makers through assured and scalable data
systems, and to provide reliable and timely decision making through a
sense&amp;integrate, simulate&amp;predict, validate&amp;interpret, and
act&amp;adapt feedback loop. This planning grant's objective is to organize a
meeting with industry partners and the universities to outline a research agenda
for CASCADE. The industrial/academic partnerships of CASCADE will enable new
algorithms, tools, and systems that securely manage, share, access, and analyze
heterogeneous sets of static or transient data to accommodate diverse security
requirements, including trust, availability, confidentiality, and integrity.
Through synergistic industry/academy partnerships, CASCADE will enable a
strategic framework that includes multi-disciplinary teams that translate
technological insights obtained from fundamental research on (a) trusted and
privacy preserving data processing and analysis, (b) real-time data processing
and analysis, (c) parallel and distributed data processing and analysis, and (d)
high dimensional and multi-modal data processing and analysis, into new key
technology elements whose different instantiations are deployed for direct
impact to various critical industries including in the energy and finance
sectors.