* 1464795
* Systematic approach to Density Functional Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Kieron Burke, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2019
* USD 542,178.00

Kieron Burke of the University of California-Irvine is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop
methods that improve the accuracy and reliability of electronic structure
calculations. Modern chemical and materials research increasingly relies on
electronic structure calculations, i.e., solving the equations of quantum
mechanics for electrons to predict or understand physical and chemical
properties. Burke's method uses very fundamental properties of quantum mechanics
to derive improved approximations in a highly systematic fashion. The
intellectual value is to understand the quantum nature of electrons more deeply
than before, in a way that significantly reduces errors. The impact could be
significant, as it could improve electronic structure calculations for thousands
of scientific papers each year, including those related to drug discovery, and
to the identification of new catalysts, and new phases of matter. There is also
a broad-based educational component, as graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students are involved in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Burke and his
research group combine theoretical methods from three different disciplines. A
systematic non-empirical approach to density functional approximation is used,
via an asymptotic expansion in powers of Planck's constant, the fundamental
quantity that determines the strength of quantum effects. For model systems, the
approximations can be found explicitly, and yield far more accurate results than
previous formulas. For realistic systems (molecules and materials), the general
forms can be used to deduce asymptotically exact approximations that
significantly improve on those in use today, and constrain more sophisticated
approaches. The methods are also applied to the problem of orbital-free
electronic structure calculations, which holds the promise of making much larger
distance and time scales accessible to density functional theory (DFT)
calculations. The work includes an alternative strategy to the DFT framework in
use today, called potential functional theory. A natural connection with thermal
DFT has the potential to lead to useful applications in the time-dependent
density functional theory of molecules and of warm dense matter.