* 1464477
* Theory and Simulation of Photo-induced Charge Transfer Dynamics and its UV-vis/IR Spectroscopic Signature Via The Linearized Semiclassical Method
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Eitan Geva, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2018
* USD 455,000.00

Eitan Geva of the University of Michigan is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry to
develop efficient computational methods to model novel materials for use in
emerging technologies for solar energy conversion and better energy storage. Dr.
Geva and his research group focus on creating theoretical and computational
tools that are used to understand the dynamics of the initial steps that lead to
electrical current generation in those systems, as well as tools to analyze
signals generated by diagnostic laser techniques; such techniques are used to
evaluate the performance of those processes in real time. The Geva research
group has active collaborations with several theoretical and experimental
research groups. Under this award, Dr. Geva plans to develop activities to
advance and modernize the undergraduate physical chemistry curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program is guided by the vision that the
linearized semiclassical approximation provides a flexible, rigorous and self-
consistent framework for developing computationally feasible methods, capable of
capturing important quantum effects in complex many-body systems described in
terms of anharmonic force fields. Under this CTMC award, the Dr. Geva and his
coworkers seek to advance such methods for modeling photo-induced charge
transfer dynamics and its time resolved UV-vis/ IR spectroscopic signature in
condensed phase systems, such as molecular liquids and organic photovoltaic
materials. The methodology describes charge transfer dynamics on multiple levels
of theory that range from equilibrium Fermi's golden rule, through non-
equilibrium Fermi's golden rule to non-perturbative mixed quantum-classical
Liouville dynamics.