* 1464347
* CRII: SaTC: Privacy-Enhancing User Interfaces Based on Individualized Mental Models
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Yang Wang, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 175,586.00

Technology advances have brought numerous benefits to people and society, but
also heightened risks to privacy. This project will investigate mechanisms and
build tools to help people make privacy-aware decisions in different online
contexts. The outcomes will help people to better understand their own privacy
preferences and behavior, and enable them to better manage their privacy on the
Internet. The project will create designs that can be integrated into mobile app
markets and web browsers. The results will also inform Internet standards and
governmental policies on Internet privacy. In addition, this project will have
important educational and training benefits at the undergraduate and graduate
levels, including privacy-related class projects and modules. These training
opportunities will help students to become more aware of potential privacy
issues in technologies and develop technical skills in building privacy-
enhancing mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate two
main ideas: individualized mental models of privacy, and a universal privacy
dashboard. People often have differing mental models of privacy, or preferences
that are context-dependent. However, it has been shown that people?s actual
decisions or behaviors often divert from their stated privacy preferences.
Motivated by the theory of contiguity from learning sciences, this project will
examine whether people will make privacy-preserving decisions when their
individualized mental models and their decision choices are presented to them
contiguously in time and space (e.g., on the same user interface). This project
will also explore the universal privacy dashboard as a principled way to provide
transparency regarding individual's mental privacy models and behaviors in two
example domains: online tracking and Android app permissions. This dashboard
approach will enable people to monitor, reflect, and if technically feasible,
directly change their privacy decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further
information see the project web site at:
http://salt.ischool.syr.edu/privacymirror/