* 1464381
* CRII: III: Declarative array processing for large-scale scientific analyses
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Spyros Blanas, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 03/31/2018
* USD 175,000.00

Scientists understand complex natural phenomena through data-intensive analyses
that run on hundreds of thousands of processing cores. Quickly exploring very
large datasets in parallel for insights, however, is challenging. Analyzing
larger-than-memory datasets exposes the intricacies of the storage hierarchy and
necessitates different implementations based on the anticipated data volume and
the system architecture. Domain scientists using large-scale computing
facilities are therefore faced with a dilemma: they need to either perpetually
maintain and tune their data processing codes to the evolving system
infrastructure, or limit their investigation to analyses that can be completed
in a reasonable time as datasets continue to grow in size.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Declarative data processing techniques can alleviate
scientists from the burden of managing how scientific data are accessed or
stored. Although many declarative data management systems are actively used by
scientists, these systems require time-consuming data transformations, such as
loading, chunking and repartitioning, before answering any scientific query. In
addition, many data management systems assume complete control of the underlying
hardware, and are oblivious to optimizations and scaling opportunities that are
offered through the batch execution paradigm of large-scale computing
facilities. To address this gap in research, we will investigate techniques in
the intersection of data management and scientific computing on how to allocate
resources, and how to proactively manage parallel I/O and distributed memory. To
impact scientific practice, we will develop a prototype runtime system that will
augment an established scientific file format library with declarative querying
capabilities for data analysis in leadership computing
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web
site at: http://go.osu.edu/insitu_analysis