* 1464204
* CRII: Cyberlearning: Teaching Intercultural Competence through Personal Informatics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Amy Ogan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2018
* USD 190,612.00

The need for intercultural competence has never been higher as technology makes
it easier for people to engage in global communications, collaboration, and
commerce. In higher education, the global and multicultural environment means
that the challenges of intercultural communication exist within classrooms. This
project would study how technology can help STEM teaching assistants, especially
foreign teaching assistants, better communicate with their students across
cultural lines, by building and testing software called CANAR (Computer-Aided
Noticing and Reflection). The ultimate goal is support better teaching and
learning of STEM in university classrooms by bridging cultural divides between
students and their teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CANAR system will be
constructed using an iterative design methodology, and will build on prior
personal informatics software which uses the area under the receiver operating
characteristics curve (AUROC) to do speaker-detection on speech in classroom
settings. This data will be used to present TAs with a dashboard based on
Liddicoat's model of developing intercultural competence. Research will be
conducted using qualitative observation and Corbin and Strauss' approach to
grounded theory to address questions of what data and strategies can support
intercultural noticing and reflection among the TAs, and to examine the benefits
of this reflection on their intercultural communication competencies in the
classroom. To examine what types of data are helpful for intercultural
competence, research participants will engage with three types of data in the
CANAR dashboard: artificially synthesized data representing typical experiences
by international TAs, real data on the participants' communication derived from
human coded observations, and real data on the communication derived by the
automated system.