* 1464735
* Infrared Electro-Optical Spectroscopy of Degradation Pathways in Organo-Halide Perovskite Photovoltaics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* John Asbury, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2019
* USD 395,396.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor John Asbury at Penn
State University to use Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy combined with
electrical techniques to examine the chemical origins of defects in an emerging
class of photovoltaic materials known as organo-halide perovskites. These
photovoltaic materials represent a promising class of potentially inexpensive
and highly efficient solar cells - a high priority for development of a
sustainable energy economy that does not rely on fossil fuels. However, the
long-term stability of these materials is limited by the formation of defects.
The use of electrical techniques combined with infrared spectroscopy enables the
identification of chemical species that cause the defects. This information in
turn can guide the development of synthetic strategies to eliminate defects,
resulting in more stable and higher efficiency solar cells. The PI also plans to
engage underrepresented middle school and high school students in this research
project through the use of solar cell models by which they will use the
scientific process of hypothesis, experiment and evaluation to explore possible
solutions to scientific challenges that have direct bearing on solar energy
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective of this project is to
examine charge-trapping in organo-halide perovskites using infrared-detected
admittance spectroscopy that combines electrical information about charge trap
energetic distributions with structural information about the molecular species
that give rise to those traps from Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy.
Traditional electrical characterization techniques provide information about the
density and energetic distribution of charge traps in materials but do not
reveal structural information about the chemical origins of such traps. While
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy can provide structural information about
materials through measurement of their vibrational frequencies, this technique
typically measures the majority component of a material and is not able to
capture the vibrational spectra of defects, which represent a minority
component. By combining these techniques, this project will provide direct
measurements of charge trap energetic distributions and densities along with
structural information about the chemical species that give rise to those
defects. Systematic variation of the chemical structure, composition, and
preparation of organo-halide perovskite photovoltaic materials will enable
fundamental understanding of how the electronic structure of these promising
materials depends on their underlying chemical and morphological properties.
These measurements seek to address key scientific challenges that are important
for realizing more efficient and stable perovskite solar cells.