* 1464424
* CRII:SHF: Enabling Technologies for Three Dimensional (3D) Millimeter-Wave Integrated Circuits: Through Silicon Via (TSV) Modeling and Design
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Yang Yi, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2017
* USD 174,902.00

Millimeter-wave (mmW) communications is regarded as an emerging technology to
resolve the spectrum shortage issues resulting from the exponential growth of
mobile data traffic. This project addresses the fundamental scientific issues
and advanced design challenges of the three-dimensional (3D) mmW integrated
circuits (ICs) capable of handling very wide system bandwidth required for
emerging communication systems. The project will facilitate further advances in
3D integration and broader adoption of this emerging technology in semiconductor
manufacturing and electronic design community by offering fundamental
understandings in circuit design for beyond ultra-high frequency (UHF) band
wireless communications. In addition to technological impact, the PI will
develop a broadening participation plan and an educational plan that will
immerse students from the underrepresented groups in the field of electronic
circuits. Tools and techniques developed in this research will be used for
developing and teaching new courses. Outreach activities will span from the high
school level up through the graduate level making full use of University
Diversity Programs as well as Missouri-Iowa-Nebraska-Kansas Women in Computing
Program. Furthermore, the PI will leverage the collaboration with several
leading semiconductor companies to set up technical seminars and internship
programs for both undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three dimensional integration with
Through Silicon Vias (TSVs) applied to the mmW mobile broadband wireless
communications could offer miniaturization opportunities, performance
improvement, and power consumption reduction. One of the most critical
components and challenges in 3D ICs is the modeling and design of TSVs. In light
of the great promise and design challenges of 3D mmW ICs, this project targets
to introducing new ideas, developing system prototypes, as well as a new and
transformative direction for the advancement of TSV design at all levels -
circuits, systems, and computer-aided design (CAD). The proposed TSV modeling
and analysis methodologies could be integrated with existing Electronics Design
and Automation (EDA) tools. By investigating one of the key components of mmW
ICs, this project attempts to lay a foundation for a practical design
methodology for the mmW systems with higher reliability, lower power
consumption, reduced delay, and increased system miniaturization.