* 1464906
* Elucidation of Reaction Mechanism with the Unified Reaction Valley Approach:  Part III Homogeneous Catalysis and Beyond
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Dieter Cremer, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 11/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-B) and
Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) programs are
supporting Professors Elfi Kraka and Dieter Cremer at Southern Methodist
University to derive a general design principle for the next generation of
chemical catalysts combining features of homogenous and enzyme catalysis. The
unified reaction valley approach (URVA) of Cremer and Kraka aims to serve as a
quantum chemical tool to study the mechanism of catalyzed reactions at a greater
level of than is currently easily achieved. URVA acts like a "high-resolution-
camera" attached to the reaction complex, being able to reveal the interplay
between vibrations and the electronic structure changes of the reaction complex.
It records all events when the reaction complex follows the energy valley on the
reaction side up to the energy pass point and then down through the exit valley
to the products. Important and less important events are differentiated by
analyzing direction and curvature of the reaction path rather than features of
the reaction complex itself. Basic differences between and catalyzed and non-
catalyzed reactions can be determined in this way, but also the limitations of
man-made catalysts are apparent. Enzymes are the well-tuned catalysts developed
in response to stringent survival pressures. Given the remarkable catalytic
power seen in many enzymes, the major focus will be on the extension and
application of the URVA methodology to enzyme catalysis to determine its major
advantages. The mechanism of transition metal, non-transition metal or metal-
free- and (artificial) enzyme-catalyzed reactions will be systematically
analyzed and compared. A strategy for de novo catalyst design is to be
developed, which, by including aspects of both chemo- and bio-catalysis, can
serve as an incubator for enhanced interdisciplinary efforts to generate target-
specific catalysts. The data of all reactions investigated (including reaction
movies) will be collected in the CATCO reaction library, which will increase to
more than 500 reactions. This library will be available to the chemical
community for research, teaching, and student
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past two years, URVA has proven to be
a unique tool for the mechanistic study of more than 150 homogenous catalysis
reactions. In addition to following the chemical processes of bond breaking and
forming, URVA uses a substantially improved algorithm for following the reaction
valley far out into the van der Waals region to monitor pre- and post-chemical
processes in a high level of detail. The direction and curvature of the reaction
valley are analyzed in terms of internal coordinate or curvilinear coordinate
components and then directly related to electronic structure changes. Other
essential tools of URVA are the local vibrational mode analysis, the charge
transfer and charge polarization analysis as well as the presentation of the
chemical reaction in terms of reaction phases. Method development will include
the design and programming of i) URVA methodologies for an implicit or explicit
inclusion of solvent effects, ii) 2-component relativistic methods for the
investigation of "relativistic" systems, and iii) new QM/MM methodologies for
the description of chemical reactions in an enzymatic environment.