* 1464085
* Metal Complexes of Donor-Bridge Acceptor Biradical Ligands: Testing Models for Electron Transfer/Transport/Quantum Interference and Controlling Excited State Wave Functions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* David Shultz, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2018
* USD 435,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor David A. Shultz of the Department
of Chemistry at North Carolina State University will develop detailed
relationships between a molecule's structure and how it transports electrons.
The goal of this research is to develop lucid connections between a molecule's
shape and structure and electron transport, which are useful to the design of
materials and devices that rely on electron transport. The results will have
application in the next generations of molecular electronics and "spintronics"
(electron spin-based electronics), photonics, organic light-emitting diodes and
artificial photosynthetic reactors. The proposed research contains elements of
molecular synthesis, structure, spectroscopy, reactivity and theory, and is thus
well suited for an integrated education of scientists. The Shultz group has
extensive experience in training scientists (including undergraduates and those
from underrepresented groups) who go on to careers in academia, government
laboratories, industry and entrepreneurship. Outreach activities involve hosting
and training undergraduate summer researchers from Shaw University, a local
Historically Black College/University (HBCU). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron
donor-acceptor interactions control electron transfer and transport at the
molecular level. They are thus crucial, foundational elements in biological and
artificial electron transfer and photosynthesis, solar energy conversion and
molecular electronics/spintronics. The first thrust of the proposed research
describes continued efforts in the Schultz group toward an elucidation of
electronic coupling in Donor-Bridge-Acceptor systems in which the donor fragment
is a metal-semiquinone and the acceptor is a nitronylnitroxide radical, and the
magnetic electron spin-spin exchange coupling between the two is directly
proportional to the square of the Donor-Acceptor electronic coupling. The second
thrust of the proposed research describes studies aimed at using exchange
coupling in photogenerated biradical excited states (via ligand-to-ligand charge
transfer) to probe and ultimately to control excited state processes and to
mimic exciton-polaron interactions.