* 1464209
* CRII: SaTC: Detecting Security Vulnerabilities in Instruction Set Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Cynthia Sturton, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 12/31/2017
* USD 174,976.00

The interaction between computer processors -- the hardware at the heart of our
computers, tablets, and phones -- and software -- apps, web browsers, and other
applications -- is governed by an Instruction Set Architecture (ISA). The ISA is
the specification that defines how the processor will respond to commands from
the software. It is large and complex, too large for a person to understand and
reason about all the interactions between different parts completely. As a
result, security vulnerabilities exist in the ISA. These vulnerabilities can
sometimes be exploited by attackers to steal data or take control of the
machine. This research is about detecting security vulnerabilities that exist in
the ISA. Finding and removing these vulnerabilities will create a more secure
foundation for all our computing activities. This will benefit government
agencies that require high assurance environments, cloud providers that rely on
hardware features for the security for their service, and users who, more and
more, are relying on diverse hardware components from a variety of hardware
design companies to handle their private and sensitive
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers posit that vulnerabilities in the ISA
happen in one of two ways: 1) Erroneous specification: the ISA prescribes
behavior that is dangerous; or 2) Nondeterminism in the specification: the ISA
is incomplete and one of the possible behaviors allowed by the specification is
dangerous. The hypothesis of this research is that it is possible to focus on a
relatively small subset of the ISA for which these types of errors are likely to
occur. The researchers are developing a practical methodology for discovering
for which instructions vulnerabilities are most likely to occur. With that
information, they are developing tools to detect and correct security-critical
errors in the ISA. In addition to making a practical contribution, the research
activities are improving understanding in the computer science community of what
a vulnerability in an ISA looks like and where and under what conditions it is
likely to occur. This will enable future verification efforts to concentrate on
the most security-critical aspects of the ISA.