* 1464584
* The Fundamental Dynamics and Optical Control of Molecular Devices
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Roseanne Sension, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2019
* USD 536,520.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Sension of the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor to investigate molecular-based components of
optically controlled nanomachines. These devices aim to provide a means for
nanoscale remote-controlled sensing, transport, synthesis, memory, logic
circuits, and information storage. The practical development of these devices
faces significant challenges in design, arising from incomplete knowledge of the
complicated systems involved. Professor Sension will use ultrafast spectroscopy
to study the fundamental chemistry and physics of molecular processes relevant
to molecular switches based on photochemical ring-opening reactions, molecular
motors, based on isomerization around a central bond, and vitamin B12 analogues
capable of photoactivated drug delivery. Methods will also be developed to use
the wavelength, energy, phase, beam profile, polarization, and temporal
structure of laser pulses intelligently to manipulate molecular constituents of
potential devices. Students engaged in this research will receive training in
modern experimental physical chemistry techniques, working on research problems
relevant to biological processes, as well as nanotechnology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One of the most important reactions is the
electrocyclic ring-opening reaction of substituted cyclohexadiene active in many
molecular switches. Fundamental studies of small cyclohexadiene containing
molecules will provide experimental data to inform theoretical efforts in a
synergistic relationship. Study of the ring-opening reaction of
7-dehydrocholesterol is important as this is precisely the reaction that occurs
in human skin to produce pre-vitamin D. The photoinitiated ring-opening reaction
will be studied in liposomes, a physiologically relevant model system. This
project also seeks to increase the fundamental understanding of cis-trans
isomerization reactions key to molecular motors. The photochemical reactions of
cobalamins are finding increased application in the sensors, antivitamins, and
molecular drug-delivery devices. Fundamental studies of the ultrafast internal
conversion and photodissociation of active cobalamins will be performed to
understand the photochemistry and photophysics of these systems as a function of
ligand, wavelength, temperature, and environment.