* 1464133
* Institutional Developing Excellence in Academic Leadership-National (IDEAL-N)
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Diana Bilimoria, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Erika Tatiana Camacho
* 06/30/2020
* USD 750,263.00

The PLAN-IHE funding track is designed to expand the application of proven-
successful gender-equity initiatives for STEM faculty through networked
adaptation of a specific program or initiative. Careful evaluation is expected
to expand understanding of such initiatives across institutions and institution
types.

The Institutions Developing Excellence in Academic Leadership-National (IDEAL-N)
project will build a learning community among 10 research universities in Ohio
and Pennsylvania to promote gender equality in academic Science & Engineering
(S&E) disciplines. The 10 partner universities include Case Western Reserve
University (CWRU), Bowling Green State University, Cleveland State University,
Kent State University, University of Akron and University of Toledo and Carnegie
Mellon University, Duquesne University, Indiana University of Pennsylvania and
University of Pittsburgh. IDEAL-N will build on the successful transformations
and outcomes achieved in the earlier CWRU ADVANCE project, IDEAL. IDEAL-N is
comprised of four elements: leadership enhancement training, annual change
projects, plenary conferences, and development of an equity index. The creation
of this institutional learning community will benefit not only the practices and
policies of the individual universities, but will also inform the nation's
efforts to foster science and technology careers, stimulate and redirect
economic development, and reverse the drain of talent from academic S&E.

IDEAL-N targets senior administrators as the locus of change and provides
intensified educational, leadership development, and support components. The
project will employ an innovative technology platform, using Cisco's
TelePresence, to re-imagine and stimulate cost-effective information
dissemination and networking for a national audience. The project will identify
multilevel Change Implementation Teams at each university to lead institutional
transformation that include: a co-director, a change leader, and a social
science faculty member. The co-director will be a senior administrator at the
Provost's Office level. The change leader will be a department chair or senior
faculty leader in an S&E department. A social scientist is included to help
translate social science theory and the promising practice literature on gender
equity into actionable projects within S&E disciplines. Annual change projects
focused around a key institutional transformation theme will be implemented at
each institution over three years. Each Change Implementation Team will select a
transformational theme/issue/need relevant to their campus to improve gender
equity in a S&E department. The change projects will vary in complexity and
scope, but they will directly address the transformational theme within the
IDEAL-N departments selected, and directly or indirectly address the larger
institution. Building on another extremely successful element of the previous
IDEAL project, three plenary conferences will be held during the early summer of
each year of IDEAL-N. These conferences will use the TelePresence platform to
gather senior academic leaders from the partner institutions, Change
Implementation Team members, and national experts on academic leadership and
gender equity to exchange knowledge and design solutions to effect change. Based
on the research and experience of previous ADVANCE projects, as well as from the
literature on promoting gender equity in academic careers, IDEAL-N will develop
an innovative Gender Equity Index to serve as an assessment and benchmarking
tool for academic institutions. The criteria for this index will include best
practices to promote gender diversity, equity, and inclusion, with a special
focus on disabled and underrepresented racial and ethnic minority women faculty.

The NSF ADVANCE Partnerships for Learning and Adaptation Networks (PLAN) program
track supports projects that promote the adaptation and implementation of
previously effective ADVANCE programs in new contexts and the testing of
innovative strategies to promote the participation, success, and advancement of
women in STEM academic careers. PLAN projects also contribute to the knowledge
base on gender equity in academic careers.