* 1464538
* Discovery of Organic and Organometallic Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Paul Williard, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2018
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism B program
supports fundamental research of Professor Williard at Brown University.
Professor Williard will develop a fast, accurate, sensitive and quantitative
assessment of the molecular weight of chemical compounds in solution utilizing
nuclear magnetic resonance measurements. This technique provides a rapid
evaluation of chemical compounds and processes including rapid assessment of new
electrolytes for lithium ion batteries (LIB), rapid monitoring of biodiesel fuel
formation from used cooking oils, high throughput screening of new
pharmaceuticals, and real time analysis of industrially important, bulk-scale
chemical reactions such as polymerization and catalytic processes. It is
applicable to small, medium and large molecules. Professor Williard in
conjunction with the Leadership Alliance - a national organization based in
Providence, RI that actively identifies, encourages and supports
underrepresented minority student participation in research projects - with
support from this grant and encouragement from the chairs of the chemistry
departments at Brown University and at Claflin University in Orangeburg, SC will
visit Claflin and teach a course on modern structure determination emphasizing
the techniques developed in this project. Both faculty and students from Claflin
will participate in exchange visits designed to foster increased collaboration
between the largely minority student and faculty at Claflin with this research
at Brown University.

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), referred to as diffusion oriented
spectroscopy or DOSY, will be enhanced and tuned for the characterization and
discovery of new and existing alkali metal compounds, transition metal clusters,
and alternative energy fuels derived from carbon dioxide. This specific
technique utilizes pulsed gradient radio frequency (rf) fields to determine
diffusion characteristics of analytes in solution. The methodology will be
developed with the goal of improving the efficiency of the chemical reactions in
which organic, organometallic and macromolecular compounds participate. An
important aspect of the proposed project is that it will enhance diffusion-
formula weight analysis (D-FW) with improvements in the sensitivity of pure
shift NMR experiments. Single crystal x-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) will be
performed in conjunction with the solution phase structure determination where
applicable to corroborate and to complement NMR analyses.