* 1464788
* Global Chlorination: A General Synthetic Strategy towards Chlorosulfolipid Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Rendy Kartika, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 07/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Rendy Kartika of Louisiana State
University (LSU) is investigating the conversion of stereochemically complex
aliphatic polyols to the corresponding alkyl polychlorides. In addition to
introducing new chlorination technology to the toolbox of organic reactions,
this research provides invaluable educational experience for student
researchers, empowering them to be competitive in the STEM workforce. Funding of
this project strengthens Professor Kartika's established efforts to train
students from underrepresented groups and women, and help build organic
synthesis at LSU. The broader impact of this work benefits from two outreach
activities: 1) the LSU ChemDemo project, and 2) the Louisiana Organic Chemistry
Symposium (LOCS). ChemDemo is an established service-learning activity that
directly exposes LSU undergraduates enrolled in large general chemistry courses
to hands-on chemistry experiments performed for K-12 students in the Baton Rouge
area. LOCS is a one-day symposium that Professor Kartika established at LSU in
2013 and is repeating in 2016. The event brings together chemistry graduate and
undergraduate students in the Gulf South region to broaden dissemination of
contemporary organic chemistry research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit is focused on developing a viable general strategy towards the total
synthesis of chlorosulfolipids and their congeners. Due to the gap in the
knowledge concerning stereoselective reactions involving polychlorinated
hydrocarbons, the complex structural features in chlorosulfolipids present
significant challenges for structural elucidation and total synthesis. The
strategy builds on synthetic methods that convert stereocomplementary aliphatic
1,2- and 1,3-diols to their respective 1,2- and 1,3-dichlorides in a
stereoselective manner. This study continues with the design of convergent
synthesis of chlorosulfolipid natural product danicalipin A, highlighted by
global chlorination of the corresponding polyol precursor as the key step in the
total synthesis.