* 1464308
* EAGER; Exploratory Research for a Mass Flow Apparatus Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Abani Patra, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 49,993.00

1464308&lt;br/&gt;Sonder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER grant will suport
exploration of experimental, design, and management concepts for a potential
user facility to allow for unprecedented in scale (10-100 m) experimental
simulation of terrestrial mass flows (5-10 t of material). An envisioned mass
flow apparatus (MFA) on the size scale and with capabilities hoped for (e.g.,
multiple material release modalities, variable ramp inclination and surface
topography as well as a range of ramp embedded sensing modalities) was a concept
recommendation of a recent NSF supported workshop that engaged an international
community of volcanologists. As such the PIs will first target the
considerations necessary to simulate pyroclastic flows though the MFA would be
suitable for experimental study of landslides. The MFA would allow for study of
mixed phase mass flows where initial boundary conditions are controlled and the
resultant deposits would be studied to help improve numerical models of the
behavior of mass flows and to ultimately use those models to help mitigate mass
flow hazards. Topics to be further studied using EAGER support include: 1) the
sourcing, handling, delivery and preparation of suitable starting materials for
target simulations; 2) design of the variable inclination ramp, provision for
modification of surface morphology and integration of specific sensing
modalities and engineering consideration of the ramps structural design and
response to dynamic loads of the mass scales envisioned; 3) consideration of
management issues (e.g., time and costs of experiment set up and clean up,
scheduling, cost recovery estimates for target experiment types and longer term
usage considerations ? maintenance.) The envisioned MFA offers a potentially
transformative experimental resource for study of hazardous mass flows under
controlled settings at unprecedented scales and with sensing capabilities that
cannot be applied in situ under natural conditions. This EAGER grant will
support the additional exploratory considerations necessary to refine MFA design
consideration and management concepts that could result in a tractable MFA that
could support broad use by the geoscience community.