* 1464279
* CRII: CPS: A Knowledge Representation and Information Fusion Framework for Decision Making in Complex Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Soumik Sarkar, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 04/30/2018
* USD 208,406.00

This Data-driven Decision-making in Cyber-physical systems (CPS) project focuses
on bringing tools from data science and systems science together to develop new
tools for analyzing and making accurate decisions in complex cyber-physical
systems (e.g., power-grid, transportation network, power plants and smart
buildings) to make them safer, more efficient and highly secure. This project
develops algorithms, implements software and demonstrates proof-of-concept using
large integrated building system as a challenge application area. Potential
advantages of the tools developed in this research over current methods will be
higher degree of accuracy, increased automation and lower cost of
implementation.

Majority of state-of-the-art methods use ad-hoc rules and physics-based models
for such problems. However, they lack in accuracy and scalability due to the
very complex nature of current and future large interconnected systems. The
tools developed in this project will alleviate these issues significantly via
intelligent use of large volume of data generated from the systems. The
theoretical aspect of the research will make use of inherently multidisciplinary
concepts from Nonlinear Dynamics, Information Theory, Machine Learning and
Statistical Mechanics. The research project primarily supports interdisciplinary
education and career development of graduate students as well as offers
education and outreach programs to high school and undergraduate students in
STEM disciplines.

The project engages the Center for Building Energy Research (CBER) at Iowa State
to demonstrate success on a real platform. The center provides a unique
opportunity to the researchers to test and validate the tools on the Interlock
House test bed which is a high end field laboratory for energy efficiency
research and data validation. This enhances the potential of transitioning the
new technology toward commercial reality.