* 1464543
* New Strategies and Methods for Synthesis of Indoles and Carbazoles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Shengping Zheng, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 06/30/2020
* USD 390,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis program is supporting fundamental
research of Professor Shengping Zheng at Hunter College of the City University
of New York. Professor Zheng will develop new methodologies for the synthesis of
indoles and carbazoles beginning with commercially available building blocks,
such as phenols and anilides, in one to three steps. The proposed research is
expected to impact the chemical and pharmaceutical industries, as demonstrated
by the synthesis of biologically active and pharmaceutically promising natural
products such as lycoranine A and B, carbazomycin B and G. Professor Zheng will
use research and teaching in organic synthesis as a framework for developing
scientific skills and promoting retention and recruitment of groups of
undergraduate students who are underrepresented in science. The Hunter College
setting, with its diverse student body and partnerships with local high schools,
will provide an excellent opportunity for directing Professor Zheng's
educational initiative towards women and other underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, new strategies and methods for
the synthesis of indoles/oxindoles and hydrocarbazoles/carbazoles will be
developed using inexpensive anilides/phenols as starting materials.
Specifically, the synthesis of indoles/oxindoles from quinone imine ketals will
be developed. An efficient synthesis of hydrocarbazoles from bicyclic
oxazolidinones via a photo-rearrangement will also be investigated. Application
of this method in the Büchi ketone synthesis will be explored. Furthermore, two
syntheses of carbazoles from quinone monoketal and quinols will be studied. One
is through anilide dianion addition to quinone monoketals and the other is
through a palladium catalyzed enolate aryl coupling via an oxazolidinone
intermediate. Methods developed in this research will make an important
contribution to heterocyclic synthesis.