* 1464919
* 2015 Plant Lipids GRC &amp; GRS Conference; Galveston, TX - February 1-6, 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Glenda Gillaspy, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2015
* USD 9,942.00

The 2015 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Seminar (GRS) on Plant Lipids:
Structure, Metabolism, and Function play critical roles in communicating novel
concepts and approaches in plant lipids, as well as fostering the development of
younger scientists. The goal of this project is to support U.S. postdoctoral
fellows, graduate students, and early career scientists to attend these
meetings. Interactions throughout both conferences will stimulate new research
directions and collaborations to advance fundamental research on plant lipids.
As such, this project enhances U.S. competitiveness in basic science research
that is relevant to major issues such as energy independence and maintenance of
food production.&lt;br/&gt;The meetings, to be held January 31 through February
6, 2015 at the Hotel Galvez in Galveston, Texas, will advance the field by
introducing new emerging paradigms not present two years ago, including advances
in understanding animal cholesterol and phosphoinositide signaling, genome-wide
association approaches in maize, and engineering of algal lipid composition. New
approaches to stimulate critical discussion will also be deployed, including a
focus on integration of knowledge and approaches between metabolism and lipid
signaling. Fifteen talks have been selected from submitted abstracts which will
enhance discussion on novel technologies like metabolic flux modeling, and
exposure for early career scientists. In addition, the GRS will offer a
concentrated opportunity for graduate students and postdoctoral trainees to
network and present their work. The GRS will include four dedicated meeting
mentors that will allow participants opportunities for formal and informal
conversations. In addition, two other scientists will provide stimulating
presentations on both scientific and writing issues. Lunch table mentoring
sessions also seek to actively engage students with established investigators to
ask questions. The broader impacts of this project include increasing diversity
in science by providing speaking and leadership opportunities to women and
under-represented groups. As well, this project will ensure participation of
students and postdoctoral trainees who present their research at the GRC and
GRS. This opportunity for young researchers should aid in their retention and
success in scientific endeavors, providing long-term benefit to society.