* 1464763
* Collaborative Research: Intrinsic Gas-phase Properties of Amino Acids and Peptides: Thermochemistry, Fragmentation Mechanisms, H/D exchange and IRMPD Spectroscopy.
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* John Poutsma, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2018
* USD 119,955.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms program is
supporting the collaborative research of Professor John C. Poutsma at the
College of William and Mary and Professor Jennifer Poutsma at Old Dominion
University. Professor John Poutsma employs mass spectrometry-based experiments
to study the subtle interplay between the structure of amino acids and their
gas-phase energetic properties. He is studying a class of compounds known as
non-proteinogenic amino acids (NPAA), which are found naturally in plants and
fungi, but are not used in protein synthesis. Many NPAAs are toxic to humans and
other animals in part due to structural similarity to one or more of the twenty
common protein amino acids (PAA). NPAAs can compete with PAAs in a variety of
biological pathways including being mis-incorporated into proteins and peptides.
These experiments will further understanding of the intrinsic chemistry of NPAAs
as isolated entities and when incorporated into small peptides. Professor
Jennifer Poutsma is performing density functional theory calculations that
support and guide the experimental studies. Both research programs integrate
research and educational components through the training of undergraduate
researchers. The vast majority of the research projects outlined in this
proposal are being performed by undergraduates at William and Mary and Old
Dominion University. Performing independent research helps expose these students
to the modern research in biologically relevant, mechanistic mass spectrometry,
supported by advanced computational chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research, the intrinsic gas-phase thermochemical properties of di-peptides are
being determined using the extended kinetic method in a triple quadrupole
instrument. Specifically, the PIs are studying the gas-phase acid-base chemistry
of dipeptides that contain proline or one of its non-protein amino acid analogs
azetidine-2-carboxylic acid or pipecolic acid. Absolute gas-phase thermochemical
properties will be determined using the extended kinetic method (EKM) in a TSQ
Quantum triple-quadrupole instrument. The collaborative research team is working
to determine the effects of ring-size and conformational flexibility on the
acid-base properties of these species with the goal of applying this knowledge
toward a better understanding the mechanisms for selective fragmentations in
low-energy tandem mass spectrometry experiments of proline-containing peptides.
Peptides containing these 4- and 6-ring analogues of proline, a typical beta-
turn-forming amino acid are of considerable interest in chemical biology and
peptide design circles. The results of these studies are likely to be of
interest to scientists in these communities.