* 1464439
* CRII: SHF: Automatic Extraction of Error-Handling Specifications in Systems Software
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Cindy Rubio Gonzalez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 182,500.00

Software error handling is the process of detecting and responding
to&lt;br/&gt;the occurrence of errors during the execution of a program.
Ideally,&lt;br/&gt;whenever a runtime error occurs, software systems should
respond&lt;br/&gt;according to the programmer?s intent. Unfortunately, that is
often not&lt;br/&gt;the case. Error-handling code is difficult to write, and
tends to be&lt;br/&gt;poorly understood, poorly documented, and poorly
tested.&lt;br/&gt;Unsurprisingly, error-handling code is often buggy. Bugs in
software&lt;br/&gt;error handlers are some of the most pervasive, dangerous,
and&lt;br/&gt;difficult to detect bugs. Incorrect error-handling is
particularly&lt;br/&gt;alarming in systems software (e.g., the operating system)
because user&lt;br/&gt;applications depend on the reliability of systems
software. This&lt;br/&gt;research aims to gather a better understanding of error
handling in&lt;br/&gt;systems software through automatic inference of error-
handling&lt;br/&gt;specifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Error-handling
specifications describe how the system detects and&lt;br/&gt;recovers from
errors. This research applies static program analysis&lt;br/&gt;techniques to
automatically infer error-handling specifications in&lt;br/&gt;systems software.
This task is particularly challenging because&lt;br/&gt;systems software
implements numerous failure policies, and&lt;br/&gt;error-handling code is often
diffused through the system. Furthermore,&lt;br/&gt;the analysis of such large
code bases often faces scalability&lt;br/&gt;problems. Understanding existing
error-handling strategies is the&lt;br/&gt;first step to ensure systems software
is reliable. This understanding&lt;br/&gt;also has the potential to lead to the
development of new&lt;br/&gt;error-handling mechanisms, and new programming
language support for&lt;br/&gt;error handling. Both of these could have a
significant impact on&lt;br/&gt;software reliability beyond systems software.