* 1464640
* Fundamental Studies of the Hydrogen-Atom Hydrogen-Molecule Exchange Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Richard Zare, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 940,410.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Zare of Stanford
University and his graduate student and postdoc are investigating the dynamics
of the H + H2 reaction by controlling the collision energies and by identifying
the detailed states of the products. The most accurate full quantum mechanical
and quasiclassical trajectory calculations can be done for this system to
compare with experiments. This research may significantly deepen our
understanding of this reaction, in particular, the geometric phase effect and
other nonadiabatic effects, vector correlations, and the effects of a change in
the potential surface in an intense infrared laser field. The knowledge obtained
for this simple reaction may be applicable to understanding more complex
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Zare and his research group generates
hydrogen atoms with sufficient kinetic energy to go above the well-defined
conical intersection of the H3 system where the Born-Oppenheimer approximation
is expected to break down, meaning the interactions take place on more than one
potential energy surface. For another subproject, the potential energy surface
is manipulated by using an intense off-resonant infrared laser field in an
attempt to control the collision process. This may demonstrate experimentally
the possibility of photon catalysis of a chemical reaction.