* 1464129
* New Methods for the Asymmetric Synthesis of Amines
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Jonathan Ellman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2018
* USD 480,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jonathan Ellman of Yale University
is developing efficient new strategies for the asymmetric synthesis of chiral
amines, which are important motifs in pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and new
materials. The broader impacts of this work include the potential for the
development of new and practical methods for the asymmetric synthesis of
important classes of chiral amines applicable to the preparation of
pharmaceuticals, agrochemical and materials. In addition, Professor Ellman
regularly participates in Yale's Science, Technology and Research Scholars
program by providing opportunities for underrepresented minority and women
scientists to carry out research in his laboratory. Professor Ellman also
participates in the Yale University Science Pathways program, which actively
supports New Haven middle and high school students interested in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program has two main parts. One part
relies on the practical asymmetric synthesis of aminoboronic acid derivatives
that are engaged through transition metal catalysis to react with a variety of
different carbon electrophiles to give valuable chiral amine products. In the
second research area asymmetric organocatalysis is used to couple nucleophiles
with substituted nitroalkenes. Reduction of the nitro group then provides chiral
branched amine products. A key step in this strategy is enantioselective
nitronate protonation, which has not previously been investigated.