* 1464102
* CRII: SCH: A Smart Biosensor for Monitoring Cell Sickling in Patients with Sickle Cell Disease
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* E Du, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 166,935.00

The objective of this research project is to develop a portable, smart biosensor
for monitoring of abnormal blood activities in patients with sickle cell disease
(SCD). Despite the advanced healthcare system in the US, life expectancy of SCD
patients is limited to about 50 years and patients suffer from unpredictable
pain crises. Vascular occlusion is the primary cause of various clinical
complications and shortened lifespan. The developed method will provide rapid
blood testing in a minimally-invasive manner. Specifically, a quantitative
measurement of cell sickling that is a primary contributing factor of vascular
occlusion will be made. This project will open up new opportunities to gather
large quantities of longitudinal cell sickling data to be associated with
clinical outcomes and to help establish criteria for prediction of pain crises
in individual SCD patients. Alerts will be raised when the measured cell
sickling level is higher than the patient's "normal" range, allowing quicker
interventions to prevent further complications and pain crises. This effort can
potentially revolutionize the diagnostics and personalized-management of SCD.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The essential idea of the smart biosensor is to integrate
a microfluidic impedance sensing module and a sensing interface module on a
single portable device. The disposable sensing module consumes a single drop of
blood, allowing in situ measurement of cell sickling induced by deoxygenated
abnormal sickle hemoglobin. The integration of smart phone with the biosensor
will provide flexible opportunities to SCD patients for long-term monitoring of
abnormal blood activities outside hospital and laboratory. To accomplish this
goal, the PI will focus on the following research objectives: (a) Integrate a
microelectrode impedance transducer into a microfluidic hypoxia channel that
mimics in vivo hypoxia-induced cell sickling conditions; determine the accuracy
and sensitivity of electrical impedance as a sensing signal of cell sickling;
(b) Functionalize the microfluidic channel with oxidoreductase agent to
miniaturize the hypoxia control unit as well as to accelerate the cell sickling
rate; (c) Establish communication between the microfluidic impedance sensing
module and a smartphone through Bluetooth technology for analysis and display of
results. This research will be the first attempt to electrically measure cell
sickling events triggered by on-chip hypoxia in a portable device. This project
makes contributions to the fields of biosensing, hematopathology, and healthcare
monitoring.