* 1464874
* Chiroptical Spectroscopic Studies on Supramolecular Aggregates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Prasad Polavarapu, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2020
* USD 416,670.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Prasad Polavarapu at
Vanderbilt University to study "chiral" molecules - that is, molecules with
handedness associated with them. Differences in pharmacological activity between
a left-handed chiral molecule and its right-handed mirror image make it
necessary to isolate these molecules from one another to investigate their
properties. Dr. Polavarapu's group specifically studies chiral surfactant
molecules which form special aggregate structures with encapsulation properties
(used, for example, for drug delivery). They seek improved understanding of the
properties of these molecules to enable better control and use. Involvement of
students from both Vanderbilt and Tennessee State University through
collaboration with Dr. Nsoki Phambu, is expected to provide valuable research
training opportunities for undergraduates interested in the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work focuses on chiral aggregates based on
tartaric acid chemical templates. Recently developed vibrational circular
dichroism (VCD) is used to probe the aggregates, along with established
electronic circular dichroism (ECD) and optical rotatory dispersion (ORD).
Three-dimensional molecular structures of chiral aggregates are determined with
these tools and additional data from methods such as electron microscopy and
atomic force microscopy. Molecular dynamics simulations provide further
understanding of possible structures. Quantum chemical predictions of
chiroptical spectroscopic properties and comparison to corresponding
experimental observations are used to further unravel the relation between
chiral aggregates and their spectroscopic properties. These studies are expected
to help establish the relationship between the structures of chiral aggregates
and their chiroptical properties. This work is is also expected to better define
the analytical capabilities of chiroptical spectroscopic methods for
characterizing chiral aggregates.