* 1464293
* CRII: CIF: Towards Self-Powered Heterogeneous Cellular Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Harpreet Dhillon, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 174,890.00

Driven by unprecedented increase in mobile data traffic, cellular networks are
undergoing a huge paradigm shift from a coverage-centric homogeneous deployment
of high-power cell towers (base stations) to a more organic capacity-driven
deployment that additionally includes various types of low-power base stations,
collectively called small cells. To maintain deployment flexibility and limit
operational costs, it is highly desirable that these base stations have a
capability to power themselves through self-contained energy harvesting modules.
The inherent unreliability associated with energy harvesting, however, combined
withthe irregular locations of the small cells, makes it challenging to quantify
the reliability of such "self-powered" heterogeneous cellular networks. This
project aims to lay the foundations of these networks through new analytical
tools and metrics. Self-powered base stations with additional capability to
self-backhaul will result in a "truly wireless" cellular network thereby
enabling a variety of "drop and play" deployments. Further broader impact of
this project will be through research dissemination, education, broadening
participation of students, and industry collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the overarching goal of establishing fundamental
performance limits for self-powered hetergeneous networks, this project adopts a
cross-disciplinary approach involving tools from communications, information
theory, and stochastic geometry. The first synergistic component of this project
develops a new comprehensive model capable of capturing key characteristics of
self-powered heterogeneous networks, such as the differences in the base station
capabilities, irregularities in their deployments, and uncertainties in their
energy levels. Powerful mathematical tools with foundations in stochastic
geometry and point process theory lend tractability to this model, thereby
allowing the formal analysis of new performance metrics unique to self-powered
heterogeneous networks. For instance, due to the coupling of loads across base
stations, when one base station drains out its energy, it may initiate a
"cascade effect" taking the whole network down with it. The first suite of
results characterizes this behavior and determines the regimes in which the
network remains stable. Once stability is guaranteed, the second set of results
focuses on the end-user performance in this new paradigm where the surviving
base stations are not always guaranteed to have sufficient energy to serve all
their load, thereby resulting in energy outages. Finally, these metrics are
jointly analyzed with classical quality-of-experience metrics, such as downlink
rate.