* 1464025
* CSEDI Collaborative Research:   Anelastic properties of the Earth from seismic to tidal timescale
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Gordana Garapic, SUNY College at New Paltz
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2019
* USD 63,774.00

Earthquakes produce sound waves that travel through the interior of the Earth
and thereby sample the conditions along their paths. Collections of large
numbers of arriving sound waves are used to reconstruct conditions and structure
of the interior of the Earth. While traveling through the interior, these waves
produce microscopic strains in the rocks they pass through. The response of the
rocks to these strains depends on conditions such as temperature and chemical
environment. Very large Earthquakes in subduction zones, for example the
Andaman-Sumatra earthquake from 2004 or the Alaskan earthquake from 1964,
produce enough energy for the Earth to "ring like a bell". Gravitational
interaction of the Earth with the Moon and the Sun (tides) causes periodic
deformation of the whole Earth that is comparable to the effects of large
Earthquakes. Microscopic strains similar to those caused by earthquakes and
tides can be investigated in the laboratory, and thereby also the effects of
temperature and chemical environment on the response. The challenge of the
proposed work is to apply the laboratory results to global observations from
seismology and geodesy. The promise of this approach is to improve our
understanding of the conditions in the interior of the Earth and its physical
description. The findings will have implications for modeling of the ongoing
rebound of the surface of the Earth since the last ice age, affecting
determination of the causes of changes in sea level, as well as tidal modeling
of other planets and moons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to
combine observations of small-strain deformation at a broad range of timescales,
from seismic body waves (seconds) to normal modes (minutes - hour) and tides
(hours to years), to determine the frequency dependence of energy dissipation in
the interior of the Earth. These observations will be combined in a normal
mode/tidal model of a non-spherical Earth that includes anelasticity. Results
from this model will be compared to laboratory-derived models for anelastic
behavior of crystalline grains and their defects, which are the basis for
predictions outside of the experimentally accessible parameter space. Comparison
of experimental predictions with global models will help to constrain the
applicability of the microphysical models to small-strain deformation due to
seismic waves and tides, and ultimately also post-glacial rebound and (large-
strain) convection. At the same time the combination of information from normal
modes and tides will yield new constraints on the conditions and structure in
the mid to lower mantle, which are difficult to obtain by other means.