* 1464244
* CRII: CI: Scalable Multigrid Algorithms for Solving Elliptic PDEs on Power-Efficient Clusters
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Hari Sundar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 06/30/2018
* USD 175,000.00

While emerging extreme-scale computing systems could provide unprecedented
resources for scientific discovery, two major challenges are the cost and the
energy required to run and cool these systems. The system-on-a-chip (SoC)
components widely used in the mobile device market are substantially cheaper and
more energy efficient compared to desktop or server processors, and represent a
promising option for future systems. This project addresses three challenges for
emerging extreme-scale computing systems: the potential move to mobile
processors, the increasing levels of concurrency, and the need for energy
efficiency. Shared infrastructure is developed to accelerate interdisciplinary
and collaborative research. This is a first step in the development of
mathematical and computational methods for solving scientific computing problems
on low-energy systems that can reduce the overall cost of scientific discoveries
and promote the progress of science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project develops
a scalable and power efficient parallel multigrid solver for elliptic partial
differential equations (PDEs) that targets emerging extreme scale computing
systems. Elliptic PDEs are ubiquitous in natural, engineered and societal
systems, and the efficient multigrid solvers being developed as part of this
project are beneficial to research across several disciplines. The project also
develops a power-performance model to aid in application-controlled power-
performance management, at the per-node level. Motivated by the slower
interconnections common on low-power clusters, the project develops a new class
of parallel algorithms that lower the power utilization of computations to
overlap with the communication. This is the reverse of what has conventionally
been done, where communication costs are hidden by overlapping with computation.
Additionally, the algorithms utilize compute nodes that are not computationally
active at all times -- a radically different approach that creates a new class
of energy-efficient scalable parallel algorithms. The research will be evaluated
initially using a 16 node Tegra/ARM-based cluster and ultimately, the CloudLab
cluster at the University of Utah. The developed software will be disseminated
using an open source license. The scalability experiments will be run on the
NSF-supported CloudLab cluster, hosted at the University of Utah, allowing other
users to re-create both the hardware and software stack used for the
experiments. The resulting system will be among the first large scale low-energy
clusters available anywhere.