* 1464232
* Mechanistic Studies of the Photoactivation of Metal- Hydride, Halide and Oxo Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniel Nocera, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 880,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor Daniel Nocera of Harvard University to study catalytic
processes that can generate hydrogen from light and simple compounds. Fuels are
compounds that react with an oxidant, usually oxygen, to release energy. At the
molecular level, when a fuel is burned, the bonds in high energy compounds
rearrange to form new bonds in lower energy compounds, and the energy released
in this bond rearrangement is used to power our world. Most fuels in our society
are derived from coal, oil and natural gas; namely fossil fuels, the bonds of
which are rearranged with the bonds of oxygen to generate carbon dioxide and
water, which enter the atmosphere. One way to avoid the formation of carbon
dioxide is to cut the connection between fuels and carbon and to use hydrogen as
a fuel. There are two sources of hydrogen that can be generated using solar
irradiation: water or hydrohalic acid (for example, a hydrogen atom bonded to a
chlorine atom); however, hydrogen cannot be generated by shining light directly
on water or hydrohalic acid. A catalyst must be used that will capture the light
and then act as an intermediary in the bond rearrangement reaction. Professor
Nocera is developing new catalysts that can absorb light and then convert
hydrohalic acids into hydrogen and elemental halogen. The new compounds,
reactions and techniques resulting from this research are likely to impact
realted areas of science and could result in new energy generation technologies.
Professor Nocera continues to be involved in raising public awareness of the
global energy problem and the role that science, and especially chemistry, can
play in addressing the energy challenge. Research discoveries in this area are
being conveyed to the public through a variety of forums including news media,
radio programs, movies and other broadcast venues.

The Nocera group is developing new catalysts for photochemical HX splitting and,
in parallel, is studying the mechanisms of such reactions. The storage of
renewable energy in the form of fuels requires the rearrangement of bonds with
low energy content to ones of high energy content, and bonds of important energy
consequence are H-H, X-X and O=O. New metal compounds based on Rh, Ni, Fe and Mn
are being synthesized that can provide insight into these energy conversion
processes. Critical intermediates that promote the requisite bond activation are
being studied using advanced spectroscopic techniques, including the application
of time-resolved X-ray crystallography and nanoparticle-based time-resolved
resonance Raman spectroscopy for the identification of the critical M-H and M-X
intermediates, and magnetic resonance techniques (intermediate-field ENDOR,
ELDOR-detected NMR and single-crystal polarized neutron diffraction) for the
identification of M-O intermediates. With knowledge of the stereoelectronic
properties of the critical intermediates, photocycles are being constructed to
drive energetically uphill reactions, which are at the basis for renewable
energy conversion.