* 1464239
* CRII: AF: New Approaches to Graph Spanners
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Michael Dinitz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2019
* USD 185,029.00

This project is focused on research and educational activities related to graph
spanners. In many applications it is important to "compress" distance
information: if we are given pairwise distances between points, is there any way
of storing them (possibly with some loss) other than storing all pairwise
distances? This basic question, possibly with different definitions of
"distances", arises in problems as diverse as property testing of mathematical
functions, routing in computer networks, biomedical image segmentation, and many
others.

One standard way of doing this is through a graph spanner, in which we store
only a small subset of the distances and then use those distances to
(approximately) infer the ones that we did not store. Spanners have been studied
extensively over the past 20 years, and we now have very good characterizations
of what the tradeoffs are between the amount of information stored and the
quality of the distance estimation. In this project the PI will take a
different, more algorithmically-focused point of view: given points and
distances, can we develop efficient algorithms that find the best possible
spanner (or close to it)?

The development of such algorithms would be a significant step forward from a
theoretical point of view, as spanners seem to give mathematically difficult
optimization problems. They are also related to many other problems in network
design, and better algorithms for spanners will hopefully lead to better
algorithms for a wide variety of related problems as well. Such algorithms would
also be a step towards making spanners more practical, as they could be used to
do "the best that we can" on any particular input, thus bypassing many of the
known impossibility results which state only that some inputs cannot be
compressed.

This project also has a significant educational component. The PI will develop
and refine classes on algorithms for distance spaces and approximation
algorithms. The PI will also supervise research projects related to this project
performed by undergraduates from Johns Hopkins and from other institutions.
Finally, the PI will work with talented high school students in Baltimore on
appropriate projects.

More formally, graph spanners are subgraphs which preserve distances, and are a
basic algorithmic building block that is used widely throughout theoretical
computer science. The vast majority of research on spanners has been in the form
of existential questions. For example, what types of spanners exist? What are
sufficient conditions or necessary conditions to achieve certain parameters?
What tradeoffs between various parameters are possible?

While these are all extremely interesting questions, the related optimization
questions have received much less attention. For example, if we are given a
graph, is there an efficient algorithm to find the best (or close-to-best)
spanner? This and other related questions move graph spanners from the realm of
graph theory into the realm of algorithms. In this project the PI will study
these optimization problems through the lens of approximation algorithms. More
specifically, in this project the PI will extend the existing linear
programming-based techniques and develop new techniques based on other convex
relaxations in order to design approximation algorithms for graph spanners.
These algorithms will be based on relaxation-based techniques (in particular the
Sherali-Adam LP hierarchy and the Lasserre SDP hierarchy). In parallel to this,
the PI will design improved lower bounds including both hardness results
(through novel reductions from 2-player 1-round proof systems) and integrality
gaps for convex relaxations.