* 1464810
* Electron transport in energy production complexes of biology
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Dmitry Matyushov, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 03/31/2018
* USD 442,000.00

Dmitry Matyushov of Arizona State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division, with co-funding from the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences Division, to develop a theoretical study of charge
transport in mitochondrial energy complexes of biology. Protein complexes
located in mitochondrial membranes provide all energy available to living cells.
Disruptions of charge transport result in chronic diseases and are closely
related to oxidative stress and aging. Matyushov and his research group are
attempting to understand how chemical energy (obtained from food) is transformed
into the energy stored for biological function. In this project, basic
theoretical principles that have been identified on the scale of individual
proteins are extended to the much larger scale of biology's energy chains. The
main goal is better understand the factors influencing the energetic efficiency
of living cells. A still unresolved challenge is how electrons are transported
across the membrane without significant dissipation of energy into heat. The
project links the structure and dynamics of the protein-membrane-water
environment to energy-efficient electron transport. Graduates students and
postdoctoral associates contribute to this research. As part of this project,
the PI will organize summer computer schools for talented
youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at developing a
predictive model that accounts for the effect of changing physical conditions
and mutations in relevant proteins upon the rates of individual electron
transfer steps and on overall cross-membrane electron transport. The proposed
mechanism involves the conditions for breaking the equilibrium statistics of
nuclear fluctuations affecting individual electron transfer steps. The breakdown
of the system's ergodicity is possible due to strongly dispersive dynamics of
the protein-water-membrane thermal bath spreading over many orders of magnitude
in terms of relaxation times. No single theoretical technique is capable of
covering this range of timescales. The problem is resolved by combining large-
scale atomistic simulations of membrane-bound complexes with coarse-grain
modeling of protein electro-elastic fluctuations to cover length- and timescales
that are currently inaccessible by atomistic simulations. The mechanistic
properties of protein electron transfer predicted by simulation are tested
against the results of two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy. The project
seeks to solves some of the most fundamental problems of interfacial statistics
and dynamics on the nanometer length-scale andon the timescale of 1-100
nanoseconds: a) whether the Gibbs ensemble is an adequate tool for describing
the reaction activation barriers, b) whether the Debye-Onsager picture of
interfacial polarization is a good reference for developing predictive models of
interfacial electrostatics, and c) whether an appropriate theoretical framework
can be established that effectively describes energy dissipation and energy flow
in biology.