* 1464713
* Banach Spaces: Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Thomas Schlumprecht, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 04/30/2019
* USD 264,382.00

Banach spaces together with their geometry provide an important framework for
studying problems in physics, signal processing, and the analysis of large data
sets. This research project on Banach spaces will have two main directions. The
first one is the study of coordinate systems of Banach spaces. If we model a
given problem in physics or signal analysis using a certain Banach space we will
also need an "appropriate coordinate system" for that space, i.e. we want to
represent the elements of this space by a sequence of numbers. What constitutes
an "appropriate coordinate system" will of course depend on the specific
problem, but generally the goal is to approximate a given element of a Banach
space as well as possible with the least amount of coordinates, and to
reconstruct the element from the given sequence of coordinates with the smallest
possible error and the least amount of effort. Not every Banach space admits
coordinate systems which have the minimality properties; one would like a
coordinate system to satisfy. Therefore one also needs to find for a given
Banach space criteria to embed it into a space with coordinate systems, without
losing the topological and geometrical properties of the original space. Metric
spaces are often used in Computer Science to model large data sets, and our
second objective is to investigate embeddings of metric spaces into Banach
spaces, and to obtain on the one hand information about the structure of the
metric space, from the property that it embeds in certain Banach spaces, and on
the other hand deduce geometric properties of a Banach space, from the property
that certain metrics embed or do not embed in it.

Many of the problems under study in this project either originate from, or are
related to, other areas of mathematics such as descriptive set theory, harmonic
analysis, metric geometry, and approximation theory. The techniques to be
employed will involve a combination of analysis, geometry, infinite
combinatorics, and logic. One of the problems considered is an old one from
harmonic analysis, which asks whether the space of p-integrable functions and
other function spaces have a Schauder basis formed by translates of only one
element. Another prominent problem is the embedding of uniformly convex Banach
spaces into such spaces with a basis or a finite dimensional decomposition.
Together with his colleague Sivakumar and their joint student, Keaton Hamm, the
investigator intends to study the representation and approximation of elements
of certain function classes using redundant coordinate systems. The research
also pursues a new direction and investigates problems in metric geometry. This
work aims to characterize geometric and topological properties of Banach space
like reflexivity by the embeddability of certain metric spaces.