* 1464778
* SusChEM: Oxidative Methods for C-C, C-N, and C-O Bond Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Marisa Kozlowski, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 07/31/2019
* USD 486,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division is
supporting Professor Marisa C. Kozlowski of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Pennsylvania to explore the development of methods for the
formation of C-C, C-N, and C-O bonds by oxidative coupling reactions. The
formation of such bonds by facile oxidative transformations is a well-recognized
process in biological systems. Such routes often introduce functionality at non-
functionalized centers, thereby eliminating the need for complex pre-
functionalized starting materials. To achieve these goals, individual reaction
steps will be studied using stoichiometric conditions in order to understand the
principles governing novel reactivity and selectivity.

The chemistry studied will contribute to environmentally benign methods for
chemical synthesis as oxygen is used as the terminal oxidizing agent in
combination with less toxic and less expensive base metals. Successful
development of the methodology will have a broad impact as there is an important
need for synthetic methods in areas ranging from the pharmaceutical, chemical,
materials science, and agricultural industries to basic biological and chemical
research endeavors. The broader impacts involve training undergraduate students,
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. Broadening the participation of
underrepresented populations in chemistry research is a particular focus with
support for the newly established Association for Cultural Diversity (ACDC) in
Chemistry at Penn. This organization is a chapter of the National Consortium for
Diversity in Science and Engineering with the mission of promoting diversity of
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields at Penn and surrounding universities.