* 1464496
* EAGER:  GOALI: Novel Anaerobic Nitrogen Transformations in Gold-Cyanide Metallurgical Processing Tailings
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Linda Figueroa, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2018
* USD 63,003.00

1464496&lt;br/&gt;Landkamer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAGER: GOALI: Novel anaerobic
nitrogen transformations in gold-cyanide metallurgical processing
tailings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harnessing anaerobic microbial processes for
control of cyanide release from heap-leach, milling and other industrial
operations would transform how waste cyanide material is managed. Anaerobic
incubations of sediment and water collected from gold-cyanide heap-leach and
milling operations containing cyanide, nitrate and sulfate produced data that
suggest a previously undocumented transformation of cyanide and denitrification
mechanism. Two important nitrogen transformations are hypothesized for the
observed transformations in the microcosms. The native heap-leach bacteria
appeared to convert cyanide to formate and ammonia and subsequently consume the
formate under anaerobic conditions in the absence of added carbon. Secondly,
nitrate was reduced in the absence of added organic carbon. Reduced iron
minerals present in the mill residues (waste rock) may have acted as electron
donors for nitrate reduction along with the formate produced from cyanide
degradation. Harnessing these novel anaerobic nitrogen transformations in the
management of cyanide at mining ore processing operations has the potential to
significantly reduce treatment cost. The utilization of autotrophic anaerobic
cyanide degradation to prevent environmental cyanide releases at gold mining ore
processing sites represents the potential for significant monetary savings
because there are no (or minimal) chemical or aeration requirements. Total
nitrogen discharge limits also result in expensive treatment scenarios that
could be replaced by inexpensive in-situ autotrophic denitrification. This
university/ industry partnership will facilitate the applicability and
dissemination of the research outcomes to the industrial
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autotrophic (no added organic carbon) anaerobic
cyanide biodegradation has not been documented previously. To find an
organism(s) that can utilize cyanide as both an electron donor and a carbon
source in the absence of oxygen would represent an entirely new metabolic
pathway for supporting microbial growth that has not been explored. Secondly,
denitrification driven by solid phase reduced iron as an electron donor has not
been investigated in mining site environments such as heap leach operations.
Accordingly, the effect of pH, temperature on these microbes and associated
metabolisms will also represent new knowledge. Experiments that control for
potentially competing reactions are required to provide clearer evidence for
these transformations. Planned work involves anaerobic, autotrophic microcosm
studies to validate the hypothesized mechanisms. Experimental variables will
include pH, temperature and nitrate concentration to elucidate their effect on
cyanide degradation and denitrification. This will be accomplished by incubating
anaerobic batch microcosms containing heap leach residues, cyanide and sulfate
at different pH and temperatures in the presence and absence of nitrate. Liquid
samples will be withdrawn from the microcosms periodically and analyzed for
cyanide species, sulfate, sulfide, nitrate, nitrite and ammonia. Headspace gas
phase samples will be analyzed for the appearance of nitrogen gas. Additionally,
microbial DNA from key microcosms will be sequenced to identify members of the
microbial consortium responsible for the transformations. The role of solid
phase reduced iron in denitrification will also be studied by including
microcosms that contain a chemically pure reduced iron solid phase rather than
heap leach residues.