* 1464994
* I-Corps:  Novel Vortex Raman Spectrometers for Materials, Clean Energy and Biological Applications
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Jiufeng Tu, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

A Raman spectrometer is one of the main tools for molecular detection in
materials: solid, liquid or gas. This I-Corps team has shown that a Raman
spectrometer, when modified, can have ultra-high spectral and spatial
resolutions. The proposed technology entitled "Vortex Raman Spectrometer (VRM)"
developed by the team offers new ways of molecular detection, previously not
possible. There are several categories of potential users for the proposed
technology: (i) academic researchers (chemists, physicists, and material
scientists) who will use VRM to study new phenomena and new materials; (ii)
pharmaceutical companies who will use VRM to design new drugs and for quality
control; (iii) semiconductor and optical fiber manufacturers who will use Vortex
Raman imaging for monitoring inhomogeneity on the surfaces of their products and
control the impurity levels in their products; and (iv) government agencies such
as DHS and border control authority who will use VRM for real-time detection of
explosives and illegal drugs. The VRM offers solutions to these potential users
that are more efficient or sometimes new solutions to their problems that are
currently not available.

Vortex Raman microscope (VRM) uses Vortex light instead of ordinary Gaussian
beam. An optical vortex is a point of zero intensity. Its existence as a non-
trivial solution to Maxwell's equations was predicted by Mike Berry in 1974. The
creation of high orbital angular momentum (OAM) of light in Laguerre-Gaussian
(LG) beams has generated a great deal of excitement. The proposed VRM will
demonstrate the power of vortex spectroscopy for which forbidden transitions and
silent modes will become allowed with LG beams. The theoretical analysis
performed by the team has shown the feasibility of Vortex Raman spectroscopy and
a number existing of Raman spectrometers will be modified into Vortex Raman
spectrometers which will have ultra-high spectral and spatial resolutions.
Several different types of spatial light modulators will be used to turn
ordinary Gaussian beam from a laser into Laguerre-Gaussian (LG) beams. The
Vortex nature of the LG beams needs to be preserved in VRM to perform Vortex
Raman measurements.