* 1464525
* Sparse Principal Component Analysis via the Sparsest Element in a Subspace
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Paul Hand, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 133,789.00

Sparse principal component analysis (PCA) is a technique that allows biologists
and other scientists to interpret experimental data in terms of very few
variables. For example, it can help identify which among thousands of genes are
important in distinguishing different types of cancer. In order for scientists
and engineers to select the best algorithm for finding sparse principal
components, it is important to have a theoretical understanding of the
performance of many algorithms under a realistic data model. Most existing
theoretical understanding focuses on the simple case where there is a single
component that happens to be sparse. The proposed work will introduce a new
model in which there are multiple components, of which one is sparse. For a
special case of this more realistic model, the proposed work attempts to
understand if there are any conditions under which sophisticated convex programs
are provably better than very simple algorithms. Either outcome would be
informative in helping researchers decide between the many algorithms for sparse
PCA. In this project, sparse PCA will be studied from the perspective of finding
the sparsest element in a subspace. This perspective is motivated by a
multispike data model, which the PI calls a sparse-dense model. Under this
model, the infinite data limit of sparse PCA becomes the sparsest element
problem, which is nontrivial. The objective of this research is to understand
the computational-statistical tradeoff in finding the sparsest element in a
subspace under the sparse-dense model. The PI would like to determine if there
is a scaling gap between the information theoretic limit and the best
performance by a computationally efficient algorithm. Ultimately, we would like
to understand when sophisticated convex methods are provably better than simple
thresholding methods. This objective will be explored by semidefinite
relaxations, polynomial optimization, and reductions to the planted clique
problem.