* 1464127
* CRII: CHS: Fast Planning Using Computational Models of Narrative
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Stephen Ware, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2019
* USD 138,436.00

The objective of this research is to develop a plan-based computational model of
narrative, and to use that model to automatically structure interactive
experiences. When humans evaluate the importance of a narrative event, they
consider not just what has happened but also events which did not happen or
might have happened instead. This project will design, implement, and test a
computational model of this kind of hypothetical thinking, which narrative
theorists call possible worlds reasoning. This model will be used in a fast
narrative planning algorithm and put to use in an existing interactive virtual
environment. The results will improve our understanding of how people reason
hypothetically during narrative comprehension and improve the capabilities of
interactive narrative technologies to teach, train, and treat their audiences.

Specifically, this research will extend previous work on hybrid planning
algorithms which combine the rich knowledge representation of Partial Order
Causal Link (POCL) plans with fast forward-chaining state space heuristic
search. By augmenting the search space of these planners with accessibility
relations the tree can be used not just as a data structure for search but also
a network of possible worlds and the relationships between them. This
computational model of hypothetical reasoning in narrative will be evaluated
using an empirical cognitive question answering framework called QUEST. The
improved algorithm, which will leverage the state-of-the-art Fast-Downward
heuristic, will be evaluated in an existing interactive narrative virtual
environment called The Best Laid Plans.