* 1464927
* Synthetic Materials for Biofilm Inhibition
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Yan Zhao, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2019
* USD 570,000.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterials Program of the Division of
Materials Research to Iowa State University is to study novel polymeric
nanoparticles to suppress bacterial quorum sensing (QS). Through QS, bacteria
recognize each others' presence by detecting auto-inducers secreted into the
immediate environment. Once a threshold concentration is reached for the auto-
inducers, QS-regulated genes are turned on to trigger biofilm formation and
enhanced virulence for pathogenic bacteria. In biofilms, bacteria can be
1000-times more resistant to antibiotics and other environmental pressure.
Eighty percent of all bacterial infections are related to biofilm formation and
practically all medical devices are subject to biofilm infection. Overcoming
bacterial resistance and biofilm formation is an urgent and difficult challenge
to scientists and engineers worldwide. The proposed research aims to develop
nanoparticle catalysts to mimic naturally occurring auto-inducer degrading
enzymes to selectively destroy the main auto-inducer of gram negative bacteria.
The research has the potential to impact numerous areas that are affected by
bacterial biofilm formation including health care, engineering, and agriculture.
This cross disciplinary research will expose student researchers to a wide range
of skills and prepare them to solve large problems faced by humanity through
cutting edge materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Despite their
unicellular nature, bacteria can communicate with each other and recognize
others' presence. The process, termed quorum sensing (QS), happens as signal
molecules (i.e., auto-inducers) are secreted and accumulate within a bacterial
community. A threshold concentration of the auto-inducer triggers biofilm
formation and enhanced virulence for pathogenic bacteria. The emergence of
multidrug resistant bacteria and shortage of new antibiotics in drug development
prompted many researchers to search intensely for potential solutions, targeting
bacteria in the biofilm state in particular. The proposed research develops
polymeric nanoparticle catalysts to selectively bind and destroy the main auto-
inducer of gram negative bacteria. A number of strategies will be pursued to
create catalytic pockets in water soluble nanoparticles carrying the necessary
catalytic functionalities for the intended chemical decomposition. Kinetic
studies in the degradation of the auto-inducers will be combined with biological
assays to identify the most potent biofilm inhibitors. With the proposed
research, student researchers will be trained in a wide range of skills
including organic synthesis, biology, antimicrobial research, enzyme catalysis,
physical organic chemistry, supramolecular chemistry, and polymer chemistry.
Moreover, the students will see a strong connection between their work and large
problems faced by humans and appreciate the value of cutting edge scientific
research. The multidisciplinary work thus can provide excellent training to the
student researchers that come from either a chemistry or veterinary medicine
background.