* 1464032
* CRII: SHF: SimDB: An Automated Framework to Debug System-level Concurrency Faults
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Tingting Yu, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2018
* USD 190,648.00

Modern computer systems utilize multiple CPUs, connect to a large array of
peripheral devices, and sense their surroundings through various sensors and
actuators. The increasing complexity of these systems can cause software that
runs on them to suffer from deployment failures due to various forms of
concurrency faults. When a software failure occurs in the deployed system,
developers need to debug the system and find the cause of the failure in a
timely manner. Unfortunately, debugging large complex concurrent software
systems is difficult. This is because concurrency faults occur ?intermittently?
and are thus difficult to reproduce, unless there is a specific interleaving
that can cause such faults to occur. For example, a failure may involve
participation of various software components and system events; reproducing
these may require recreating a combination of many factors or specific system
environment settings (e.g., hardware,network).

The goal of this project is to provide an automated framework that allows
engineers to effectively debug system-level concurrency faults in deployed
systems. To achieve this goal, the project will investigate and develop advanced
static and dynamic analysis techniques. Specifically, it will (i) develop light-
weight static analysis techniques that can identify potential failure-inducing
program paths; (ii) develop dynamic analysis techniques by using virtualization
to effectively reproduce failures that occur in the deployed systems due to
nondeterministic and heterogeneous system events; (iii) implement an automated
debugging framework that provides rich user interfaces to facilitate in-house
debugging processes. The outcome of this project will be a framework that is
scalable, transparent, and capable of dealing with broad classes of concurrency
faults. The process by which the framework is employed is mostly automated so it
requires little human intervention. As such, the framework is expected to help
developers understand and correct failures in deployed systems, with benefits to
all who depend on such systems.