* 1464635
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Center of Forensic Science Research at FIU
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2016
* Jose Almirall, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2016
* USD 15,850.00

Center for Forensic RESearch and COmmercialization (FRESCO) at
FIU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forensic science practice has benefitted from several
important scientific advances (ie. DNA profiling, PCR, high resolution mass
spectrometry) and rapid transition from basic research to forensic method
development has improved the quality of evidence in many types of forensic
investigations, resulting in a safer and more just society. The transfer of
technology from the research laboratory to commercial products can be
facilitated with close collaborations between the end users (law enforcement and
the courts), knowledge and technology developers (research laboratories) and
industrial partners willing to commercialize and market tools for routine use.
The International Forensic Research Institute (IFRI) is recognized as a national
leader in forensic science research since it's founding in 1997 with more than
10 active researchers in the forensic sciences in the Departments of Chemistry
and Biochemistry, Biological Sciences and Earth and the Environment. The goals
of the new Center for Forensic Research and Commercialization (FRESCO) are to
bring together industrial partners, including the end-user community, with
academic forensic science researchers with an aim to develop, implement and
commercialize new tools that benefit the national forensic science enterprise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new center will conduct research in several emerging
areas within chemical and biological sciences with potential impact on the
criminal justice system. A project entitled Rapid, Direct 25 minute PCR Analysis
of Forensic Evidence has the potential to speed up DNA profiling thereby
providing better information to investigators. Genome wide screening for the
expansion of epigenetic markers for age and trace forensic body fluid
identification will aim to identify the type of cells that give origin to the
DNA sample present at the crime scene. A project entitled Source Attribution
Tools; Elemental and Isotopic Analyses Using Laser Sampling Strategies will
develop rapid tools for the organic and inorganic characterization of materials
and extending the reach of forensic scientists to field analysis with the use of
portable instrumentation. The Paper Microfluidic Devices for the Detection of
Explosives Residues project develops microfluidic paper based analytical devices
(ÂµPADs) for on-site explosives detection utilizing colorimetric reactions
immobilized on paper. Database Development for Forensic Evidence Interpretation
will increase the number and types of databases for common types of forensic
evidence such as ink chemistry. The Canine Cargo Container Screening combines
the use of properly trained canines and instrumental methods to offer a rapid
screening system. The rapidly changing types of encountered illicit drugs
require the need for the Mass Spectroscopic Characterization of Designer Drugs
project in collaboration with the forensic laboratory community and other
industry partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant is jointly supported
by NSF and the National Institute of Justice.