* 1464371
* CRII: RI: Large-Scale Discovery and Organization of Subcategories and Parts from Image and Video Segments
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Fuxin Li, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2018
* USD 173,375.00

This project develops a system for understanding of visual categories given
limited annotations. The system automatically detects subcategories and object
parts with only category-level annotations. Such detailed understanding is
important for autonomous systems to perform interactions with objects or to
recognize them under occlusion. For this purpose, current deep neural networks
will be extended to better support objects and parts of irregular shape. Once
understandings at such level have been achieved, it helps to construct new
categories from just a few exemplars, which has broad applications in autonomous
systems.

This research generalizes previously successful approaches in semantic
segmentation and unsupervised video segmentation for an efficient approach to
learn subcategories and parts. The framework starts from overlapping figure-
ground segment proposals, computes least squares regressors from input segments
against segment overlaps, and utilizes the Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury formula and
structures from the quadratic loss function for efficient optimization of
thousands to hundreds of thousands of subcategories and parts simultaneously.
This project then explores the training of deep convolutional networks with
initializations from these subcategories and parts defined on free-form
segments. This requires generalization of the neural network architecture to
handle free-form segments that can deform through a video sequence. It is
proposed to use the geodesic distance transform on spatial-temporal segments to
define customized filters for different localities for improved performance and
better interpretability.