* 1464515
* RUI: An Examination of the Utility of Tris(phosphino)borates as Supporting Ligands for Rhenium(I) Dihapto-Arene Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Paul Fischer, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 08/31/2019
* USD 258,780.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Paul J. Fischer of Macalester College leads a research group
of exclusively undergraduate students in designing and synthesizing new rhenium
(Re) metal complexes for chemical synthesis applications. Specifically, the
target Re complexes are anticipated to bind organic molecules (for example,
benzene and naphthalene, inexpensive substances found in crude petroleum), and
activate them toward reactions under mild conditions. The hypothesized results
of these reactions include transformations of these abundant feedstock chemicals
into more useful substances that require significantly more energy-intensive
strategies to prepare using current methods. This project will provide a
stimulating training ground in modern research methods for talented
undergraduate students including women and African American students. This
research program seeks to equip undergraduate students with the skills, tenacity
and enthusiasm to facilitate their success in chemical research in subsequent
graduate studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the feasibility and
advantages of employing tris(phosphino)borates as surrogates for
hydrotris(1-pyrazolyl)borate for the preparation of pi-basic fragments with high
propensity to coordinate arenes in a dihapto fashion. Thermal and photochemical
syntheses are being pursued to open the completely unexplored area of
tris(phosphino)borate rhenium chemistry. Special emphasis is being placed on
modulating the electronic and steric environment of Re fragments of
tris(phosphino)borates for optimum dearomatization of aromatic substrates.
Reaction products are characterized by NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) and IR
(infra-red) spectroscopies, cyclic voltammetry and X-ray crystallography, the
latter via collaboration with the University of Minnesota.