* 1464781
* Bifunctional Organometallic Catalysis with Phosphines and N-Heterocyclic Carbenes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Andrew Cooksy, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2019
* USD 510,000.00

In this project funded by the the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Douglas B. Grotjahn and Professor Andrew L. Cooksy of San
Diego State University are studying ways to develop the best catalysts for
reactions that make organic compounds of interest for a variety of applications,
such as pharmaceutical compounds. Organic molecules (ligands) are being designed
and synthesized that can bind to a metal atom via one site and to a reacting
substrate via another site, and a range of these ligand/metal combinations are
being tested for catalytic activity. The fundamental, molecular level steps
through which these catalysts function are being studied with the aim of
utilizing this information to better design the next generation of ligands.
Because catalysis accounts for processes that total one third of the global
gross domestic product and a majority of the commercial chemical products and
chemical processes, the discovery of new or improved catalysts for organic
reactions can have a great impact on economic development and growth. During the
course of this research project, undergraduate and graduate students are being
trained in the field of catalysis, and a high school outreach program on
molecular visualization is being carried out.

Professors Grotjahn and Cooksy are using some of the design principles of
enzymes, specifically substrate hydrogen bonding and proton transfer, with the
aim of accelerating organometallic catalysis. Ligands containing proton-donating
or hydrogen-bonding groups are being synthesized and combined with a variety of
metal precursors to form metal complexes. The reactions being studied center on
waste-free addition or isomerization reactions, with several specific goals: (1)
building and applying a toolbox of alkene isomerization catalysts; (2) using
ligands to enable X-H activation; (3) developing catalysts for addition
reactions; (4) developing protic N-heterocyclic carbene compounds, a newer but
promising ligand class with carbene nitrogens bearing an N-H moiety that can
engage in hydrogen bonding or proton transfer. The project involves significant
one-on-one training of students in modern techniques of organic and
organometallic chemistry, including NMR spectroscopy, catalysis screening, and
computation. The proposed research has the potential to add new mechanistic
insight to our broader understanding of bifunctional catalysis.