* 1464264
* Collaborative Research: Nitrogen Partitioning and Evolution of Particulate Organic Nitrogen in Peat Fire Emissions
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Lynn Mazzoleni, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2017
* USD 114,576.00

This project is a collaborative effort by Desert Research Institute and Michigan
Technological University to provide insight into the emissions of nitrogen-
containing compounds from the combustion of peat soils. Preliminary estimation
suggests that nitrogen emissions from fires in peatlands can potentially rival
that of fossil fuel combustion. An accurate assessment of the global nitrogen
cycling requires a detailed understanding of the various nitrogen-containing
compounds emitted during peat fires and the factors affecting their partitioning
into the gas and particle phases and the changes that they undergo in the
atmosphere with age.

The main hypothesis of the proposed work is that an important fraction of peat
fuel nitrogen (N) is contained in particulate organic nitrogen (PON), and that
this fraction changes during photochemical processing in the atmosphere. The
objectives of the research are: 1) to evaluate the partitioning of peat soil N
into gas and particle-phase components as a function of peat fuel type and
combustion efficiency, with a particular focus on quantifying the PON fraction;
and 2) to assess how the oxidation (aging) of smoke by hydroxyl (OH) radicals
alters the abundance and chemical properties of the PON.

The proposed work is expected to advance the understanding of the importance of
peat fires for global N cycling and atmospheric chemistry. The research results
will be distributed to US natural resource managers through a webinar, which may
inform their decision-making on peatland restoration and preservation. A high
school science teacher involved in this research will help develop material for
engaging students in hands-on activities related to biomass burning, fire
ecology, and atmospheric chemistry implications of these fires.