* 1464311
* CRII: CPS: Safe Cyber-Physical Systems Upgrades
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Taylor Johnson, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 174,634.00

Cyber-physical systems (CPS) encompass the next generation of computerized
control for countless aspects of the physical world and interactions thereof.
The typical engineering process for CPS reuses existing designs, models,
components, and software from one version to the next. For example, in
automotive engineering, it is common to reuse significant portions of existing
model-year vehicle designs when developing the next model-year vehicle, and such
practices are common across CPS industries, from aerospace to biomedical. While
reuse drastically enhances efficiency and productivity, it leads to the
possibility of introducing unintended mismatches between subcomponents'
specifications. For example, a 2011 US National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA) recall of over 1.5 million model-year 2005-2010 vehicles
was due to the upgrade of a physical transmission component that was not
appropriately addressed in software. A mismatch between cyber and physical
specifications may occur when a software or hardware upgrade (in effect, a cyber
or physical specification change) is not addressed by an update (in effect, a
matching specification change) in the other domain. This research will develop
new techniques and software tools to detect automatically if cyber-physical
specification mismatches exist, and then mitigate the effects of such mismatches
at runtime, with the overall goal to yield more reliable and safer CPS upon
which society increasingly depends. The detection and mitigation methods
developed will be evaluated in an energy CPS testbed. While the evaluation
testbed is in the energy domain, the methods are applicable to other CPS domains
such as automotive, aerospace, and biomedical. The educational goals will bridge
gaps between computer science and electrical engineering, preparing a diverse
set of next-generation CPS engineers by developing education platforms to
enhance CPS engineering design and verification skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is to develop new techniques and tools to automatically
identify and mitigate the effects of cyber-physical specification mismatches.
There are three major research objectives. The first objective is to identify
cyber-physical specification mismatches. To identify mismatches, a detection
problem will be formalized using the framework of hybrid input/output automata
(HIOA). Offline algorithms will be designed to find candidate specifications
from models and implementations using static and dynamic analyses, and then
identify candidate mismatches. The second objective is to monitor and assure
safe CPS upgrades. As modern CPS designs are complex, it may be infeasible to
determine all specifications and mismatches between all subcomponents at design
time. Runtime monitoring and verification methods will be developed for inferred
specifications to detect mismatches at runtime. When they are identified, a
runtime assurance framework building on supervisory control and the Simplex
architecture will assure safe CPS runtime operation. The third objective is to
evaluate safe CPS upgrades in an example CPS. The results of the other
objectives and their ability to ensure safe CPS upgrades will be evaluated in an
energy CPS testbed, namely an AC electrical distribution microgrid that
interfaces DC-producing renewables like photovoltaics to AC.