* 1464112
* Collaborative Research: On the Origin of Atomic Layer Deposition Enhanced Activity and Stability of Nanostructured Cathodes for Intermediate-temperature Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Kevin Huang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 396,857.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: In this collaborative project supported by the
Ceramics Program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor Kevin Huang
and Professor Xinhua Liang are developing highly active and stable
nanostructured cathodes for intermediate-temperature solid oxide fuel cells (IT-
SOFCs). IT-SOFCs are a commercially viable high-efficiency and low-emission
power product with a great potential to replace conventional internal combustion
engines. The current cathodes for IT-SOFCs are nanostructured with high
catalytic activity, but are unfortunately unstable, gradually losing their
activity during operation. This project focuses on stabilizing nanostructured
cathodes with atomic layer deposition (ALD) and understanding the reason behind
why stability and activity of nanostructured cathodes are significantly enhanced
by the ALD process. The fundamental knowledge gained from this project is
expected to contribute to the understanding of the activity-stability dilemma
observed in the catalysis community and play a significant role in developing
new active and stable cathodes for commercial IT-SOFCs. The project supports one
female graduate student and one minority undergraduate student.

TECHNICAL DETAILS: A key to the success of IT-SOFCs is to develop highly active
and stable cathodes. The current nanostructured active cathodes are unstable at
elevated temperatures. This project is aimed at developing active and stable
nanostructured cathodes and investigating the fundamental science underpinning
the enhanced catalytic activity and stability through an integrated "theoretical
hypothesis" and "experimental validation" approach. A multifunctional defect-
chemistry model entailing nanoscale porosity, mixed oxide-ionic and electronic
conductivity, Sr-segregation suppression and morphological stabilization is
being investigated as the theoretical basis. A suite of advanced in situ, in
operando and ex situ surface analysis techniques is being utilized to
systematically probe the profiles of chemical and electronic states and
surface/sub-surface phase and morphology evolutions of well-defined epitaxial
heterostructures to gather key experimental evidence for validating and/or
modifying the model. The electrocatalytic charge-transport mechanisms are also
being investigated on patterned electrode thin-film structures to collect the
individualized electrochemical properties and correlate them with the surface
chemistry results. Both graduate and undergraduate students including members of
minority and other underrepresented groups play an active role in this research
through clearly identified and focused research projects. The importance and
potential impact of the project are being disseminated to the general public via
special outreach programs at USC and Missouri S&T. A new course is being created
for graduate students at USC. A joint educational program with Benedict College,
a historically black college, has been previously established with the goal to
promote education and workforce development for underrepresented students.