* 1464978
* Synthesis and Small-Molecule Reactivity of Unsaturated Metal Isocyanides
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Joshua Figueroa, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 04/30/2018
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Joshua S. Figueroa of The University of California, San
Diego is studying the synthesis and fundamental reactivity of coordinatively
unsaturated transition metal isocyanide complexes. The isocyanide molecules that
will be utilized in this project represent a class with significant steric
encumbrance, such that they are effective at stabilizing highly electronically
and coordinatively unsaturated transition metal centers. The proposed work
focuses on the interplay between the reactivity of low-coordinate complexes and
isocyanide ligand super-structure for the goal of developing new reactivity
paradigms in transition metal chemistry and homogeneous catalysis. In addition,
this project is also ideally suited for outreach and training at all levels of
the STEM education continuum. The PI is engaged in increasing participation of
underrepresented persons (URP) in research to expose young students to STEM
fields and careers. The synthetic work is integrated into major outreach efforts
of the PI aimed at increasing the exposure, participation and retention of
under-represented persons in synthetic chemistry and related STEM fields. These
efforts include increasing the participation of junior college transfer students
in the San Diego area in chemical research and continued chemistry enrichment
activities for local San Diego High School students with predominantly URP
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the synthesis and
study of low-coordinate transition metal isocyanide complexes in order to
advance fundamental aspects of molecular design, small-molecule activation
chemistry and catalysis. Specific studies are proposed to intimately control the
electronic structure environment of transition metal centers, through synthesis,
for the binding and activation of exceedingly unreactive small molecule
substrates and difficult-to-activate chemical bonds. A complement of synthetic
strategies and molecular design principles are proposed to achieve these goals.
In addition, the synthetic work is coupled with advanced spectroscopic,
analytical, mechanistic and computational techniques to provide insight into
electronic-structure/reactivity correlations.