* 1464736
* A Workshop for Integrative Additive Biomanufacturing and Tumor Engineering, Bethesda, MD, February 19-20, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Gretchen Mahler, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 12/31/2015
* USD 26,511.00

PI: Mahler, Gretchen J. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1464736&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creation of highly organized multicellular tumor
constructs could potentially revolutionize oncology and tissue engineering. The
recent advances in additive biomanufacturing, oncology, tissue engineering,
microfabrication, and materials science offers new opportunities for creating
sophisticated and vascularized 3D tumor models in vitro by printing or
depositing materials and cancer and its surrounding cells layer-by-layer
precisely with the help of a high-precision robot. These lab-produced high order
tumor tissues can be used as disease models for both pathophysiological studies
and drug discovery. Here, the PI proposes an NSF-NIH joint Workshop in
integrative advanced biomanufacturing and tumor engineering. The overarching
goal of this workshop is to bring together scientific leaders to review the
progress, to identify grand challenges in integrating additive manufacturing
with tumor engineering, and finally to articulate a vision to advance physical
sciences and engineering in life sciences and oncology. The emerging of additive
biomanufacturing, human genome editing, stem cell engineering, material genome
techniques, computational and synthetic biology, and personalized medicine
offers new opportunities to spur research, education, industry growth and
innovation in tumor engineering. The following objectives are expected to be
achieved through the workshop: 1) Identify challenges in biomanufacturing of
tumor models that express key characteristics of human tumors in vivo, 2)
Develop a community to share ideas, resources, and technologies to address
challenges identified through the workshop, 3) Establish a forum for engineers
to collaborate with oncologists or vice versa in tumor engineering research, 4)
Increase public awareness of tumor engineering research, 5) Promote tumor
engineering research and education programs, and train and educate students in
tumor engineering research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held in
Bethesda, MD, February 19-20, 2015. It will consist of panel presentations and
in-depth discussions by leading scholars and researchers. The panel discussion
will be led by a session chair and documented by a scribe. The scribe will be
responsible for developing a session report based on the discussions. The
session report will be further extended into a Workshop Report that will be
published and accessible by the public. The workshop will tentatively consist of
four sessions including "Tumor-on-A-Chip", "3D Printing of Multiple Tissues
Integrated Physiological Tumor Models", "Noninvasive Characterization of 3D
Printed Tumor Tissues", and "Multiscale Tumor Computational Modeling". While
there have been increasingly more workshops and symposia in additive
manufacturing held or planned lately, no workshops or symposia, to the best of
organizers' knowledge, have significant overlap with the proposed workshop. It
is expected that this workshop will initiate and stimulate the discussion on
integrating additive biomanufacturing with tumor engineering and spur
collaboration among engineers, oncologists, and life scientists. The findings of
the Workshop will be disseminated in several different ways. The report will be
published and accessible to the research community. A perspective paper stemmed
from the Workshop will be published in a peer-review journal. The workshop will
serve as an open forum for researchers and scholars to interact with each other
and to exchange ideas. Efforts will be made to recruit early career
investigators and investigators from underrepresented groups to participate in
the workshop.