* 1464497
* Trap Assisted Dynamical Processes in Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Daniel Gamelin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program supports
Professors Xiaosong Li and David Gamelin of the University of Washington to
develop new nanoscale chemical structures that are useful for the emergence of
next-generation information processing or energy conversion technologies.
Chemical processes in semiconductor nanostructures are ubiquitous in energy
conversion, energy storage, and efficient lighting, as well as in information
processing and storage technologies. This integrated approach of synthesis,
spectroscopy, and theory yields new and powerful avenues for describing
fundamental properties that govern the important chemical processes in
functional semiconductor nanostructures. This collaborative project, which
involves both theoretical calculations and experimental synthesis and
measurement also provides a mechanism for advanced interdisciplinary education
and training that spans materials science, theory, inorganic chemistry,
electronic structure analysis, dynamics analysis, and spectroscopy, and prepares
participating undergraduate and graduate students for future careers in science
and technology. Through a combination of high-school and community outreach,
undergraduate research mentoring, and engagement with faculty at primarily
undergraduate institutions, this project promotes and fosters participation of a
broad spectrum of youth in science and engineering activities.

This project uses a balanced theoretical and experimental approach to develop a
fundamental understanding of various trap-assisted dynamical processes in
semiconductor nanostructures. New computational methods using a first-principles
spin-Hamiltonian within the time-dependent density functional theory framework
are being developed for predicting and modeling trap-assisted dynamical
processes. New computational approaches in conjunction with
spectroscopic/spectroelectrochemical techniques are applied to investigations of
trap-state assisted energy transfer processes and excited state dynamics that
allow their microscopic origins to be defined thoroughly. Key structural
parameters within the nanocrystals are to be systematically chemically modified.
Theoretical and experimental determination of the parameters allows modulation
or control of trap-state assisted processes in impurity-containing semiconductor
nanocrystals.