* 1464252
* CRII: RI: What do you mean? -- Automatic identification of inferences drawn from text
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 01/31/2019
* USD 143,374.00

When dealing with language, readers/hearers understand far more than only the
literal meaning of the words they read/hear. For instance, if your son's teacher
tells you "I doubt your son will pass his exam", you will infer that your son
will probably fail the exam. This project investigates how to automatically
derive systematic inferences that people commonly draw. To approximate human
understanding, it is essential for natural language processing (NLP) systems to
develop broad-coverage models that capture what is conveyed in language without
being explicitly said. The project focuses on how events are perceived: in the
example above, do people believe that the son will pass? Accurately identifying
events that are agreed upon and taken as facts has implications for any NLP task
that require an accurate inference process, such as in information extraction.
The outcomes of the project consist of a better grasp of how linguistic insights
can be used to automatically approximate human-level understanding, and publicly
available data that will serve to develop robust, broad-coverage NLP systems as
well as to evaluate and sharpen linguistic theories. The goal of automatically
deriving common inferences is pursued by developing classifiers that bring in,
as features, linguistic insights studied in semantics and pragmatics, and by
constructing a dataset of naturally occurring examples, from different genres,
annotated with humans' intuitions via crowdsourcing techniques. A large body of
work in NLP is recently focusing on the power of "surface" features for NLP
tasks. But such features are reaching a limit. This project demonstrates how
specialized linguistic features go beyond what can be approximated with surface-
level information given available data and leads to fundamental advances in NLP
systems. Independently of performance on NLP tasks, semantic and pragmatic
features are of interest from a theoretical linguistics perspective. By
quantitatively studying the interactions of linguistic features on a large
amount of naturally-occurring examples, this project has an impact not only for
NLP but also for semantic and pragmatic theories.