* 1464435
* Collaborative Research:  Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Advanced Mammalian Biomanufacturing Innovation Center (AMBIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Michael Betenbaugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 05/31/2016
* USD 16,360.00

Johns Hopkins University, Clemson University, and the University of Delaware
propose to form a new NSF-supported Industrial/University Cooperative Research
Center (I/UCRC) entitled the Advanced Mammalian Biomanufacturing Innovation
Center (AMBIC) to address current and future challenges faced by US bio-
pharmaceuticals manufacturing. The Advanced Mammalian Biomanufacturing
Innovation Center (AMBIC) will bring together leading academic, industrial, and
government biotechnologists with the goal of advancing cell culture
manufacturing innovation at a pre-competitive research level. AMBIC represents a
unique opportunity to address technology challenges and bottlenecks in US
biopharmaceutical manufacturing by bringing together leading researchers and
innovators to implement transformative products and processes that will lead to
a stronger, healthier, and more competitive biopharmaceutical industry. In this
way, AMBIC will be a critical catalyst towards maintaining national excellence
in biopharmaceutical production by focusing on mammalian cell culture issues.
The three thrusts of AMBIC are as follows: 1. Genome and Cellular Engineering of
Mammalian Platform with the goal of developing advanced platforms with improved
production capabilities. 2.`Omics and Systems Biology for Mammalian Cells with
the task of acquiring ?omics data and implementing standards of performance for
the mammalian production platform 3.Optimizing Bioreactor Control for Improved
Cellular Performance with the objective of characterizing metabolic states and
implementing advanced controls.

This project will support the planning meeting to engage partners from the
biopharmaceutical industry and government to participate in AMBIC and develop a
research and educational program for the center. A planning meeting will help to
identify major research challenges and to design a cutting edge research and
educational program in mammalian biomanufacturing. Furthermore, AMBIC will
establish and maintain a pipeline of educated and motivated students at all
levels for careers in biopharmaceutical manufacturing and development.
Collaborations with corporate partners will enable the students to work on the
most pressing problems that the industry faces. In addition, AMBIC will serve to
engage and excite students from under-represented minority populations to pursue
a career in life sciences, engineering, or related STEM fields. Through systems
biology analysis, novel cell line development, and bioreactor optimization,
AMBIC will provide innovative solutions to improve biomanufacturing
efficiencies. These advances will ultimately serve to lower overall health care
costs for consumers and make biopharmaceuticals more affordable and available
for a greater number of patients.