* 1464335
* CRII: NeTS: A Coordinate System based Network for Data Plane Scalability and High Throughput
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Chen Qian, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2016
* USD 174,998.00

The growing popularity of cloud services and big data processing requires design
of high-bandwidth networks that provide scalability for tens of thousands of
servers and flexibility for incremental growth of network size. Recent work has
been investigating new network architecture and protocols to achieve three
important design goals of large data centers, namely, flexibility for
incremental growth, scalability for large networks, and high throughput.
Unfortunately, existing data center network architectures focus on one or two of
the above properties and pay little attention to the others.

This research entails a systematic study of the architecture and design issues
of a novel coordinate-based network. The design innovations include (i) a random
and dense interconnect of network switches to achieve flexibility, (ii) a novel
greedy routing protocol on virtual coordinates to replace address-based routing
and achieve forwarding plane scalability, and (iii) extension of the greedy
routing protocol for high-throughput multi-path routing.

In addition, the design innovations provide network capabilities to support
important data center services, such as key-value operations and multicast.
Compared to existing work, the coordinate-based network provides new
opportunities to achieve these services without exhausting data plane memory.

The research objectives include the following: (i) design, implementation, and
evaluation of the proposed network architecture and protocols; (ii) design and
implementation of scalable data center services in the proposed network,
including key-value operations and multicast; (iii) design of the update and
recovery methods to maintain a consistent network; and (iv) development of a
unified simulator for data center network protocols and prototyping the proposed
network.

The results of this research contribute towards enhancing the performance and
scalability of current data center networks, the creation of a novel greedy
routing protocol using virtual coordinates, and the education of undergraduate
and graduate students on network protocol design. Given the growing importance
of big data applications and cloud computing, the proposed research has the
potential to influence network operation in academia, industry, business, and
government. The results of this research will be incorporated into the
undergraduate course Computer Networking and Introduction to Database Systems
and graduate courses Advanced Computer Networking and Data Center Networks,
Cloud Computing, and Future Internet taught by the PI at the University of
Kentucky. Students trained in this project will be capable to develop new
protocols and conduct network experiments in various test tools. The PI is also
making effort to integrate under-represented minorities. Finally, the simulator
built for this work will be disseminated in the form of an open-source
prototype.