* 1464048
* Patriot League Institutions Mentor Associate Professors WISEly
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Nathan Urban, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Erika Tatiana Camacho
* 08/31/2021
* USD 703,742.00

This project will create and study a new model for mentoring of women associate
professors in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). A
diverse network of Patriot League Institutions will be involved: Lehigh
University, Georgetown University, Bucknell University, Lafayette College, and
the United States Military Academy. These small to mid-sized universities
represent a range of missions, Carnegie classifications, geographies, and
organizational structures. This project will address gaps in mentor structures
and practices by establishing Faculty Success Fellowships for two cohorts of
eligible associate professor women in STEM across the network. The program
includes a peer-mentoring component that includes faculty from across the
network of institutions to expand the faculty peer network. Expected outcomes
include: improved perceptions of mentoring and support; improved measures of
career satisfaction and progress; enhanced mentoring skills; and campus leaders
with understanding about how to align promotion expectations with
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is specifically designed to
address the many reasons that STEM women faculty remain at associate professor
rank longer than men, 1 to 3 years, or 24.2% more, before promotion to full
professor (Bilimoira, 2011; MLA 2009; Buch, 2011). Some of the reasons are tied
to inequitable mentoring at the associate faculty level (Buch, 2011). The
intervention is adapted from Lehigh's ADVANCE program, strengthened with
information from previous ADVANCE programs, and uniquely refined to each
institution's context by local implementation teams. The Fellowships permit
faculty to design and implement a mentored resourced plan of action leading to
early success. The vertical mentoring structure will be reinforced with a peer-
to-peer mentoring component to minimize isolation, foster accountability,
increase their support networking, provide outside perspectives, and encourage
future collaborations. Administrative leadership (Deans and Department Chairs,
as appropriate) is essential to success; the proposal supports their inclusion
through ongoing communication. The iterative evaluation provides insight into
existing and evolving attitudes about mentoring, facilitates knowledge about
implementation process, and will improve trainings. The findings will create and
advance knowledge about the design and implementation of mentoring programs for
mid-career success of women faculty in STEM. This project will strengthen our
understanding of how best to support associate professor faculty to full
professor, where most higher education leaders emerge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF ADVANCE Partnerships for Learning and Adaptation Networks (PLAN) program
track supports projects that promote the adaptation and implementation of
previously effective ADVANCE programs in new contexts and the testing of
innovative strategies to promote the participation, success, and advancement of
women in STEM academic careers. PLAN projects also contribute to the knowledge
base on gender equity in STEM academic careers.