* 1464287
* CRII: CHS: Cyberbullying Detection Using Content and Social Network Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Vivek Singh, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2019
* USD 188,348.00

This project aims to define new approaches for automatic detection of
cyberbullying by integrating the relevant research in social sciences and
computer science. Cyberbullying is a critical social problem that occurs over a
technical substrate. According to a recent National Crime Prevention Council
report, more than 40% of teenagers in the US have reported being cyberbullied.
This is especially worrying as the multiple studies have reported that the
victims of cyberbullying often deal with psychiatric and psychosomatic
disorders. Specifically, this research will advance the state of the art in
cyberbullying detection beyond textual analysis by also giving due attention to
the social relationships in which these bullying messages are exchanged. A
higher accuracy at detection would allow for better mitigation of the
cyberbullying phenomenon and may help improve the lives of thousands of victims
who are cyberbullied each year. The results of this research will also open
doors to employing social intervention mechanisms to help prevent cyberbullying
incidents in future. The findings from this research will also validate and
refine existing theories on cyberbullying and potentially advance the field by
creating a wave of data-driven analysis of the phenomenon. The generated data
set will be made available to the larger research community, thus enabling new
findings that can help counter this social problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will define new approaches for automatic detection of cyberbullying and
validate and refine social science theories related to cyberbullying. To
understand cyberbullying, experts in social science have focused on personality,
social relationships, and psychological factors involving both the bully and the
victim. Recently computer science researchers have also developed automated
methods to identify cyberbullying messages by text mining cyber conversations.
However, focusing only on the textual content may lead to a piecemeal
understanding of the phenomenon and a limited detection performance. Hence, this
research investigates: (1) whether analyzing social network features surrounding
the network can improve the accuracy of cyberbullying detection, and (2) whether
the findings of social science research on cyberbullying obtained via surveys,
ethnography, and interview-based methods hold true when tested via automated
data analysis undertaken at a much bigger scale. By analyzing the social
relationship graph between users and deriving features such as number of
friends, network embeddedness, and relationship centrality, the project will
validate (and potentially refine) multiple theories in social science literature
and assimilate those findings to create better cyberbullying detectors. The
project will yield new, comprehensive models and algorithms that can be used for
cyberbullying detection in automated settings.