* 1464694
* Reactivity of Radicals in Crystal Lattices
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Anna Gudmundsdottir, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2019
* USD 498,960.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanism Program is
supporting Professor Anna Gudmundsdottir at the University of Cincinnati to
investigate the solid-state photochemistry and photophysics of naphthoquinones
and vinyl azides, using a combination of laser flash photolysis and x-ray
crystallography. The goal of this research is to elucidate solid-state reaction
mechanisms and to explain how a crystal lattice structure can affect reactivity.
Professor Gudmundsdottir will integrate the research components of this project
with an educational program designed to attract both high school and
undergraduate students, with a focus on enhancing participation of students from
groups that are underrepresented in science. Students will be provided with an
opportunity to participate in research and educational activities that focus on
professional development. The proposed research and the developmental teaching
will lead to enhanced infrastructure within the Chemistry Department at the
University of Cincinnati and serve as an outreach program for other schools in
the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the solid-state
photoreactivity of naphthoquinones and vinyl azides by identifying their
photoproducts and acquiring their X-ray structures. Laser flash photolysis will
be used to characterize the transient excited states and radicals which are
formed in the crystals and to determine the kinetics for their formation and
decay. Collectively, these data will make it possible to elucidate detailed
solid-state reaction mechanisms and to explain how the crystal lattice affects
behavior of transient species and selection of the reaction products.
Mechanistic studies will be supported by theoretical calculations. The planed
studies, will lead to new knowledge in the field of photochemistry, reactive
intermediates and solid-state chemistry. The proposed research will also
contribute toward the design of crystal lattices for selective carbon-carbon and
carbon-nitrogen bond formation from radicals, with a goal of using crystals as a
matrix for solvent-free synthesis. Simultaneously, this research will contribute
to the design of photoresponsive devices, such as solar cells and light emitting
diodes.