* 1464661
* Fundamental Reactions Relevant to Selective Hydrocarbon Functionalization with Late-Transition Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Karen Goldberg, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2018
* USD 480,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
funding Professor Karen I. Goldberg of the University of Washington to improve
the general mechanistic understanding of key reactions needed to design
catalysts that enable an energy efficient, environmentally benign and cost-
effective transformation of hydrocarbons. New catalytic methods that selectively
convert the carbon-hydrogen bonds of hydrocarbons to yield higher value products
have the potential to impact large-scale chemical production. New processes may
eventually permit industrial chemists to achieve more sustainable processes by
employing available and underappreciated carbon feedstocks, and abundant, non-
toxic reagents in production. Within this project, the mechanisms of specific
reaction steps involved in hydrocarbon functionalization, such as carbon-
hydrogen bond cleavage and incorporation of oxygen from air, are being carefully
investigated for their optimal application in selective catalysis. A diverse
group of graduate and undergraduate students is being trained in modern methods
for studying catalysis and mechanism. Students are encouraged to pursue careers
in science, with emphasis on the need for a strong workforce of effective
independent scientists. Outreach to high school students and the general public
is being planned to communicate the vital role of catalysis research in finding
new energy efficient and environmentally benign methods for making many everyday
products from plastics, to paints, to pharmaceuticals.

Professor Goldberg is developing a detailed mechanistic understanding of
fundamental organometallic reactions with potential applications in the
functionalization of carbon-hydrogen bonds of hydrocarbons, including selective
methane oxidation. New strategies for activating carbon-hydrogen bonds, for
selectively activating and incorporating oxygen into metal-alkyl bonds, and for
regioselective olefin hydroarylation transformations are being investigated. Key
model reactions are being studied, and through investigations of these
stoichiometric and catalytic reactions, critical variables for promoting these
transformations are being determined. Insights concerning specific coordination
environments, metal and ligand options, substrate requirements and reaction
conditions that favor particular reaction steps are envisaged. The mechanistic
information gleaned from these studies may have a distinctly broader impact on
catalysis research, in both academic and industrial settings.