* 1464521
* Collaborative Research:  Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Power One IC -- NSF Center on Integrated Power Management Circuits and Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2016
* John Volakis, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 03/31/2016
* USD 11,500.00

The global electrical energy consumption is rising rapidly and there is a demand
to double the power capacity within the next 15-20 years. The production,
distribution and use of energy should be as efficient as possible. Power
management technologies are widely used in many electronics and energy systems
including wireless mobile devices, notepads, PC and laptops, photovoltaic and
power systems, bio-sensors, automobiles, hydro power, biomass, geothermal, solar
thermal, solar photovoltaic, wind power, etc. These applications and distributed
energy resources require a new integrated power electronic technology. The Power
One IC center is a network of academic and industry leaders who aim to develop
an integrated power and energy management for these applications. The center is
a multi-university NSF I/UCRC that is led by Arizona State University (ASU) in
partnership with The University of Colorado at Boulder (CU-Boulder), The Ohio
State University (OSU), and Dartmouth College (DC). The power management (PM)
block is a critical component of any electronics, and energy systems. This block
acts in the same way as the heart which controls and regulates the flow of blood
to various body part. The PM system task is to efficiently regulate, control,
and convert energy to assure efficient delivery of energy to various components
of the system. Most of the existing system use external bulky discrete devices
for power management. The objective of this center is to develop fully
integrated power management within the system to develop fully autonomous and
integrated systems on a chip. Power One will address issues ranging from system
level power management, to circuits, devices, materials, and Integrated
Circuits. The center will develop innovative research combined with educational
components to address energy management. Creating this new knowledge will
advance the next generation of fully autonomous systems with power and energy
management as an integrated part of the system. These cutting-edge power
management solutions will make a significant impact in the efficiency and cost
of all portable electronics, cellular wireless systems, computers, multi-media,
lighting, renewable energy, electronic vehicles, etc. Power Management IC (PMIC)
is at the heart of this technological revolution and is the key component to
every electronic system in our modern world.

Integrated circuits have revolutionized computing, communication, and
information technology, which, in turn, have enabled new economic and social
paradigms that have improved standards of living, access to information, and
productivity. However, energy management and efficient energy control and
conversion has become major bottlenecks that limit the ongoing scaling of size,
performance, cost, and battery life. A solution to the power-management
bottleneck is within reach, but requires a comprehensive system effort that ties
together a diverse group of stakeholders and researchers from systems, to
Integrated System, IC, electronics, and materials. The Power One IC center will
target a range of innovations that leverage emerging systems, high-density power
management circuits and components, next generation devices, and new classes of
power electronic circuits that can fundamentally shift the tradeoffs among
efficiency, size, and cost. Through Power One IC's world-class research and
education, along with leading edge industrial partners and graduate students, we
are working together across the spectrum to develop an integrated autonomous
system with energy and power management on a chip. The results of the center
research will impact renewable energy, PV and solar energy, efficient inverters
and power/voltage converters, efficient management and use of energy in portable
electronics and computers, as well as remote sensors and bioelectronics.