* 1464975
* Phase Separation of Reactive Oxygen with Multi-compartmented Sensitizers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Alexander Greer, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms program is supporting
fundamental research by Professor Alexander Greer at the City University of New
York, Brooklyn College. Professor Greer will develop techniques for accurately
studying the chemistry of reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS such as singlet
oxygen and alkoxy radicals are of broad importance in mechanistic and synthetic
chemistry and critical to understanding oxidative processes in biology. This
research seeks to create modified polymer surfaces which will provide a matrix
for spatially controlled generation and delivery of ROS. Newly synthesized
polymers will be used to study controlled photooxidation chemistry in organic
solutions, but also may have broader scientific impact in bacterial inactivation
systems. The project will support training of research students to ground them
in the necessary photoscientific methods. Professor Greer and his students will
engage in outreach to local high schools and colleges, emphasizing the value of
improving solar energy resources and water purification research. These talks
will be presented in the context of the United Nations IYL2015 (International
Year of Light and Light-Based Technologies).

With this award, new heterogeneous methods will be developed for the physical
isolation of sensitizer and peroxide molecules to generate singlet oxygen and
alkoxy radicals at polymer surfaces. The research will provide a method for
conducting controlled oxidation chemistry that will facilitate a range of future
studies on selective oxidation, chemical aging, flow and disinfection chemistry.
One key feature of this heterogeneous chemistry will be the ability to break
surface-bound peroxide bonds to regulate the alkoxy radicals formed. The
research will be relevant to organic chemistry, and has potentially broader
implications related to the oxidative degradation of materials.