* 1464317
* CRII: CI: Exploring Advanced Cyber-Infrastructure Co-Design for Big Data Analytics
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Ivan Rodero, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 06/30/2018
* USD 171,257.00

The proliferation of digital data provides new opportunities in all areas of
science, engineering and industry. However, the increasing data volumes and
rates, and the associated costs in terms of latencies and energy, quickly
dominate and limit data analytics applications' ability to leverage this data in
an effective and timely manner. The co-design process enables scientists to
reason about the rich design spaces available in software and hardware, and is
expected to help in constructing a new class of cyber-infrastructure.
Nevertheless, current solutions for big data analytics have important
limitations that make these solutions infeasible for the next generation of
cyber-infrastructure. As a result, exploring key co-design issues in the scope
of big data analytics has become critical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goals of this research are to understand the performance and power behaviors and
tradeoffs related to data placement, movement, and processing of big data
analytics on systems with emerging architectures, and to develop models that can
fundamentally enable big data analytics on ongoing cyber-infrastructure. In
contrast to existing work, this research effort focuses on the co-design process
that has been exploited in the context of large-scale scientific applications.
Key research activities include building a framework to evaluate different
classes of big data analytics, characterizing data analytics applications in
terms of performance and power, and developing a methodology to construct models
to understand and explore the design space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As data
analytics applications become increasingly important in a wide range of domains,
the ability to develop large-scale and sustainable platforms and software
infrastructure to support these applications has significant potential to drive
research and innovation in science and business domains. This project provides
an understanding of hardware/software characteristics and requirements for big
data analytics and future cyber-infrastructure design. These research activities
are integrated with graduate and undergraduate student research, and leverage
minority student outreach networks at Rutgers.