* 1464711
* RUI - Ferrocene - containing panchromatic BODIPY, azaBODIPY, and porphyrin nanocarbon assemblies for light-harvesting
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Paul Kiprof, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2019
* USD 330,000.00

In this project, Professor Viktor Nemykin of the Department of Chemistry at
University of Minnesota Duluth, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &
Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division, will develop new classes of
ferrocenyl-containing nanocarbon boron-dipyrromethene (BODIPY), azaBODIPY, and
porphyrin supramolecular assemblies. The goal of this research is to exploit the
characteristics of these donor-acceptor supramolecular superstructures for
systems for solar light energy conversion into stored chemical energy or
electricity (e.g. organic photovoltaic cells). The project lies at the interface
of organic, organometallic, inorganic, materials, and theoretical chemistry, and
is thus well designed for the education of undergraduate and graduate (M.S.)
scientists. It will also provide excellent education and hands-on experimental
training for undergraduate students including members of groups underrepresented
in science.

This proposal centers on the design and characterization of new panchromatic
BODIPYs, azaBODIPYs, and porphyrins connected to redox-active donor (ferrocene)
and acceptor (fullerene, carbon nanotube, graphene) centers. The proposed
supramolecular assemblies with fullerenes/nanotubes/graphene might be useful for
light-harvesting. In the proposed research, BODIPYs, azaBODIPYs, and porphyrins
will be used as essentially planar, highly conjugated platforms, which is useful
for a long-range metal-metal coupling and effective electron-transfer between
redox-active centers. In the planned work, organometallic redox-active centers
will be covalently linked to BODIPY, azaBODIPY, or porphyrin core in order to
prepare a variety of systems with systematic variation in geometric and
electronic structures. These donor-antennae dyads will be further covalently or
non-covalently linked to the nanocarbon derivatives such as fullerenes, carbon
nanotubes, or graphene. The systematic investigation of proposed compounds will
help to understand how and to what extent the nature of the pi-conjugated
platform, the through-bond and through-space distance(s) between the redox
centers, and the type of donor and acceptor conjugation with the antennae pi-
system can control redox processes, stability, and photo-induced electron-
transfer properties in these systems. The long-term goals include the
fundamental understanding and improvement of a basic knowledge on structure,
reactivity, and electronic interactions in complex redox-active porphyrinoid-
type supramolecular arrays, the search for aromatic pi-systems useful for
applications in molecular electronics, light-harvesting, catalysis, and
photocatalysis, and the creation of new methodologies for preparation of
porphyrins and their analogues with useful properties.