* 1464462
* Long-Chain Linear Oligogermanes and Polygermanes with Tunable Optical and Electronic Properties: Steps Toward the Design of Tailored Molecular Electronics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Charles Weinert, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2020
* USD 390,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
funding Professor Charles S. Weinert of Oklahoma State University to synthesize
molecules that contain chains of germanium atoms (oligogermanes). Systems with
very long germanium chains and germanium nanomaterials are known to have
important electronic and optical properties that depend on the number of
germanium atoms in the chain and on the other groups appended to the chain. In
this study, both the number of germanium atoms and the substituent groups are
carefully controlled. Since the properties of these molecules can be tuned by
variation of their composition, discrete molecules with specific absorbance,
emission, and conductive properties can be designed and prepared. The broader
impacts include the development of conductive new materials with tunable optical
properties that may be used in lenses, detectors, or other optical applications.
In addition to the education and training of graduate students, the project will
involve Native American high school or undergraduate students from Oklahoma with
the ultimate goal of inspiring these students to pursue careers in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Singly-bonded catenates of germanium are of interest
sigma-delocalization that results in interesting optical and electronic
properties that can be tuned by varying their composition. Recent DFT
calculations indicate that polygermanes, and potentially oligogermanes, can
function as quasi-one dimensional semiconductors with a direct bandgap, where
the valence and conduction bands result mainly from the catenated germanium
skeleton. In this project, the Weinert research team is undertaking the
synthesis of a diverse array of long-chain linear oligogermanes in order to
ascertain if these new molecules will exhibit useful optical and/or conductive
attributes akin to the polygermane analogues. The new molecules prepared in
these investigations are characterized by a variety of techniques, including
NMR, UV/visible, emission spectroscopy, cyclic and differential pulse
voltammetry, high-resolution mass spectrometry, and X-ray crystallography.
Studying the solid-state structures of these molecules is important since the
overall geometry of the oligogermane affects its physical properties. Another
aspect of this project involves the incorporation of oligogermanes into the
graphite electrodes of high-end batteries in order to improve the overall
performance of these systems, and these studies are being done in collaboration
with a research team at Technical University in Graz, Austria. The
photochemistry of these oligogermanes is being investigated, with the goal of
affecting photochemical rearrangements of these molecules to new species that
are not available by purely synthetic routes.