* 1464106
* Arithmetic Invariants and Their Non-Triviality
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* Haruzo Hida, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2021
* USD 600,003.00

This project concerns research in number theory, a subject that has many
interesting connections to more applied areas such as cryptography and physics.
Number theorists study arithmetic objects by attaching to them invariants in
order to make them clearly visible. Each important object of interest in number
theory has associated to it certain mathematical objects called its L-functions.
As they are functions of complex or p-adic variables, one can evaluate them at
integers, getting concrete numbers associated with the object under study. There
are two fundamental problems concerning invariants in number theory: A. Find a
relation (or an identity) among two or more arithmetic invariants of different
nature; B. Distinguish between the non-triviality and triviality of important
arithmetic invariants. This project will develop an algebraic theory dealing
with Problem B. In particular, the research will study non-triviality of values
of zeta functions and their derivatives. By a well-known principle (for example,
the Birch-Swinnerton Dyer conjecture), these L-values encode solutions of deep
Diophantine problems, and if we can show non-vanishing or vanishing of zeta
values, we should be able to predict how many rational solutions modular and
elliptic equations have.

This research project aims to develop a systematic theory for distinguishing
between the non-triviality and triviality of important arithmetic invariants.
Earlier work of the investigator and a collaborator developed new understanding
of p-adic Galois representations and Hecke algebras, p-adic analytic families of
modular forms and their L-functions, and analysis of arithmetic invariants. This
research project will follow on these developments. For example, the project
will investigate how to measure the size of the image of modular Galois
representation with coefficients in a big Hecke algebra (a nontriviality
question concerning the image). As another example, the work will study non-
vanishing (and non-vanishing modulo a prime) of p-adic L-functions and non-
triviality of modular attempts of creating rational points in rational elliptic
curves and abelian varieties.