* 1464734
* SusChEM: Catalytic Activation of Small Molecules by Nickel and Iron Pincer Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Hairong Guan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor Hairong Guan of the University of Cincinnati to design,
synthesize and study catalysts using earth-abundant metals, such as nickel and
iron. Such metals are inexpensive and display promise as the basis for the
catalysis of chemical processes that are industrially and economically
important. Examples include the conversion of a primary greenhouse gas, carbon
dioxide, to liquid fuels, the replacement of toxic reagents in pharmaceutical
synthesis, and the release of hydrogen from a hydrogen-storage chemicals.
Professor Guan is also developing research-based materials for a laboratory
course focusing on catalysis, and providing research opportunities to American
Chemical Society Project SEED students as well as to students from groups that
are underrepresented in STEM fields.

In this project, Professor Guan is studying pincer-ligated nickel complexes as
catalysts for the hydrogenation of carbon dioxide to methanol using dihydrogen
and the cyanomethylation of aldimines and epoxides to beta-amino nitriles and
gamma-hydroxy nitriles. Related iron pincer complexes are being developed to
catalyze the dehydrogenation of ammonia-borane, which exhibits desirable
properties as a chemical hydrogen-storage material. The mechanistic details of
these catalytic processes including the kinetics and thermodynamics of the
elemental steps are being studied so that more active and robust catalysts can
be designed rationally. Other broader impacts of the project include the
development of a research-based laboratory course and collaborations with a
primarily undergraduate institution and local chemical companies.