* 1464410
* CRII: SaTC: Analyzing and verifying the security of TCP stacks under multi-entity interactions
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Zhiyun Qian, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 05/31/2018
* USD 172,477.00

The objective of this project is to strengthen the Transmission Control Protocol
(TCP), a ubiquitous core Internet protocol, under emerging threat models to make
it robust and secure enough to serve the needs of 'smart' technologies in
communications, automobiles, medical devices, and other devices that touch our
lives every day. It is terrifying to imagine that a smart car could fail to
report an accident automatically due to a denial of service attack on its TCP
connections, or a smart medical device could fail to report a patient's change
in condition. This is not to mention the ever growing cyber attacks that
leverage the global and powerful Internet. This project will systematically
analyze the root causes of recent security vulnerabilities and generalize
them. The results will offer valuable insights on how to avoid the problems.
Further, the research is expected to lead to changes to the TCP implementations
in major operating systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research is
motivated by the following observations. First, more subtle problems such as
side channels have been overlooked in TCP stacks. Second, new threat models have
merged, e.g., co-located entities that do not trust each other. Third, the end-
to-end assumption of TCP is broken due to the prevalence of network middleboxes,
host-based firewalls, and censorship firewalls. The research will leverage model
checking to systematically search for vulnerabilities under a variety of threat
models and network settings. The models will be constructed from popular
operating systems (with recent and representative versions) as well as network
middleboxes. They can serve as the basis for testing and verifying future TCP
stack implementations.