* 1464946
* High-level QM/MM free energy calculations and reaction path studies at affordable computational cost
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2020
* Henry Woodcock, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2020
* USD 410,999.00

Henry Lee Woodcock of the University of South Florida is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division to develop the next generation of accurate and efficient
methodology to simulate reactive chemical systems in solution. Solvent plays a
major role in governing chemical processes and must be taken into account to
construct accurate models. It is much more difficult to study chemical reactions
in solution than to study reactions of isolated or gas phase molecules. Woodcock
and his coworkers focus on the development of open-sourced Web-based software
(www.charmming.org) to facilitate molecular simulation. The software development
efforts are tightly coupled to education and outreach activities aimed at making
advanced molecular simulation techniques more accessible to modeling newcomers
and the non-technical expert. Education and outreach related developments are
incorporated into the physical chemistry curriculum at several universities.
Woodcock and his research group collaborate extensively with a leading expert in
the field, Professor Stefan Boresch at the University of Vienna in Austria. This
research is cofunded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and
the Computational Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) program in the Division of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurately computing free
energies is one of the most challenging problems facing chemists. It is well
known that solvent plays a major role in governing chemical processes and must
be takeninto account to construct accurate models. The hybrid quantum mechanical
/ molecular mechanical (QM/MM) framework is the current tool of choice when
accurate computations of macromolecular systems are essential. However, robust
and efficient approaches that employ the high levels of computational theory
needed to accurately describe many reactive processes while also including
explicit solvation effects and accounting for extensive conformational sampling
are essentially non-existent. The main goal this project is the development of
techniques that mitigate current computational limitations related to accuracy,
efficiency, and adequate sampling in such calculations. These methods are
applied to study two key processes that are fundamental to understanding
structure and stability across a range of solvated bio-organic compounds.