* 1464090
* Exploration of Pressure- and Field-Tuned Phenomena and Phases in Mn- and V-based Spinels
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* S. Lance Cooper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 414,622.00

Non-technical abstract "Magnetically responsive" materials have magnetic and
conducting properties that can be sensitively tuned with pressure and magnetic
field, and exhibit a range of scientifically interesting and technologically
useful properties, including coexisting magnetic and electric orders, magnetic-
field-induced shape and conductivity changes, and strain controlled magnetism.
Understanding the physical mechanisms responsible for these exotic properties is
not only important scientifically, but is an essential prerequisite to
optimizing these materials for use in technological applications. This project
combines the use of high pressures, high magnetic fields, and visible laser
light to identify and control the underlying mechanisms responsible for
magnetically responsive behavior in a select group of magnetically responsive
materials. Among the goals of this project are to identify the key physical
mechanisms that give rise to magnetically responsive behavior, to control these
mechanisms in order to create novel properties of scientific and technological
interest, and to investigate as-yet-unexplored phase regions to uncover new, and
potentially useful, physical properties. The diverse techniques employed in this
research - including high-pressure techniques using diamond anvil cell
technology, high-magnetic-field and low-temperature methods, optical and laser
techniques, and materials growth methods - provide the graduate and
undergraduate student researchers outstanding training for a diverse range of
careers in academia, industry, or national laboratories. This project is also
dedicated to imparting scientific literacy and enthusiasm for science in both
the general public and K-12 students, through public lectures on science,
middle-school scientific demonstrations, and lab tours that highlight the
excitement of the materials studied and the scientific techniques used in this
project.

Technical abstract Magnetically frustrated materials, such as the magnetic
spinels (chemical formula AB2X4), exhibit a range of diverse ground state phases
and phenomena that can be sensitively tuned with pressure and magnetic field,
including spin-spiral, charge-ordered, multiferroic, and spin/orbital-liquid
phases. The exceptional tunability of the spinels and other magnetically
responsive materials make them excellent scientific laboratories in which myriad
phases and phenomena can be sensitively controlled and studied. Yet, there is
limited microscopic understanding of the microscopic magnetostructural effects
that lead to the important pressure- and field-tuned behaviors these materials
exhibit, due largely to the absence of spectroscopic information as to how the
spin- and lattice-dynamics of magnetically frustrated materials change as
functions of magnetic field and pressure. The purpose of this research is to
fill this important gap in our understanding by using inelastic light scattering
techniques to study the spin- and lattice-excitations of select magnetically
frustrated materials while field- and pressure-tuning through their diverse
phases. The goals of this research are to elucidate the microscopic
magnetostructural changes responsible for novel magnetoresponsive behavior in
magnetically frustrated materials, to use applied field and pressure to control
different magnetoresponsive behaviors, and to explore previously unaccessed
phase regimes and phenomena in magnetically responsive materials under high
pressures and magnetic fields. In addition to providing diverse technical
training to several graduate and undergraduate students, this research will
impact the broader community through laboratory tours aimed at exposing K-12
students and teachers to the excitement of materials research, and through
optics-related demonstrations to middle schools students.