* 1464450
* Exploring Strong Field Molecular and Electron Dynamics, and Oxidation of Bio-Organic Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* H. Bernhard Schlegel, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2019
* USD 485,809.00

H. Bernhard Schlegel of Wayne State University is supported by an award from the
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program within the Chemistry Division
for research to further our understanding of the way lasers reveal details about
chemical reactions. The work supported is theoretical and computational in
nature, but is being carried out in close collaboration with experimental
scientists who are testing the predictions of these theories in laser
laboratories. The investigations provide information on how light delivered in
short, intense pulses can be used to follow minute details of atoms and
molecules as chemical reactions are taking place. In a second portion of the
project, the investigators are studying how damage to DNA by oxidizing species
occurs at the molecular level. This process is thought to be at the core of a
number of health problems, including cancer and aging. The work is promoting the
progress of science by developing new tools and methods that will have
application in many other areas of science. The work is also helping to train
the next generation of scientists in projects that involve a high degree of
collaboration between computational scientists and experimental
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has three main categories: (1) a
study of strong field molecular dynamics; (2) electron dynamics in strong
fields; and (3) oxidation in bio-organic systems. In (1), the investigators are
studying isomerization and fragmentation of molecules in intense mid-IR
(infrared) laser fields using molecular dynamics calculations. In some cases
that go beyond the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, the investigators are using
Ehrenfest dynamics and extended Lagrangian dynamics. In (2), time-dependent
Hartree-Fock, density functional and configuration interaction methods with real
space complex absorbing potentials are being used to investigate electron
dynamics and ionization processes in strong laser fields. Topics under
investigation include angle-resolved ionization rates in conjugated molecules,
electron dynamics in ions during and after ionization, and changes in ionization
rates during isomerization and fragmentation reactions. In (3), oxidation of
G-quadruplexes, guanine-lysine adduct formation during oxidative degradation of
guanine, and oxidation of ascorbic acid are being investigated. Continuum
solvation models with cavity scaling are being used to obtain reliable pKas,
redox potentials and energetics along reaction paths.