* 1464349
* CRII: RI: Navigational Circuitry of Brain: Novel Neural Codes with Diversity for Robust and Adaptive Location Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Onur Ozan Koyluoglu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 03/31/2018
* USD 115,247.00

The main objectives of this project are to develop a novel coding framework for
the navigational circuitry of the brain, and in the context of this model, to
investigate how neural diversity and neurally plausible information processing
mechanisms contribute to a robust navigation system. Robust localization
techniques based on neural coding principles may have applications in robotics.
In addition, the framework developed here will lead to a better understanding of
brain's navigational circuitry and associated brain areas, which are implicated
in Alzheimer's disease and other brain disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
brain's navigational circuitry includes cells whose activities are modulated
depending on where an animal is in its environment. Place cells in the
hippocampus are typically active over a certain region within an environment,
but remain mostly silent otherwise. Grid cells in the entorhinal cortex, on the
other hand, respond at multiple regions, where the activity of each cell follows
a striking periodic pattern, forming a hexagonal tiling of the space. Both place
and grid populations exhibit diversity (e.g., firing fields of neurons typically
increase along the dorsoventral axis) and adaptivity (e.g., cells change their
activity levels in response to changes in environment). One theory of how these
cells are related is that grid cells form place cells, which in turn are
responsible for performing navigational computations, but this view contradicts
recent neurophysiological data. The central hypothesis of the investigator, in
contrast, is that the brain has a neural code consisting of both place cells and
grid cells, and, when processed with neurally plausible, low-complexity
algorithms, codewords of this code form a robust and adaptive navigational
processing mechanism. This project focuses on coding models consisting of place
cells that provide side information in decoding of the grid cell activity, and
separate read-out populations that perform computations with place and grid
cells iteratively. Utilizing these models, the investigator proposes to study
the role of neural diversity in achieving robustness, to analyze the modular
processing capacity of the code, to understand neural adaptivity through
obtaining broader estimate by lowering the code rate, and to compare these
findings with experimental observations.