* 1464104
* CRII: CSR: Towards Understanding and Mitigating the Impact of Web Robot Traffic on Web Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Derek Doran, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2019
* USD 174,319.00

This CSR-CRII project responds to the sudden rise of Web robot (a.k.a. Web
crawler) traffic on Web systems around the world - from approximately 20% of all
requests a decade ago to over 60% today. Because present Web systems'
optimizations assume that the traffic serviced exhibit human-like patterns that
robots do not, present robot activity on the Web may silently degrade
performance, energy efficiency, and scalability of Web systems. As the Web
continues to evolve towards a social platform where individuals upload
extemporaneous thoughts and observations that only carry instantaneous value to
organizations, and where the Internet of Things concept is expected to introduce
millions of devices that collect data from the Web and submit requests to online
services automatically, robot traffic will only rapidly increase in volume and
intensity. For this reason, it is essential that we understand the impact of Web
robot traffic on modern Web systems and devise technologies capable of
mitigating their impact on system performance, energy efficiency, and
scalability.

This effort will synthesize our present understanding of robot traffic with
machine learning tools, statistical analysis, and data science methods not
previously considered in the context of Web traffic analysis and user behavioral
modeling. It will improve our ability to understand the impact of robot traffic
on Web systems by: (i) devising automatic methods to classify robots by their
functionality and by the demands they impose; and (ii) develop novel robot
traffic generators, tailored to a specific profile of robot types that can test
how a system reacts to robot traffic of varying intensity and functional type
mixtures. The project will also explore a prototype robot-resilient caching
system that could lead to immediate performance payoffs for existing Web
systems. The project will result in preliminary analytical models, empirical
results, and prototype analysis software leading to longer-term research
endeavors. Recent data from Web systems that provide services across many Web
domains are immediately available for the project.

The results of the project potentially may transform the way Web systems from
single servers to large clouds are designed and optimized mitigating
performance, energy efficiency, and the financial cost of servicing robots.
Students to work on this project will be strategically recruited to broaden
participation. Educational activities will provide students useful yet
infrequently taught traffic analysis and Web systems security fostering stronger
ties between knowledge engineering and cybersecurity student and research
communities.