* 1464110
* CRII: NeTS: Towards Measurement and Optimization of Internet Video Quality of Experience
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Zubair Shafiq, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2018
* USD 190,998.00

Streaming video is by far the largest constituent of Internet traffic. Video
currently makes up more than 66% of the global Internet traffic. The volume of
video traffic is expected to quadruple between 2013 and 2018. The growth of
Internet video is fueled by the popularity of free advertisement-based (such as
YouTube) and paid subscription-based (such as Netflix) services. To sustain
these revenue models, both industry and academic researchers are working on re-
architecting Internet video delivery infrastructure for improving users' Quality
of Experience (QoE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many challenges arise when measuring
and optimizing video QoE. First, it is challenging to accurately quantify video
QoE in near real time and at scale. Subjective metrics are often impractical,
and objective metrics incur computational overheads and pose privacy issues.
Second, because the path between a video server and an end-user comprises a
series of heterogeneous links in content provider, Content Delivery Network
(CDN), and Internet Service Provider (ISP) networks, it is difficult to isolate
and gauge the impact of individual links and their interconnections (i.e.,
peering and transit links) on video QoE. Third, many network protocols at
various layers of the TCP/IP stack simultaneously impact video QoE. It is
difficult to separate dependencies among protocols at different
layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are two-fold. First,
it aims to design accurate, scalable, and objective measures of video QoE. Such
measures will be useful for QoE prediction and identifying factors that affect
QoE. Second, it aims to develop a toolbox to measure, analyze, and optimize the
impact of heterogeneous links and protocols on video QoE. The toolbox will be
useful to identify QoE bottlenecks and shed light on ways to alleviate them.
Moreover, it will reveal issues with the underlying network protocols and
provide guidance on fixing them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of
this project will help bridge the digital divide by improving video streaming
experience for challenged consumers, particularly those in underserved and rural
areas. The outcomes of this project might also provide insights of interest to
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). This project will bridge the areas
of networking, signal processing, and human-computer interaction and foster
interaction among them. The PI will work closely with stakeholders to facilitate
the transfer of technology from the research environment to actual commercial
deployments. The educational side of the project will integrate research
findings in the undergraduate and graduate curricula at the University of Iowa.