* 1464432
* CRII: CPS: Intuitive Human-in-the-Loop Control for Medical Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Ann Majewicz Fey, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 04/30/2018
* USD 203,297.00

Human-in-the-loop control strategies in which the user performs a task better,
and feels more confident to do so, is an important area of research for cyber-
physical systems. Humans are very adept at learning to control complex systems,
particularly those with non-intuitive kinematic constraints (e.g., cars,
bicycles, wheelchairs, steerable needles). With the advent of cyber-physical
systems, (physical systems integrated with cyber control layer), human control
is no longer constrained to system inputs. Users can also control system outputs
through a number of different teleoperation mappings. Given all this
flexibility, what is the most intuitive way for a human user to control an
arbitrary system and how is intuitiveness quantified?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on human-in-the-loop control for medical needles, which steer
with bicycle-like kinematics. These needles could be used in a variety of
medical interventions including tissue biopsy, tumor ablation, abscess drainage,
and local drug delivery. We have explored a variety of teleoperation mappings
for human control of these steerable needles; yet, we have found inconsistencies
between objective performance metrics (e.g., task time and error), and post-
experimental surveys on comfort or ease-of use. Users occasionally report a
preference for control mappings, which objectively degrade performance, and vice
versa. It is important to measure the real-time engagement of the user with the
physical system in order to capture the nuances of how different control
mappings affect physical effort, mental workload, distraction, drowsiness, and
emotional response. Physiological sensors such as electroencephalography (EEG),
galvanic skin response (GSR), and electromyography (EMG), can be used to provide
these real-time measurements and to quantitatively classify the intuitiveness of
new teleoperation algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Intuitive
and natural human-in-the-loop control interfaces will improve human health and
well being, through applications in surgery and rehabilitation. The results of
this study will be disseminated publicly on the investigator's laboratory
website, a conference workshop, and a new medical robotics seminar to be held
jointly between UT Dallas and UT Southwestern Medical Center. Outreach
activities, lab tours, and mentoring of underrepresented students at all levels,
will broaden participation in STEM. Additionally, the proximity of the
investigator?s hospital-based lab to medical professionals will engage non-
engineers in design and innovation&lt;br/&gt;