* 1464353
* CRII: SHF: Real-time Approximate-Dynamic-Programming based Neuro-controllers for Dynamic Power Management in Power-Constrained Digital Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Arijit Raychowdhury, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 175,000.00

With the Internet of Things (IoT) revolution, self-powered devices with embedded
energy harvesters and integrated batteries have become a reality. Such energy
sources are prone to wide variations in their voltage, current and power
outputs. Simultaneously, load circuits undergo large dynamic ranges through
fine-grained spatio-temporal power management, increasing number of power
domains, decreasing decoupling between voltage domains and unreliable
parasitics. However, the traditional power delivery network (which includes DC-
DC converters and voltage regulators), are still designed for the worst-case
corner and hence suffer from serious inefficiencies. This results in non-optimal
power, performance and energy-efficiency of the overall system. This project
proposes a novel and disruptive technology, where a highly dynamic power
delivery network in IoT devices is envisioned, which can autonomously adapt,
reconfigure and manage itself to meet the varying source and load
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research draws inspiration from recent
advances in Approximate Dynamic programming to provide real-time and optimal
control of the power delivery network under highly dynamic conditions. Hardware
based controllers will be developed to provide real-time optimization of the
embedded regulators and DC-DC converters for maximum energy-efficiency under
performance constraints. The success of this approach is pivoted on advances in
the power delivery network, which will also be explored. Traditional ?static?
designs cannot be controlled on the fly. Hence, the second principal theme of
the research is to explore ?variable structure control? as a means of realizing
an ultra-fast and dynamically reconfigurable power delivery system. This will
enable orders of magnitude improvement in energy efficiency across wide dynamic
ranges of operation and allow new applications for IoT devices with far reaching
societal impact.