* 1464838
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Sheaths and Pre-Sheaths in Magnetized and Unmagnetized Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Greg Severn, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This project will investigate the physical properties of a near-surface layer of
a plasma, a plasma sheath, which forms when a solid body is placed into a
plasma. Plasmas are gases consisting of free ions and electrons; they are
abundant in the universe, have many industrial applications and are the critical
component of controlled fusion research. Nearly a half of the manufacturing
steps necessary to fabricate a computer microprocessor employ plasmas. The
interaction of plasmas with materials depends on the region close to the
surfaces known as the plasma sheath. Better understanding of sheaths will lead
to improved microprocessor fabrications and might be essential in achieving
controlled fusion. The tabletop experiments employed in this study are also
ideal for, and will greatly contribute to, training of students in the field of
plasma physics and other STEM fields.

Proposed new and continuing experiments are aimed at establishing the basic
properties of sheaths and associated presheaths, which accelerate ions to the
sheath. The specific questions that will be addressed are: 1. What are the
details of the newly recognized instability-enhanced collisional friction? 2.
What happens to the anisotropy of ion velocity distribution functions (IVDFs)
along the presheath and at the sheath-edge? 3. Why do experimental transverse
IVDF results differ from simulations? 4. Are the ions in three species weakly
collisional plasmas all lost at the system sound velocity when they have
comparable densities? 5. Are there separate presheaths associated with ion-
neutral collisions and oblique magnetic fields? 6. How do sheaths and presheaths
at dielectric and mixed boundaries differ from those at conductors? 7. Does the
sheath disappear or not when a small electrode is biased to the plasma
potential? Coordinated studies of these phenomena will be carried out at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison and the University of San Diego. Experiments
will determine the presheath and sheath plasma potential profiles and the
resulting IVDFs associated with ion acceleration. Most of the experiments will
be carried out in Madison and led by the PI Prof. Noah Hershkowitz. Laser
induced fluorescence (LIF) diagnostic development will be carried out on both
campuses and led by the Co-PI Prof. Greg Severn. Plasma parameters will be
determined with two or more techniques, e.g. combinations of emissive probes,
LIF, Langmuir probes, ion acoustic wave measurements, and optical emission
spectroscopy. Experiments will employ hot filament multi-dipole, capacitive,
inductive, and helicon sources currently in operation.