* 1464527
* EAGER: Salicylic acid signaling in plant pathogen interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Zhengqing Fu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2016
* USD 148,000.00

During their lifetime plants face many kinds of abiotic and biotic stresses.
Major threats include fungal, oomycete, viral, bacterial and nematode pathogens.
It is estimated that diseases caused by these plant pathogens reduce plant yield
by 10-20% every year. Over millions of years of molecular interactions and co-
evolution of host plants and their pathogens, plants developed a sophisticated
immune system that senses an impending infection and organizes appropriate
defense responses. A key and essential player in this process is the hormone
salicylic acid (SA). Although receiving considerable attention from the research
community, essential aspects of its role in immunity remain unknown. This
project seeks to resolve fundamental new mechanisms through which this major
immune regulator achieves its effects. These may provide new strategies for
developing disease resistant crop plants.

As a master regulator of plant defense, the protein NPR1 is required for SA-
mediated systemic acquired resistance (SAR) and basal defense. In the absence of
pathogens or SA treatment, most NPR1 exists in the cytosol as oligomers. After
pathogen challenge or SA treatment, NPR1 oligomers are reduced to monomers which
enter the nucleus where they function as transcriptional coactivators, binding
TGA transcription factors to activate the expression of plant defense genes.
Recent publications demonstrated that NPR1 and its paralogs NPR3 and NPR4 bind
SA with different affinities and function as SA receptors. In addition, the PI
has identified HEN3, a nuclear kinase which is required for NPR1 monomer
formation, plant defense gene expression and SAR. Significantly, SA promotes
interactions between NPR1 and TGA1/4 transcription factors in a yeast two-hybrid
assay, thus supporting the hypothesis that SA and NPR1 activate plant defense
through increased protein-protein interactions between NPR1 and TGA1/4. This
project seeks to resolve molecular mechanisms that underlie and regulate the
function of this key immune signaling hub. Mechanisms to be explored include the
role of the HEN3 kinase in regulating NPR1 function, and the effect of SA on
interactions between NPR1/3/4 and TGA1/4. The broader impacts of the project
include the participation of a postdoc, a graduate student and four
undergraduates, including two from groups underrepresented in the sciences.