* 1464062
* Workshop on Development of Green Fracturing Fluids and Remedial Technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Hansong Tang, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2015
* USD 35,773.00

1464062 (Thomas). The objective of this workshop is to bring together
professionals from academia, industry, and government in areas of hydraulic
fracturing and environmental impact to exchange ideas and discuss potentially
improved methods of hydraulic fracturing and sustainable remedial technologies,
and to identify important directions for future research. The workshop is
scheduled for April 20-21, 2015 at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock. It
will include a series of keynote talks, presentations, and panel discussions,
categorized into four groupings: 1) Development of better green hydraulic
fracturing fluids, 2) Understanding and prediction of transport and fate of
fracturing fluid components, 3) Characteristics and behavior of fracturing
fluids and green alternatives, and 4) Sustainable remedial and containment
technologies to reduce environmental impact of fracturing fluids on ground and
surface water. A website and publication will disseminate the results of the
workshop.

This workshop seeks to facilitate research to mitigate potential environmental
impacts from fracturing operations. The workshop will provide a forum for
researchers from industry, academia, and government to present their current
findings and exchange ideas for future development. The workshop will identify
potential directions for the efforts of the research community to improve
hydraulic fracturing and reduce potential adverse impact on water quality. As
final products of the workshop, a website and publications will be made
available not only to the research community and students, but also to the
general public.