* 1464866
* Collaborative Research: Intraspecific variation in drought responses of tropical tree seedlings - consequences for species distributions under climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Liza Comita, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2018
* USD 375,582.00

Abundant rainfall is one of the reasons that tropical forests are so diverse and
productive. Climate change is predicted to shift the length and intensity of the
dry seasons that most tropical forests experience. Understanding how these
forests will respond to climate change therefore requires that we investigate
the responses of tropical trees to drought. From temperate forests, we know that
drought responses vary, not only among tree species, but also within species:
populations of the same species from different sites can show different
responses to drought, increasing the capacity of the species as a whole to
persist when climate changes. However, we know very little how drought responses
may vary within tropical tree species. This project will measure the variation
in response to drought within tropical tree species in Panama, where current
rainfall varies from site to site across the isthmus from the Pacific to the
Atlantic. To contrast responses of trees in populations from sites with
different amounts of rainfall, researchers will combine physiological
measurements and genetic analyses with field experiments on the growth and
survival of seedlings transplanted between sites. Results will show whether
variation is determined by genetic or environmental factors, and which plant
traits underlie drought response. This will improve our ability to predict how
tropical forests will respond to global climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is important to society because tropical
forests harbor the majority of the Earth's terrestrial biological diversity and
provide people with valuable products and ecosystem services. The information
generated by the project will be useful for conserving biodiversity and for
managing forests to maintain production of commercially important timber
species. Besides making findings available to the scientific community, the
project will disseminate findings to local managers and stakeholders in a
symposium. In addition, the project will strengthen the workforce for science by
training young biologists.