* 1464163
* CRII: SaTC: Empirical and Analytical Models for the Deployment of Software Updates in Large Vulnerable Populations
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Tudor Dumitras, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 04/30/2018
* USD 170,340.00

Software vulnerabilities are an important vector for malware delivery. The
software updating mechanisms, responsible for deploying the vulnerability
patches, are in a race with the cyber attackers seeking to exploit the
vulnerabilities. Moreover, these updating mechanisms have multiple, potentially
conflicting, design goals, as they must quickly deploy patches on millions of
hosts worldwide, must not overburden the users, and must avoid breaking
dependencies in the deployment environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to model the dynamics of vulnerable host populations, in order to assess
the practical barriers for current software updating mechanisms and the
conflicts among their security and reliability goals. Using real-world data sets
of update deployment events, the research studies the decay of vulnerable host
populations empirically to identify deployment-specific factors that delay
updates. Building on these insights, the project develops parameterized
analytical models for update deployment, and uses these models to quantify the
trade-offs between reliability and security when updating software. The models
provide principled methods for reasoning about the properties of software
updates in the presence of multiple design goals and enable improvements in
software updating mechanisms by exploring a large design space. The researchers
are disseminating the results from this project by organizing workshops on data-
driven security, by releasing data sets with augmented information about
software vulnerabilities, and by collaborating with industry partners to
evaluate the proposed techniques in real-world settings.