* 1464613
* Acquisition of Equipment for Calibration and Engineering Tests for University of Iowa's XPOL Radars
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Anton Kruger, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 161,287.00

1464613&lt;br/&gt;Kruger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports acquisition of
electronics diagnostic equipment to provide for regular calibration and testing
of a set of four X-band polarimeteric Doppler Radars previously funded through
an NSF/Major Research Instrumentation award (EAR- 0723145). The radars have been
acquired, commissioned and test deployed and the investigators plan near-term
scientific deployments to allow for high spatial (1.5 deg beamwidth or ca. 250
m2 pixels at 10 km range) and temporal (ca. 1-2 minute scan times) remote
sensing of rainfall distribution/rate, the 3-D wind field and to discriminate
between rainfall, hail and snow over regions of 10-30 km2. Four complete custom-
built mobile X-band (3 cm wavelength) radar systems were built by ProSensing
Inc. and delivered to the University of Iowa. The choice of X-band radar allowed
for a small diameter antenna (6 ft diameter) to be trailer mounted for mobility.
Power requirements are met by portable 120 V generators. The complete system
includes the four radar antennae, elevation and azimuth variable pedestals
mounted on truck trailers, and control, data acquisition and processing software
and hardware. The mobile radar network can support meteorological and hydrologic
research requiring high resolution observations of precipitation and wind field
variability within regional storm cells. Research on multiple fronts of current
interest in meteorology and hydrology will benefit from the radar network
including: 1) fundamental studies of uncertainty in radar measurement of
rainfall parameters in gauged basins; 2) multi-radar and LiDAR imaging of
rainfall events to study non-linear scaling effects between the range of the
national NEXRAD (Next Generation Radar) S-band network (avg 4 km2 pixel
resolution, maximum range of reflectivity ~ 230 km) and elastic scanning LiDAR
(meter scale pixel resolution; range = 1-2 km); 3) studies of the effects of
urbanization on meteorological and hydrologic processes; 4) flood prediction in
ungauged basins; and 5) soil erosion processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The radar
equipment will be used in several field experiments in Idaho, Iowa, and Illinois
such as the Midwestern Intensively Managed Landscape Critical Zone Observatory
(IML-CZO) in the Sangamon River basin in Illinois and the Clear Creek basin near
Iowa City, Iowa. The investigators intend to make the radars broadly
availability to the hydrosciences community through advertising via the CUAHSI
(Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sciences, Inc.),
UCAR (Universities Corporation for Atmospheric Research) and the CZO Network.
The investigators also plan to use the requested calibration and testing
equipment in newly developed courses in radar engineering at the University of
Iowa. This support is congruent with NSFs mission of promoting the progress of
science and advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare given the
importance of advancing understanding the dynamical behavior of storms and their
flooding potential as well the training of students in radar remote sensing and
engineering with downstream workforce benefits in meteorology, water resources
management, and radar systems applications.