* 1464036
* Collaborative Research: A Multidisciplinary Approach to  Investigate the Origin of Anisotropy at the Base of the Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Allen McNamara, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 10/31/2016
* USD 95,653.00

The lowermost part of the earth's mantle, referred to as the D" region, is a
dynamic region that is both a thermal and chemical boundary layer between the
solid, silicate mantle and the fluid, mostly iron outer core. A better
understanding of the deformation processes that occur in this region would
provide important constraints on the current dynamics of the entire mantle, the
processes of heat transfer from the core to the mantle, the thermal evolution of
our planet, and the existence and extent of geochemical heterogeneity. To study
deformation processes in the deepest mantle, the investigators combine expertise
from several disciplines: seismology, mineral physics and geodynamical modeling
of mantle convection, linked together around a common object of study: seismic
anisotropy, i.e. the difference in propagation speeds of seismic waves depending
on the orientation of the path travelled, a proxy for macroscopic deformation.
The latter's characteristics reflect mineral properties as well as flow strength
and geometry. In this project, the team will apply the multi-disciplinary tools
developed in a previous joint study funded by the CSEDI program of NSF to
further characterize the possible causes of seismic anisotropy in the earth's
deep mantle. They will begin with 3D fluid dynamical modeling of mantle
convection, in which they will model the deformation of descending tectonic
plates as they come in contact with Earth's core-mantle boundary. It is unclear
how strong these plates are, and their strength will control how they deform.
Strong plates will buckle and bend, whereas weak plates will deform is a more
ductile fashion. The team will examine numerous scenarios, each assuming a
different strength for descending plates. They will also examine scenarios in
which descending plates interact with hypothesized compositional heterogeneity
in the deep mantle. Deformation data from the dynamical calculations will be
used as input for mineral physics calculations to predict the alignment of
minerals which will control the nature of seismic anisotropy. By comparing
predicted seismic anisotropy from various models to that observed by seismic
studies, they will constrain deformation characteristics of descending plates
and compositional characteristics of the D" zone. This will provide important
information on how sinking plates drive larger-scale mantle
convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The presence of anisotropy in the D" region of
the earth's mantle is now well established, although its cause remains unclear.
Much progress was recently achieved in mineral physics, to characterize elastic
and deformation properties of lowermost mantle minerals including the post-
perovskite (pPv) phase, as well as in geodynamics, tracking strain evolution in
mantle convection modeling. There are now precise ways to compute synthetic
seismograms in a 3D anisotropic earth down to body wave frequencies. This study
will advance our understanding of the structure and dynamics of an important
boundary layer region in the earth. In previous collaborative work funded by
CSEDI, the investigators developed a multi-disciplinary approach combining
elements from geodynamic modeling, mineral physics and material science
experiments and computations, to perform forward modeling of crystal preferred
orientation (CPO) anisotropy in a 3D spherical earth, in the deep mantle part of
a subducted slab, under different starting assumptions, and compared them with
seismic observations. The ultimate goal is to gain better understanding of the
origin of seismic anisotropy in D", and determine which microscopic and
macroscopic processes may or may not be at play. So far, they investigated the
case of a 3D geodynamical model under rather simple rheological assumptions.
Now, they will explore varying rheologies producing slabs of variable strength,
including the effect of the pPv phase-change, and how slabs will deform in the
presence of hypothetical thermochemical piles. For each of these different
calculations, they will provide the deformation information to serve as input
for the mineralogical texture development within a polycrystalline mineral
aggregate. While the team will still focus on three phases, perovskite, pPv and
ferropericlase, they will also explore the effect of a variety of Fe and Al
substitution mechanisms, both theoretically and experimentally. The predicted
seismic anisotropy from these models will be confronted with seismological
observations of radial and azimuthal anisotropy both acquired during this
project and from the literature.