* 1464113
* CRII: SaTC: Efficient Secure Multiparty Computation of Large-Scale, Complex Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Yan Huang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 05/31/2019
* USD 223,000.00

Many challenging real world problems, e.g., voting and blind auction, require
computation over sensitive data supplied by multiple mutually-distrustful
entities. Elegant cryptographic theories have been developed to solve these
problems without relying on a mutually-trusted third party. Practitioners also
built prototypes capable of securely computing set intersection, AES encryption,
Hamming distance, etc. However, many other applications, such as data mining and
running universal machines, are far more complex than what can be supported by
the state-of-the-art techniques. This work studies new methods and platforms to
enable large-scale, complex cryptographic protocols in more efficient ways.
Software produced will be released as open-source projects to benefit future
research in related areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One part of this project
explores new extensible approaches to accommodate multiple Secure Multiparty
Computation (SMC) protocols and enable studying interesting combinations of
them, including a new compiler to provide a higher-level abstraction for
generating SMC protocols. The other part involves research into several new
optimizations to improve the performance and scalability of SMC, through reuse
of validated components to amortize validation costs. The educational activities
of this project include mentoring both undergraduate and graduate students in
applied cryptography research and developing a graduate course in applied
cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web
site at: http://smc-in-action.soic.indiana.edu