* 1464699
* Harnessing Amplified Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer in Conjugated Polymer Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Elizabeth Harbron, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2020
* USD 319,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Elizabeth J. Harbron of the
Department of Chemistry at The College of William and Mary will develop highly
fluorescent organic nanoparticles for use in applications that require a change
in fluorescence in response to a specific stimulus. The nanoparticles are
derived from fluorescent conjugated polymers and are doped with stimulus-
responsive dyes specific to each application. The interaction between the
polymer and the dyes yields an amplified response to the stimulus, which means
that it can be detected with lower input light levels and/or with much greater
sensitivity than with the dyes alone. The targeted applications include
nanoparticles that switch their fluorescence on and off for super-resolution
microscopy and nanoparticles that change their fluorescence color and/or
intensity to control or detect pH and mercury ions in water. These projects are
ideally suited to the training and education of undergraduate and masters
students because they involve visually appealing work with highly colored,
fluorescent materials as well as the opportunity to work at the interface of
physical, organic, and analytical chemistry. This group will continue its
efforts to increase representation of underrepresented groups in chemistry
through mentoring projects targeted toward women as well as advising and
mentoring targeted to other groups traditionally underrepresented in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conjugated polymer nanoparticles (CPNs or Pdots)
hold exceptional promise as fluorophores for sensing and imaging applications
due to their intense fluorescence brightness, high photostability, and colloidal
stability in water. Their unique strength is the ability to act as light
harvesting units, transferring the excitation energy of numerous chromophores to
a small number of low-energy sites by fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET). CPNs functionalized with FRET-acceptor dyes exhibit amplified dye
emission intensities due to this light harvesting effect. In this work, new CPNs
functionalized with stimulus-responsive dyes will be developed. The stimulus-
responsive dyes have two molecular forms that interconvert in response to a
specific stimulus, but only one form can act as a FRET acceptor for the CPNs.
Thus, the stimulus induces modulation of fluorescence intensity or color by
activating/deactivating FRET. The sensitivity of the stimulus response is
substantially increased in the CPNs as compared to the dye alone due to
amplified FRET. Optimization of the energy transfer processes in dye-
functionalized CPNs will be explored in the following systems: 1) photoactivated
CPNs that undergo off-on photoswitching in response to visible light, 2) CPNs
that can simultaneously photomodulate pH and provide fluorescence readout, and
3) CPNs that provide ratiometric detection of pH and of mercury ions in
completely aqueous environments.