* 1464938
* SusChEM: Water Splitting Photocatalysis with Doped Metal Oxide Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Frank Osterloh, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Water Splitting Photocatalysis with Doped Metal Oxide Nanocrystals

In this Chemical Catalysis project, Frank Osterloh of the University of
California at Davis is developing catalysts that can convert water into hydrogen
and oxygen using sunlight. This technology creates a carbon-free pathway to
hydrogen fuel using only sunlight as a renewable energy source. The catalysts
incorporate components for light absorption, electric charge separation, and
water conversion. They are synthesized from inexpensive components and they are
studied with a range of techniques. This work provides new insight into how
sunlight interacts with small particles and how photochemical energy is
converted into fuel. The project has significant societal broader impact through
contributions to clean energy technology. Dr. Osterloh also has created training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in inorganic chemistry and
solar energy conversion. He is active in outreach activities that present
chemical demonstrations to the community and to underrepresented student groups,
and develops online materials, which are made available to educate the public
about the need for sustainable energy.

The Chemical Catalysis program supports Frank Osterloh at the University of
California at Davis to develop microheterogeneous photocatalyst systems that can
electrolyze water under sunlight illumination without any applied external bias.
The catalysts incorporate components for light absorption, charge separation,
water oxidation and water reduction. They are synthesized from abundant elements
using a combination of scalable chemical reactions and chemical assembly and are
characterized with microscopic, optical and electrical techniques. Their water
splitting function is established through irradiation tests and
electrochemistry, and their charge separation properties are quantified with
surface photovoltage spectroscopy. This project provides new insights into
photochemical charge generation and water photoelectrolysis with doped titania-
based metal oxides. New quantitative relationships between the photocatalytic
properties of the materials and their particle size and surface composition are
also developed, with special consideration of the particle energetics and
kinetics, and the electrolyte environment. Furthermore, the project has broader
impacts by providing hands-on training to graduate and undergraduate students in
the synthesis, handling, and understanding of nanoscale inorganic materials and
their characterization with photophysical techniques and electrochemistry.
Professor Osterloh also develops new course content, laboratory experiments,
chemical demonstrations, and online materials, with an emphasis of recruiting
the next generation of STEM students, including underrepresented minorities, for
renewable energy research.