* 1464853
* CAREER: Deformation-Based Surface Generation for Microstructure Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/11/2014,06/30/2019
* Christopher Saldana, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2019
* USD 397,149.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports a project with the
goal of elucidating the interdependence of deformation history, microstructure
and thermomechanical properties in surface generation by novel impression and
burnishing-based processes. To accomplish this, an experimental study will
utilize controlled deformation platforms and a suite of advanced
characterization methods to resolve local material conditions in the modified
subsurface. Predictive models of microstructure and thermomechanical properties
will be calibrated using these results to enable multi-role surface
modification. The primary educational objective is the creation of a series of
immersive experiences for students to elicit interest in manufacturing research.
This includes deep dives in coupled design/manufacturing problems for minority
high school students and a series of hands-on manufacturing design challenges
for undergraduates. Graduate students will also engage in mentorship of high
school students on semester-long design projects. These educational experiences
are complemented by the integration of research outcomes in curricula and
development of an interactive manufacturing speaker series.

If successful, the research will result in new manufacturing processes that
enable direct control of surface properties for a broad range of engineering
components. This capability will benefit the nation's economy in enabling
domestic manufacturers to be globally competitive in automotive, aerospace and
biomedical systems applications where component surfaces strongly influence
performance, service life, and operating cost. Societal benefits of the research
include the rapid development of a new class of high-performance, surface-
engineered components (e.g., turbine blades, bearing seals, hard-tissue
implants) that will improve quality of life through enhanced performance. The
integrated educational activities will help to develop the future domestic
manufacturing workforce by promoting interest in manufacturing-related studies
among high school students and undergraduates through novel experiential
learning opportunities. Students will also gain globally-aware perspectives in
problem solving activities as they will be connected across academic levels and
cultural backgrounds in formal mentor-mentee relationships. Doctoral students
will benefit from collaborative research opportunities in the form of
international research exchanges and industrial internships.