* 1464281
* RUI: Anionic Multitopic N-Heterocyclic Carbenes: Building Blocks for Molecular and Supramolecular Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniela Tapu, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 08/31/2019
* USD 219,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry Division supports Professor
Daniela Tapu from Kennesaw State University to investigate the synthesis and
characterization of a series of rigid ligands that are designed to support
multimetallic complexes and supramolecular cages. This project challenges
conventional models of chemical bonding and structure. Understanding the
relationship between molecular architecture, electronic structure and chemical
reactivity of these new compounds may allow the development of more efficient
homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts, and may lead to strategies to
facilitate their recovery. This research has the potential to positively impact
both the catalysis industry and academic research. Broader impacts include the
training and mentoring of undergraduate and M.S. students including students
from lower income families and groups traditionally underrepresented in the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets a pallet of novel rigid
anionic multitopic non-chelating N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) that can be
applied in coordination chemistry and catalysis. These carbenes function as
building blocks for a series of zwitterionic bi- and tri-metallic complexes, as
well as metallosupramolecular systems, novel architectures that are not
accessible with the current NHC ligands. Central to these tasks are the
development of new synthetic methodologies and strategies to facilitate the
synthesis of the target molecules and the evaluation of their catalytic
properties. The proposed work will provide broad-based student training from
developing synthetic methods to access the targeted carbenes and their complexes
to characterizing their physical and electronic structures, to studying their
reactivities.