* 1464288
* CRII: CSR: Automatic Cross-Layer Memory Management to Achieve Power and Performance Goals
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Michael Jantz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,296.00

This project focuses on developing a framework that will allow users to control
and manage memory resources more effectively than conventional approaches, and
has the potential to significantly improve both computing performance and energy
efficiency in a wide range of computing domains. This project addresses the
following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application: (1) It will develop the system tools and software
necessary to effectively communicate and incorporate memory usage information
across layers during memory management, (2) It will generate new knowledge in
the areas of static analysis, profiling, and machine learning for the purposes
of predicting and classifying memory usage behavior, (3) It will allow
researchers to create and explore new collaborative memory management algorithms
and techniques, and (4) It will investigate and evaluate the potential of
various collaborative memory management schemes for achieving different power
and performance goals using a variety of realistic workloads and usage
scenarios. In addition, one graduate student will receive innovation and
technology translation experiences through the development of the cross-layer
memory management framework, and its release into the open source
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will exploring and
assess the utility of cross-layer collaboration during memory management. It is
difficult to control and optimize memory power and bandwidth because these
effects depend upon activity across multiple layers of the vertical execution
stack. However, current systems make no attempt to coordinate memory usage in
the upper-level software with placement and management in the operating system
and hardware. This project will develop a full system implementation of cross-
layer memory management, where (a) the application-layer determines data object
usage patterns, assigns objects to appropriate locations/pages in the virtual
address space, and conveys corresponding page-level memory usage information to
the OS, and (b) the OS-layer organizes its physical memory structures according
to architectural information from the memory hardware, and incorporates the
application guidance when deciding which physical page to use to back a
particular virtual page.