* 1464616
* CAREER:  Atomic Scale Defect Engineering in Graphene Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Joseph Bunch, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 02/28/2017
* USD 163,520.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to understand a variety of fundamental defect engineering issues from an
experimental and collaborative modeling perspective, including the measurement
of gas transport across single atomic vacancies in suspended graphene membranes
and the demonstration of gas separation based on size exclusion by atomically
engineered vacancies in graphene membranes. Separation processes are critical to
a large number of industries from oil refining and water purification to CO2
capture and sequestration and natural gas processing. Membranes suitable for
energy efficient separation barriers should be as thin as possible to maximize
flux, mechanically robust to prevent fracture, and have well-defined pore sizes
to increase selectivity. Graphene, a single atomic layer of graphite, represents
the thinnest membrane possible (one layer of atoms) with the smallest pore sizes
attainable (single atomic vacancies), and unprecedented mechanical and chemical
stability. It represents an "ideal" molecular sieve which can separate a mixture
of gases by excluding larger gas molecules and allowing smaller molecules to
pass through atomic size pores in the membrane.

To realize the extraordinary potential of graphene as a material for membrane
separations, a number of previously unexplored scientific issues need to be
addressed, the most important being a means to introduce atomic scale pores in
graphene which can separate gases based on size exclusion. The knowledge gained
from a fundamental understanding of defect engineering in graphene membranes
will open up new avenues to explore the energy efficient separation capabilities
of atomically thin membranes. The educational objectives of the work include
outreach efforts to increase the participation of undergraduate and high school
students into cutting edge research projects and curriculum development in the
Mechanical Engineering curriculum with a particular focus on engineering ethics
and nanotechnology.