* 1464737
* NRI: Human Cognition Assisted Control of Industrial Robots for Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2014,07/31/2019
* T. Kesavadas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 558,527.00

Advanced manufacturing, driven by industrial robots, is playing an increasing
role in US economy. Robots are being used to carry out assembly, welding,
material handling and fabrication. Even as such interactions are becoming more
common in every phase of manufacturing, a perfect symbiotic relationship between
machines and human beings is still very far away. Because of this, a majority of
the robotic applications in manufacturing are currently limited to areas where a
relatively low level of skill is required. This has restricted the full
potential of robotics to augment human operators and improve productivity and
quality of life. With recent advances in cognitive neuroscience and brain
interface technologies, connecting the human cognitive thought process directly
to robots and machines is possible, resulting in direct control of real world
applications. By collecting the brain signals using sensors and analyzing the
thought processes, many activities that take place inside the brain when humans
take specific actions or think of actions can be identified and matched to known
signals using fast computation. This new human-robot communication paradigm will
be demonstrated by developing three manufacturing scenarios. The project will
also have broad applicability in the design of robotic systems in fields outside
manufacturing, including telesurgery, rehabilitation and space exploration.
Results from this multidisciplinary research, which combines manufacturing,
computer science and robotics, have the potential to improve the productivity of
future manufacturing plants and can lead to new commercial ventures, which will
help the US maintain global leadership in robotics and manufacturing, broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research, and positively impact
engineering education.

Significant future challenges in the development of a new human-robot
communication system, which allows operators to perform complex high skilled
tasks, will be addressed. The postulated paradigm will be explored by meeting
the following intellectual challenges: (i) researching a novel methodology for
communicating motion commands to a robot by imagining simple actions using a
grammar called "actemes," (ii) new brain-computer mode and algorithms to
classify these actemes and, (iii) an intent-based system that auto-completes
robotic actions based on most likely sequence of events that human operators are
planning to complete. Three robotic manufacturing scenarios will be explored to
demonstrate the human cognition based interactions in manufacturing environment:
assembly, direct control, and quality control through object recognition.
Finally, by using a non-invasive brain-computer interface a wide range of day-
to-day applications of robotics will be demonstrated.