* 1464488
* Organo-f element Chemistry: Integrated Synthetic, Mechanistic, and Catalytic and Thermochemical Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Tobin Marks, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division is
funding Dr. Tobin Marks of Northwestern University to discover, understand, and
optimize chemical transformations involving metal catalysts. Such processes are
of central importance to the chemical enterprise and include efficient, atom-
economical, and sustainable catalytic processes for producing fuels, plastics,
pharmaceuticals, and other economically important chemicals. This project
involves four interlinked focus areas that integrate research and education, and
deal with fundamental and technologically-oriented aspects of new catalytic
reactions utilizing earth-abundant metal catalysts. Computational analysis is
being used to understand the catalytic transformations, and most importantly, to
discover new ones. A parallel goal being accomplished is the elucidation of
principals for new, efficient, useful, atom-efficient, and environmentally
"green" catalytic processes. Participation in this
multifaceted/multidisciplinary project, including interactions with industrial
scientists, is preparing students with diverse backgrounds for careers in
industry, government laboratories, and academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Marks is studying four research areas: 1) Catalytic hydroelementation to
discover, characterize, and understand atom-efficient processes that mediate
heteroelement-hydrogen additions to carbon-carbon saturation. This project is
focusing on unexplored, lanthanide-catalyzed processes that couple multiple
catalytic bond-forming events (cascades), that utilize unsaturated heterocycles
(dearomatization), that invent new ways to form oxygen-carbon and sulfur-carbon
bonds, and provide actinide catalysts which mediate new bond-forming sequences.
2) Electrophilic catalysis in polar media to study hydroelementation and its
reverse using recyclable, highly electrophilic lanthanide catalysts in non-
volatile, recyclable ionic liquids or other polar solvents to effect new
hydroelementation processes and to develop catalytic reactions that, when
coupled to hydrogenation, achieve the microscopic reverse: cleaving carbon-
oxygen, carbon-nitrogen, and carbon-sulfur bonds with hydrogen. This research
has implications for more efficient processing of sustainable biofuels and other
natural resources. 3) Catalytic materials synthesis to use lanthanide, actinide,
and related transition metal catalysts in investigating the coupling of olefin
polymerization processes with hydroelementation, to produce heteroatom-
functionalized polymers, thereby introducing polar functionality at polymer
chain ends. 4) Multinuclear catalysis to alter the course of catalytic
polymerization and copolymerization reactions by poising two catalytic centers
in close proximity. Ideally, such cooperativity effects are likely to alter both
the rates and selectivities of kinetic events that control polymer architecture,
mechanical properties, and processing characteristics.