* 1464712
* Gas-phase and Solution Reactivity Studies on para-Benzyne Analogs and Related Bi, Tri- and Tetraradicals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Hilkka Kenttamaa, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2018
* USD 503,582.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program is
supporting fundamental research of Professor Hilkka Kenttämaa at Purdue
University. Professor Kenttämaa and her students explore the reactivity of a
variety of highly reactive radical species with up to four radical sites in the
gas phase by using Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance and linear
quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometry and in solution by using a photoreactor
and HPLC/mass spectrometry. High-level quantum chemical calculations are carried
out to complement the experimental studies. The information obtained in this
research on the factors that control organic bi- and polyradicals' chemical
properties improves the fundamental understanding of organic chemistry as well
as in the design of bi- and polyradicals with tailored properties for
applications such as organic synthesis, development of new organic materials,
design of better synthetic antitumor drugs and treatments for aging. More than
20 graduate and 5-10 undergraduate students (including several females and
students from underrepresented groups) carry out all aspects of the research
under investigator's supervision. Collaborative projects with industrial and
academic groups broaden the students' understanding of research and facilitate
their development into independent scientists.

In this research, methods are developed for the generation and study of a
variety of charged aromatic, carbon-centered bi- and polyradicals in the gas
phase and in solution. The reactivity and reaction kinetics of the radical
species are examined using carefully selected reagents. Experimental studies are
complemented by high-level quantum chemical calculations in order to delineate
the most important reactivity-controlling parameters in the gas phase and in
solution. The ultimate goal is to develop the intellectual framework that allows
prediction and tuning the chemical properties of this type of organic bi- and
polyradicals in the gas phase and in solution.