* 1464524
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for I/UCRC for Instrumentation Development for Security and Resilience: Collaborative Research and Community Outreach within Forensic Science
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Adam Hall, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2017
* USD 14,785.00

I/UCRC for Instrumentation Development for Security and Resilience

The Northeastern Forensic Research Center (NFORCE) focuses on the development
and advancement of sample preparation, separation science and analytical
detection in a variety of areas of forensic science and homeland security. A
primary goal is to engage in analytical research, which will impact the
turnaround time from case submission to reporting analytical results to
investigators and attorneys. Case backlogs, often numbering in the thousands,
affect the criminal justice system nationwide. The investigators intend to
develop methods which will provide a high level of confirmatory testing in a
fraction of the time when compared to traditional approaches. Scientists are
interested in speeding up the analysis of a wide variety of samples within
analytical chemistry but not specifically for the forensic sciences and homeland
security. The projects undertaken within NFORCE would potentially impact areas
of drug discovery/development, the petroleum industry and airport security in
addition to forensic science and homeland security.

NFORCE intends to focus on advances in separation science and mass spectrometric
detection for drugs of abuse, ignitable liquids and energetic materials with the
primary goal of decreasing the total analysis time in an effort to reduce the
case backlogs nationwide. Methods such as differential mobility spectrometry
(DMS) and direct analysis in real time (DART) are examples of analytical
approaches, which avoid the necessity for chromatographic separation prior to
the detection of targeted analytes. The investigators propose to accomplish
these goals by developing collaborative research programs between academic and
industrial laboratories for the development, optimization and validation of
rapid and robust instrumental methods of analysis. Validated, high throughput,
analytical methods will be made available to participating crime laboratories
(city, state, federal or private). Dissemination will be accomplished through
peer-reviewed publications and presented at local and national forensic science
conferences. The combination of scientific quality, historical perspective and
knowledge of the practitioners will advance knowledge within forensic analytical
chemistry. The selected research activities will be strategized and decided upon
collectively in the best interests of the I/UCRC partnership.

This planning grant is jointly supported by NSF and the National Institute of
Justice.