* 1464547
* Development of Stereodynamic Chemosensors for Chiroptical Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Christian Wolf, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2018
* USD 442,368.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Christian Wolf of the Department of
Chemistry at Georgetown University will develop practical dual-mode chemosensors
that produce distinct circular dichroism (CD) signals combined with either a UV
or a fluorescence response that can be used for rapid determination of the
absolute configuration, enantioselectivity, and yield of a large variety of
chiral compounds. The envisioned sensors and current leads are designed to
exploit substrate recognition and chirality amplification events for
quantitative real-time analysis, and will address common drawbacks of chirality
sensing, including slow response time and elaborate substrate derivatization
prior to analysis. The introduction of robust chirality chemosensing assays is
expected to increase the productivity of many laboratories by providing
practical, time-efficient and cost-effective screening tools that streamline
current asymmetric reaction discovery and optimization protocols while
minimizing waste production and energy consumption. This interdisciplinary
research program will train the next generation of scientists and be conducted
by a team of graduate, undergraduate and local high school students. An
industrial partnership with Merck in Rahway, NJ, and several international
collaborations that address several aspects of the chirality chemosensing
development will enhance the local research and education
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the in-depth analysis
of the operational mode, kinetic and thermodynamic aspects of the substrate
binding event, the substrate-to-sensor chirality imprinting process, and the
ultimate chiroptical sensor response. In parallel to the development of
stereodynamic probes that operate based on covalent substrate binding,
stereodynamic metal complexes and other probe designs that incorporate
noncovalent interactions with the chiral target compounds will be explored.
These directions will include new molecular recognition and chiral amplification
motifs and further extend the general scope of chirality sensing. In these
cases, systematic sensor developments will go hand in hand with detailed
mechanistic studies using NMR (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance), ESR (Electron Spin
Resonance), MS (Mass Spectrometry), X-ray, UV (Ultraviolet), CD (Circular
Dichroism), fluorescence and in situ IR (Infrared) in combination with titration
and competition experiments. The investigation of real case applications, i.e.
the direct analysis of asymmetric reactions, will also be pursued.