* 1464581
* CDS&amp;E: Development and application of cluster-integral methods for dispersions and complex solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* David Kofke, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 360,000.00

With this award, the the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
Program in the Chemistry Division is supporting David Kofke and Andrew Schultz
of the University at Buffalo/SUNY to develop a hierarchal theoretical and
computational approach to studying chemical solutions. Chemical solutions are
ubiquitous in natural and man-made systems, and their behavior is critical to
many applications in technology, including healthcare, energy storage,
environmental preservation, and food and consumer products. One approach to the
description of chemical solutions is via a hierarchy of solute interactions,
considering first the solute molecules individually, then taken in pairs, then
groups of three, four, and so on. Each level in this hierarchy introduces new
information about the mixture, such that one can infer the full behavior by
proper analysis of these interactions. The quantities needed for this
formulation can in principle be computed from detailed molecular considerations,
which is desirable because it leads to greater predictive and descriptive
capability. However, the means to perform these calculations for practical
purposes have not been developed, so the full potential of the overall approach
is relatively untested. Developing and benchmarking this approach is the focus
of this research projects. The project integrates training of graduate students
with outreach activities and development of learning materials and computer-
based tools that permit others to benefit from the developments in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The osmotic virial equation forms the theoretical
framework the work. The research objectives of are: (1) to develop robust and
accurate methods for calculating osmotic virial coefficients up to at least 5th
order, from a molecular model, while formulating approximants that extend their
reach; (2) to examine behavior of mixtures of hard convex particles, focusing in
particular on entropy-driven aggregation and fluid-fluid phase instability.
High-throughput screening using these cluster-integral methods is anticipated to
yield data for at least 5000 species pairs; (3) to investigate association of
proteins in solution, considering in particular the effect of crowder molecules
on this behavior.