* 1464659
* Metal-Ligand Multiple Bonds, Dehydrogenation Chemistry and Catalytic Transformations of Small Molecules Such as Methane, Ethane, Other Hydrocarbons, and N2
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Daniel Mindiola, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2018
* USD 435,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor Daniel J. Mindiola and co-workers from the University of
Pennsylvania, to explore the role of group 4 and 5 transition metals, mainly
base metals of low cost, to develop reagents that can activate and transform
abundant hydrocarbon resources, present in natural gas and shale gas, into
value-added products such as olefins and amines. The research will focus on the
use of less toxic and earth abundant transition metals for the development of
new catalytic cycles that can activate and use these volatile hydrocarbons for
C-C and C-N bond forming reactions. The Mindiola group has developed systems
that are capable of transforming alkanes such as ethane and propane (present in
natural gas and shale gas) into their respective olefins ethylene and propene at
room temperature using titanium reagents. In addition to being actively involved
with underrepresented organizations, Professor Mindiola and his group prepare
short video clips of key segments during the synthesis of organometallic
reagents in an effort to develop more user-friendly approaches to the teaching
of organometallic synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to activate
and transform methane and C2-C8 linear hydrocarbons to olefins and involves the
preparation of reactive complexes possessing metal-carbon multiple bonds,
specifically with metal ions such as Ti, V, and Nb supported by robust pincer or
aryloxide ligands. These reactive moieties are tested with various carbine or
nitrene hydrogen acceptors sources to render these transformations cyclic or
catalytic. The low-temperature transfer dehydrogenation of volatile alkanes,
especially the ones which are not useful as liquid fuels, is being explored. The
PI and his group disseminate information broadly about the chemical uses of
shale gas, as well as Fischer-Tropsch and steam-cracking reactions.