* 1464832
* Harnessing Redox-Active Ligands and Cofactors to Facilitate Multi-electron Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Alan Heyduk, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 483,628.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
funding Professor Alan Heyduk of the Department of Chemistry at the University
of California, Irvine to develop new molecular catalysts for splitting water
into hydrogen and oxygen. The utilization of intermittent alternative energy
sources such as wind and solar requires that efficient conversion strategies be
developed to generate chemical fuels. Water-splitting to afford hydrogen and
oxygen is an attractive energy-storing reaction for this goal, and for
widespread applicability, these catalysts must be made from inexpensive and
earth-abundant elements. This project is also providing avenues for the training
of students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels and includes strong
representation from groups that are historically underrepresented in the
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Heyduk is developing new tridentate,
redox active ligands that can be shuttled among three oxidation states while
bound to a metal, as a way to introduce multi-electron redox functionality to
the metal complex. The PI is exploring the use of these complexes in the
catalysis of important multi-electron reactions, such as water oxidation and
proton reduction. The ultimate goal of the project is to generate molecular
electrocatalysts for both halves of the water-splitting reaction and based upon
earth abundant first row transition metals. The development of new molecular
catalysts for the electrochemical reduction of protons to hydrogen and the
electrochemical oxidation of water to oxygen provide insights into the
mechanistic and kinetic barriers to efficient water splitting. For widespread
applicability, these catalysts must be made from inexpensive and earth-abundant
elements, where the factors governing multi-electron reactivity are yet to be
elucidated. Success in this endeavor will impact alternative energy strategies
by providing new avenues for the conversion of transient energy sources into
storable, portable, chemical fuels.