* 1464959
* Microscopy for Organic Chemists: Insights into the Location of Chemical Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Suzanne Blum, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 07/31/2020
* USD 410,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Suzanne A. Blum of the University of
California, Irvine is developing microscopy techniques that reveal chemical
reactions at ultimate sensitivity limits. These techniques advance the
boundaries of technology while concurrently answering long-standing questions in
chemistry. These studies provide suggestions for improving the efficiencies of
chemical reactions, resulting in reduced costs and waste generation and lower
energy demands in the synthesis of advanced materials and pharmaceutical
building blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing single-
molecule and -particle microscopy techniques that reveal the locations of
chemical reactions. Such location information will be used to understand the
mechanisms of organic reactions including late-metal catalysis. Single-particle
studies are performed via scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in order to test
ideas about the spatial homogeneity and efficiencies of surface-supported
molecular catalysts. Single-molecule studies are performed via fluorescence
microscopy. These studies bring together the diverse expertise of a
collaborative research team in organic synthesis, mechanistic investigation,
reaction development, and single-molecule and particle microscopy experimental
design and tool development. The broader impacts of the proposal include methods
for improving catalyst efficiency and generation of fundamental mechanistic
information for the development of synthetic methods. The expansion of a
successful future faculty teacher training program at the University of
California, Irvine, that the principle investigator initiated forms an
additional broader impact in order to advance the NSF goals of advancing
discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training and learning, and
broadening participation of underrepresented groups. The expansion increases the
number of graduate students receiving training in teaching, the diversity of
chemistry courses in which the training occurs, the participation of faculty
mentors as trainers in pedagogy, and the quantity of undergraduate students
reached.