* 1464960
* RUI: SusChEM: Towards accurate computational dynamical and mechanistic studies of transition metal homogeneous (photo)catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hendrik Eshuis, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 195,425.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program and the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program of the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Hendrik Eshuis of Montclair State University is applying and
developing computational methods to study the catalysis of chemical reactions
using metal complexes and to understand the relationship between the structure
of molecules and their activity as catalysts. A computational method, called the
Random Phase Approximation Method, is being developed and refined to described
fundamental aspects of how chemical bonds are activated by catalysts. This
method is also being applied to study how light can drive certain catalysts to
perform specific reactions, also known as photocatalysis. This project is
contributing to the toolbox of computational methods available for the study of
a wide range of chemistries, including catalysis. Ultimately, it may advance the
development of more efficient and greener catalysts, a goal of interest to both
society and industry. Both undergraduate and graduate students are involved in
this research, and Prof. Eshuis is involved in strengthening the computational
chemistry component of the chemistry curriculum at Montclair State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Eshuis is applying and developing
computational methods to study transition metal homogeneous (photo)catalysis and
is primarily focused on the development of the random phase approximation method
to describe dynamic and mechanistic aspects of bond activation reactions. The
quality of the random phase approximation method is being benchmarked against
experimental results and compared to other ab initio and density functional
theory methods. The method is being applied to the study of mechanisms of
carbon-carbon bond activation reactions by nickel containing catalysts, with a
focus on the link between ligand composition and reactivity, as well as in the
study of the mechanism of photocatalyzed trifluoromethylation reactions. The
random phase approximation method is being further developed to be used in ab
initio molecular dynamical studies of mechanisms involving carbon-hydrogen bond
activation and extended to open-shell systems.