* 1464886
* RUI: Production of Highly Reactive Metal-Oxo Species with Molecular Oxygen and Visible Light for the Selective Oxidative Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Rui Zhang, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,468.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Rui Zhang at the Western Kentucky University is designing
efficient photocatalysts (catalysts that function with the input of light) that
can utilize sunlight to activate oxygen and transfer it to other chemicals, also
termed oxidation. The use of sunlight and atmospheric oxygen rather than a
chemical reagent in the oxidation processes of bulk chemicals would be more
sustainable, generate less chemical waste, and potentially reduce economic costs
associated with the process. The research may impact the fundamental science and
technology of green chemistry. The project is providing cutting-edge research
experiences for the participating undergraduate STEM students and thereby
training future STEM professionals. High school students from Gatton Academy are
also spending time in the laboratory and learning about catalysis research.

Dr. Zhang is studying ways to produce highly reactive metal(V)-oxo species in a
catalytic cycle through photo-disproportionation of mu-oxo metal(IV) dimers.
Initial studies in this research laboratory have demonstrated unique reactivity
of ruthenium(IV) mu-oxo bisporphyrins and iron(IV) mu-oxo corroles in which high
valent transition-metal oxo intermediates are accessed through the
disproportionation. Now, Prof. Zhang is studying ways to produce the more
reactive manganese(V)-oxo species via photo-disproportionation reactions and to
develop efficient oxidations catalyzed by more stable metallocorrole complexes.
Synthetic pathways are being developed to link a photosensitizer to the catalyst
and to improve the light harvesting efficiency of the catalyst.