* 1464817
* Photochemistry, Spin, and Molecular Motion: Connections through Magnetic Resonance
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Malcolm Forbes, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 540,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B (CSDM-B)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Malcolm D. E. Forbes
at Bowling Green State University to study how molecules move in confined spaces
on the nanometer scale. With specially designed spectroscopic measurements, the
Forbes laboratory investigates the location and mobility of molecules confined
to thin polymer films, such as those making up household paint coatings, as well
as other structures like microbubbles, which are used as delivery vehicles for
cancer therapy. Recently, this group has applied these techniques to study a
class of materials called "structured fluids." These fluids have many practical
applications in the food and oil industries, but the underlying fundamental
principles describing the flow of these materials under stress is poorly
understood. Forbes and his coworkers are attempting to provide a rigorous
quantitative footing for how the viscosities of structured liquids change in
response to a stress. Dr. Forbes co-chairs the 2015 Gordon Research Conference
on Photochemistry and he currently serves as President of the Inter-American
Photochemical Society (I-APS), working with the Society to promote UNESCO?s
"Year of Light" in 2015.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Forbes laboratory uses
steady-state and time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance (SSEPR and TREPR)
spectroscopies at multiple frequencies, coupled to pulsed lasers or continuous
wavelength (CW) light sources to create photogenerated radical pairs in confined
environments such as vesicles and in heterogeneous media such as non-Newtonian
fluids. With rigorous spectral simulation routines, the group is able to extract
structural data (hyperfine couplings and exchange interactions), kinetic
parameters (rate constants and activation energies), and molecular dynamics
information. Systems currently under investigation include: 1) singlet oxygen
reactivity and topology in heterogeneous structures (micelles and vesicles), 2)
polymer chain dynamics in solutions, emulsions, and thin films, 3) coordination
compounds such as light-harvesting copper complexes and water-splitting
ruthenium catalysts, and 4) the molecular basis of rheological phenomena such as
viscosity modification. The well-established "nanoreactor model" for the TREPR
line shapes of mobile spin correlated radical pairs (SCRPs) is being refined for
radicals located in colloidal systems such as pluronic micelles and mixed
surfactant vesicles. These experiments provide detailed information about the
mobility and ordering of small molecules over a wide range of time scales.The
Forbes laboratory has strong interactions with scientists from overseas (Russia,
Mexico, China and Austria).