* 1464958
* RUI: Catalytic Methods for the Enantioselective Synthesis of Enolizable Alpha-Amino and Alpha-Azido Aldehydes and Novel Applications Thereof
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Thomas Coombs, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 05/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

This award from the Chemical Synthesis program supports the research and
development of new methods for constructing alpha-amino aldehydes and related
structures in the laboratory of Professor Thomas Coombs at the University of
North Carolina Wilmington (UNCW). The nitrogen sources used in this work allow
easy manipulation of the nitrogen protecting group following their union with
aldehydes. The ability to remove this protecting group using mild reaction
conditions is expected to permit a broader range of functionalized aldehydes to
serve as starting materials in streamlined syntheses of nitrogen-containing
small molecules. The alpha-amino aldehydes generated via these methods can be
transformed into a range of nitrogen-containing compounds with potential
applications in medicinal chemistry and chemical biology. The proposed chemistry
uses organocatalysts and water in the key steps, contributing to the development
of this line of catalytic bond construction. The University of North Carolina
Wilmington (UNCW) has a strong tradition of training students in STEM fields.
This award will allow Professor Coombs to extend hands-on research opportunities
to both undergraduate and M.S.-level students interested in conducting original
research in preparation for careers in chemical science. The projects funded in
this proposal will be used to teach students how to approach research questions
from a molecular perspective and to troubleshoot challenges encountered in the
laboratory.

The proposed research is aimed at developing new methods for the
enantioselective organocatalytic synthesis of enolizable alpha-amino aldehydes
bearing sulfonamide protecting groups. These protecting groups may be removed
under non-reductive conditions, permitting the incorporation of reducible
functional groups in the starting aldehydes. Extending these methods to use
tryptamines as reaction substrates for the synthesis of 3-amino-pyrroloindolines
via a similar mechanism will also be investigated, as will the development of an
enantioselective route to enolizable alpha-azido aldehydes for use in tandem
reactions generating nitrogen heterocycles. The proposed research seeks to
develop new enantioselective amination methods for streamlining organic
synthesis.