* 1464772
* Fundamental reactivity of PtII/PtIV redox couple relevant to oxidative alkane C-H bond functionalization with O2 as direct oxidant
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Andrei Vedernikov, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2019
* USD 470,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor Andrei N. Vedernikov of the University of Maryland to develop
new catalysts for converting compounds typically abundant in natural gas, i.e
unreactive hydrocarbons into functionalized compounds with added value.
Importantly, this 'green' project proposes to use oxygen from the air as the
only consumable reagent for the desired oxidative transformations. To accomplish
the goal, computational design is combined with experimental study of the
reactions involved. To enhance the chances for success the project includes
collaboration with the theoretical computational group of Professor William A.
Goddard, III from Caltech. The broader impacts include the training of students
via the ACS Project SEED Program from area high schools through participation in
this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at a detailed mechanistic
understanding of how facially chelating ligands control reactivity of a Pt
center in alkane C-H bond activation. These studies follow on earlier work in
Professor Vedernikov's group on Pt(II)species that mediate aerobic
functionalization of C-H bonds. Several series of novel Pt(II) complexes are
being developed, including sulfonated CNN pincer complexes and macrocyclic
pyridinophane complexes. This work includes DFT (Density Functional
Theory)-driven catalyst discovery and detailed mechanistic characterization of
new systems by means of kinetics, isotopic labeling experiments and DFT
calculations. If successful, some of the new systems may serve as efficient
catalysts for partial aerobic oxidation of methane and higher alkanes.