* 1464979
* SusChEM: Surface Active Site Design for Selective Deoxygenation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* J.William Medlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Rauchfuss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 533,520.00

Many chemical processes require the ability to make or break carbon-oxygen bonds
in a compound without affecting other bonds. The conversion of biomass to fuels
and chemicals requires carbon-oxygen bond dissociation (or "deoxygenation")
reactions to improve the compatibility of biomass-derived compounds with the
existing refining infrastructure. Unfortunately, catalysts that are effective
for deoxygenation also often catalyze other, undesired reactions that lead to
the loss of carbon. The ability to design solid materials that specifically
remove oxygen from a feedstock is thus a goal of modern catalysis research. In
this project, Dr. J. Will Medlin of the University of Colorado Boulder is
investigating how interactions between oxygen-containing reactants on catalyst
surfaces can be tuned to allow for specific removal of oxygen from a feedstock.
Dr. Medlin is also investigating the role that catalyst nanostructure plays in
favoring oxygen removal reactions over those that remove carbon. The project
integrates scientific outreach and training within the research program. These
outreach activities include summer research opportunities for undergraduate
students, as well as expansion of an annual chemistry and chemical engineering
"Field Day" activity that is focused on hands-on science experiments for middle
school students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. J. Will Medlin of the University of
Colorado Boulder is developing an understanding of the mechanism for
deoxygenation reactions of alcohols on metal surfaces. Selective activation of
carbon-oxygen bonds is important in many applications, including the conversion
of biomass-derived compounds to fuels and chemicals. It is especially important
to identify catalysts that are selective for carbon-oxygen bond activation,
since cleavage of carbon-carbon bonds generally results in carbon loss and
reduced efficiency. Although certain metal surfaces have been identified as
being unusually active and selective for deoxygenation, the relationship between
surface properties and deoxygenation performance is not well understood,
hampering efforts to design improved catalysts. In this project, Dr. Medlin is
employing a combination of experimental studies using model surfaces, density
functional theory calculations, and experiments with supported catalysts to
systematically investigate factors that have previously been associated with
high deoxygenation selectivity. In this project, isotope tracing studies are
employed to systematically investigate the mechanism for the critical hydrogen
transfer step during deoxygenation. Deoxygenation selectivity and kinetics are
measured for a variety of palladium surfaces to identify the geometric
structures associated with efficient deoxygenation. The goal of this project is
to identify simple catalyst descriptors that can inform design of efficient
catalysts. This project emphasizes STEM education through the research training
of students across multiple levels, as well as through an annual "Field Day"
activity for middle school students organized by Dr. Medlin's group.