* 1464494
* Metalated Nitriles: Unmasking Fundamental Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Fraser Fleming, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 08/31/2019
* USD 417,500.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Chemical
Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, the research team is exploring
fundamentally new reactions of nitriles. The proposal has impact in several
areas; the elevation of nitrile chemistry, student training and development, and
improving the ability of students' writing. The research falls into three broad
areas that will develop new reactions of nitriles for the synthesis of cyclic,
carbon-based scaffolds of relevance for the synthesis of pharmaceuticals,
agrochemicals, and new materials. The first third of the proposal focuses on an
extremely rapid synthesis of bicyclic nitriles, the middle third develops
counter-intuitive methods of creating new carbon-carbon bonds, and the last
section of the proposal develops new routes to reactive nitrile intermediates to
control the three dimensional shape of nitrile-substituted scaffolds. The
project continues an excellent track record in training students and post-
doctoral associates, particularly minorities and women, to provide a stream of
bright, highly motivated students for careers in science. The approach features
vigorous research training with synergistic mentoring of undergraduate and
graduate students and an emphasis on career life balance through group
educational events and annual professional development retreats. Improved
writing skills are taught through a review writing strategy that transitions
undergraduate and graduate students from novice learners to expert
practitioners. The approach simultaneously addresses a general writing
deficiency in many students while instilling tools to critically evaluate the
primary literature. Publishing the strategy in the Journal of Chemical Education
should allow others to replicate the strategy with other
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on a blend of conceptually new bond constructions and new chemical entities,
many of which challenge conventional processes. Preliminary results demonstrate
the feasibility of preparing chiral decalones in a single synthetic operation,
potentially replacing multi-step technology based on the Wieland-Miescher
ketone. A highly unusual equilibration is under development which changes the
stereochemistry of a quaternary bridgehead center; a process that challenges
conventional notions. A counter-intuitive alkylation of metalated nitriles with
unactivated alkenes is rapidly assembling tricyclic ketones. A complementary
alkene addition uses S-ketenimines as particularly attractive nucleophiles to
address two long-standing challenges: rapid access to stable ketenimine
nucleophiles, and nitrile-based alkenylations. The last section of the proposal
provides an orthogonal, innovative asymmetric alkylation with metalated
nitriles. Collectively, the proposed research exploits the unique reactivity of
nitriles consummate with the long-term objective of elevating metalated nitrile
alkylations to a level of influence comparable to that of enolate alkylations.