* 1464936
* Control of Conformation and Reactivity in Pentafluorosulfanyl and Tetrafluorosulfanyl Substituted Aliphatic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,09/30/2021
* John Welch, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 09/30/2021
* USD 385,980.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor John Welch of the University at Albany is developing new
fluorine containing functional groups. Fluorinated compounds are widely employed
in life sciences and materials research. Nearly 20% of all pharmaceuticals and
40% of all agrochemicals contain fluorine. Fluorination and fluorinated
functional groups have added value and utility to materials for 75 years yet it
has been increasingly apparent that these useful substituents can be accompanied
by undesirable environmental effects. Prof. Welch is training graduate students
to handle extraordinarily reactive reagents to prepare novel fluorinated
reactants. Prof. Welch operates and makes available to the scientific community
a dedicated laboratory equipped with the necessary infrastructure for the
preparation, purification and characterization of both liquid and gaseous
reactive fluorinated intermediates and synthons.

The relationship between structure and reactivity of aliphatic fluorinated
hypervalent sulfur compounds is under investigation. Although the chemistry of
the pentafluorosulfanyl group is very much in its infancy, the Welch group is
exploring the use of environmentally more benign hypervalent fluorinated sulfur
compounds to deliver the desired effects of fluorination while mitigating the
undesirable aspects, e.g., by decomposing in an environmentally benign manner.
The influence of steric demand, electronegativity and dipole moment on the
physical properties, conformation, and selectivity of beta-lactams, amino acids
and peptides containing fluorinated hypervalent sulfur is being explored. The
role of trifluoromethyl substitution in the SF5-group (i.e. the new SF4(CF3)
group) is under investigation. In comparing the SF5 and SF4(CF3) substituents,
differences in selectivity and reactivity will be examined. An effort will be
made to establish whether such differences correlate with trends in dipole
moment or electron-withdrawing ability of these two new, heavily fluorinated
substituents.