* 1464941
* Chiral Porous Metal-Organic Frameworks as A Tunable Platform for Asymmetric Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Wenbin Lin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2019
* USD 640,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Wenbin Lin at the University of Chicago is developing new
types of solid catalysts that translate solution phase catalysis into the solid
phase. The production of most commodity chemicals utilizes solid phase catalysts
due to their efficiency in chemical usage and separation. Certain important
chemicals presently are only made in solutions because solid phase catalysts for
their synthesis are not known. These processes usually require lots of organic
solvents and can be quite wasteful. In this research project Professor Lin is
synthesizing new classes of solid phase catalysts based upon metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs), materials that are built from organic molecules and the
framework pieces and metal atoms as the connecting points. The materials are
porous which enables molecules to move in and out of the structures, and by
tailoring the metal atom connection sites, the researchers are dictating the
types of catalysis that can occur within the material. By matching the
structures of the metal atom sites to known solution phase catalysts, the
researchers are creating MOFs that can perform the analogous solution phase
reactions. The project is also integrating research, training and education.
Graduate and undergraduate students participating in the research project are
learning important research and communication skills. Professor Lin is also
partnering with the Collegiate Partner Program to host Chicago area high school
students for a research experience in the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Lin is developing strategies to
synthesize novel chiral MOFs based upon m-BINAP motifs with large open channels
and pores and to study their activity as single-site solid catalysts for
asymmetric catalytic reactions. The studies are focusing on: 1) tuning the
effective reaction space of chiral, porous MOFs through the inclusion of mixed
linkers; 2) exploring earth-abundant metal asymmetric catalysis and
organocatalysis within the MOFs; 3) realizing asymmetric photocatalysis via
photoactive multicomponent MOF assemblies; and 4) developing multifunctional MOF
systems for asymmetric tandem catalysis. The ability to determine MOF structures
precisely provides distinct advantages over many other types of heterogeneous
asymmetric catalysts, because the catalytic activities/selectivities of the MOF
can be approximated using a range of characterization methods and altered
through the use of tailor-made building blocks. MOF-based single-site solid
asymmetric catalysts have the potential to become cost-competitive heterogeneous
catalysts and find application in fine chemical synthesis.