* 1464926
* Predicting emergent continuum-elastic properties of lipid membranes from molecular-level simulations via consistent and model-free scale bridging
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Markus Deserno, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2018
* USD 480,000.00

Markus Deserno from Carnegie Mellon University is supported by the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program of the Chemistry Division (CHE)
and the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program of the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) to develop computational approaches to predict the
elastic properties of lipid membranes and to understand how protein filaments
adsorbed onto these membranes exert forces upon them. These membranes, a
combination of fat-like molecules, cholesterol and proteins, are complex
entities across which metabolic intermediates enter and exit cells. Most
cellular membranes require frequent changes of their shape or even connectivity
in order to execute their wide spectrum of biological functions. The underlying
mechanics depends on a small number of parameters, which fully characterize both
the energetic requirements for such deformations as well as the forces
transmitted by them. Deserno and his research group develop a set of new
simulation strategies for predicting these parameters in computer simulations.
The aim is to gain access to physical parameters that have been controversial or
notoriously hard to obtain. They also develop quantitative approaches to
investigate one of the most common processes by which membrane connectivity is
changed. Graduate and undergraduate students working on these projects will gain
experience in soft matter, biophysics, simulation, and continuum modeling.
Ongoing outreach projects with both middle- and high schools in Pittsburgh will
be extended by developing a lecture series closely tied with hands-on
experimentation that develops the concept of elastic sheets and beams.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research
and education to (1) measure emergent continuum-elastic properties of lipid
membranes from molecular-level simulations via consistent and model-free scale
bridging and to (2) develop theoretical techniques for describing the
interaction of semi-flexible polymers with curved surfaces. In (1) the research
involves expanding the information obtainable from simulating buckled membranes
to extract not only the bending modulus, but identify its entropic contribution,
the position of the pivotal plane of a single leaflet, and the magnitude of the
spontaneous monolayer curvature. These techniques are applied to computational
membrane models spanning a wide range of resolution, from atomistic to highly
coarse-grained. Particular applications include lipid bilayers that are strongly
stiffened when entering a gel phase, or strongly softened by trace amounts of
small peptides. Deserno and coworkers also aim to measure the Gaussian curvature
modulus by expanding the dynamic patch closure protocol to an equilibrium
measurement based on externally confining fields, which after accounting for
composition-curvature coupling can be generalized to the nontrivial case of
lipid mixtures. In (2) Deserno explores the geometric nature of elastic forces
that result from confining one-dimensional semi-flexible polymers to curved
surfaces. Building on the case of a confining cylinder, which has both a
continuous rotation and translation symmetry, the Euler-Lagrange equations for
the shape are to be solved through a combination of analytical and numerical
techniques, and the associated stresses and torques are identified. Moving on to
a confining catenoid, translational symmetry is lost, as is generally a
potential quadrature, but the new curvature gradients provide a host of new
physics, linked to boundary conditions, curvature localization, and
polymerization forces. Geodesics and asymptotic curves are studied as limiting
cases for polymers with anisotropic elastic properties, and additional
spontaneous curvature and twist render the filament an excellent continuum model
for dynamin filaments. This allows the prediction of forces exerted by dynamin
helices polymerizing around membrane necks, a process that is believed to
underlie many cellular membrane fission events, but whose mechanistic
underpinning is still not understood.