* 1464493
* I-Corps:  Models of Commercialization for Transportation Technology and Data Sources
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2015
* John Collura, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 05/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Approximately 30,000 people lose their lives in traffic crashes on our nation's
roadways with about 300 of these fatalities occurring in Massachusetts. The
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, along with assistance from the federal
government, invests nearly $1 billion per year in transportation infrastructure.
A portion of these funds are paid to the consultants who design and oversee the
construction of the projects. A small, but still significant, portion of the
design process is dedicated to assessing pre-build traffic conditions and crash
data analyses. This I-Corps team will be merging two pieces of technology they
have developed to create an improve platform for managing transportation data.
The proposed technology has the potential to improve the accuracy and
reliability of such analyses and to reduce the amount of time and cost to
conduct the overall design process.

This I-Corps team has developed two systems at the University of Massachusetts.
The first is the Regional Traveler Information Center (RTIC), an Intelligent
Transportation System that collects travel times and traffic volumes in Western
Massachusetts using cameras and sensors strategically placed on major arterials
and highways. The other is the UMass Safety Data Warehouse that compiles
numerous data sets from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. These datasets allow
researchers to investigate crash causes, identify high risk demographics and
locate crash hot spots. Crash, citation, hospital, death certificate, and
roadway inventory data have been linked using advanced statistical methodologies
to create a single dataset that allows analysts to consider the comprehensive
crash experience; including driver behavior, crash characteristics, roadway
environment, and crash outcomes such as injuries and costs. The new platform
will provide real time traffic collection and crash data analyses to customers
through a web tool. This would be accomplished by expanding the real time
traffic collection reach of RTIC, uploading data from RTIC and the UMass Safety
Data Warehouse onto a web tool, and building algorithms to automate crash data
analyses.