* 1464891
* EAGER: SusChem: Enhanced Electricity Production from Engineered Salinity Gradients Using Capacitive Mixing
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Bruce Logan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2016
* USD 130,000.00

146489&lt;br/&gt;Logan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several technologies are being
explored to capture electrical energy from salinity gradients, which may exist
naturally (e.g., seawater and river water) or be engineered (e.g., by using
waste heat and thermolytic salts). One of the newest methods to produce energy
from salinity gradients is capacitive and pseudo-capacitive mixing (CapMix). In
this approach, capacitive electrodes are alternately exposed to solutions having
high and low salt concentrations. CapMix has a critical advantage over other
technologies being explored (e.g., pressure retarded osmosis, PRO; and reverse
electrodialysis, RED) in that it does not require membrane materials, which are
often prohibitively expensive. To date, however, CapMix has produced lower power
densities than these membrane-based processes. The purpose of this project is to
improve power production using CapMix through chemical modification of carbon
electrode surfaces and testing novel metal-based electrodes. The use of salinity
gradient energy is an opportunity to reach out to young scientists and engineers
that are eager to find new ways to produce carbon-neutral electricity. The
highly interdisciplinary nature of power production from salinity gradients
presents a unique opportunity to showcase different technical fields that span
solution and surface chemistry, water quality, renewable materials, engineering
economics, and electrical power production. To convey information on salinity
gradient energy, it is proposed to create a website and YouTube videos to inform
students how to make and test these devices so that they could build these
systems for home and school studies and science fairs. This will encourage
creativity and learning at home through experimentation and through self-
motivated learning via the internet, where the PI has had success in the past
with high school student inquiries. The findings of this project could have
important implications for global energy production using carbon-neutral
technologies, and further advance achieving energy sustainability of the water
infrastructure through such processes as energy recovery from waste
heat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, CapMix studies have used NaCl solutions to
generate salinity gradients. This project will focus on a new approach that uses
a thermolytic salts (i.e., ammonium bicarbonate, AmB) or chemicals (ammonia)
that can be distilled at low temperatures (45 degrees C). The main objective is
to demonstrate that CapMix power production can be substantially increased by
using new, un-tested thermolytic solutions with metal and chemically-modified
carbon electrodes. There are no data on this unique combination of materials and
thermolytic chemicals, and these experiments will provide a proof of concept
that altering the electrode type and chemistry can increase performance by
widening the voltage window. For the metal electrodes, the team will measure the
power densities generated by using novel manganese, silver, or copper based
electrodes. For the carbon electrodes, we will examine the effects on
performance of surface chemistry alterations using oxidative treatments, acidic
treatments, and the bonding of specific chemicals. The work is guided in part by
the success of modifying activated carbon to function as supercapacitors in
sulfuric acid solutions, although here the AmB solution conditions will be
sufficiently different such that the trends will likely differ from previous
results. This approach is considered to be based on sustainable chemistry, as
most of the materials (e.g., carbon electrodes, ammonia) are Earth-abundant and
are used in closed-loop systems.