* 1464315
* CRII: CHS: Remote Paper Prototype Testing for Mobile Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Haoqi Zhang, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2019
* USD 147,536.00

The goal of this project is to establish a research program to enable mobile app
designers to conduct user testing on low fidelity or paper prototypes in
realistic environments. Mobile app usage now accounts for over half of all time
spent on digital media. Current practice is that realistic testing of new apps
tends to occur only after the development of high-fidelity prototypes, which can
take weeks or months to implement. The PI will build and evaluate tools, and
develop methodologies, for remote paper prototype testing that will enable
designers to facilitate testing sessions from the lab while users remotely
interact (via a Wizard-of-Oz mechanism) with a low-fidelity prototype that can
be generated in just a few hours. The PI's goal is to accelerate mobile app
development by making it possible for designers to observe and gather valuable
feedback from users in realistic scenarios early in the design process; as a
consequence, designers will be empowered to test multiple ideas and iterate on
them quickly, with the potential for order-of-magnitude increases in the rate of
innovation at lower cost in terms of both monetary and human resources. The PI
will make his tools available to a wide community of researchers and design
practitioners by releasing all software artifacts to the general public under
open source and creative commons licenses, and by providing implementations that
rely only on existing, off-the-shell technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will design, implement, and evaluate remote paper prototype testing tools that
preserve and extend the affordances of paper prototyping to the mobile setting
while supporting the design goals of testing mobile apps in realistic locations
and situations of use, of facilitating a testing session and wizarding a paper
prototype remotely, and providing location-based and situational context. For
example, users will test a paper prototype out of the lab while a designer
wizards from afar. A paper prototype placed under a video camera in the lab
streams an audio-visual feed to the tester's mobile device, while a device on
the user streams an audio-visual-data feed to the facilitator and wizard,
including the user's first-person perspective, their talk-aloud, and other
relevant data, such as their location. To operate the prototype from afar, a
wizard responds to the user's actions and situational context based on the live
stream from the user. Any alerts or updates to the prototype are streamed to the
test user's mobile device. The PI will collaborate in this research within
Northwestern University with the Segal Institute of Design, the Design,
Technology, and Research program, Design for America, and the NUvention program.
Effectiveness of the developed methods and tools will be evaluated through
controlled experiments and field deployments. Project outcomes will contribute
to our understanding of low-fidelity prototyping and wizard-based techniques for
remote testing.