* 1464357
* CRII: CSR: Rethinking Operating System Structure for Wearable Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Felix Xiaozhu Lin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2018
* USD 175,000.00

CRII: CSR: Rethinking Operating System Structure for Wearable Devices

Wearable computing devices are playing increasingly important roles in areas
like education, business, and healthcare. However, the major metrics of wearable
devices, most notably interactive performance and energy efficiency, are far
from satisfactory. To address this challenge, this CRII research project
examines the key component of a wearable device, namely the operating system,
and explores designs that fit in the unique characteristics of wearable devices.
Wearable devices have unique form factors and usage models, and highly
specialized workloads, and the operating system needs to be virtually
specialized for different workloads.

This project develops a comprehensive characterization of existing wearable
workloads on current and emerging hardware platforms, and a set of structuring
principles for guiding the design of wearable operating systems that can be
specialized for multiple types of workloads. The project develops an operating
system prototype whose design follows the principles and thus demonstrates the
effectiveness of the principles.

The project leverages collaborations with industry leaders to foster a broad
impact on the commercial development. The project outcomes will be integrated
into the operating system course curriculum. The research program offers a
platform for involving undergraduate students in publishable research and for
promoting science and engineering to high-school students, and under-represented
groups.