* 1464312
* CRII: CHS: Mobile Crowdsourcing System for Public Safety
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Yun Huang, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2018
* USD 189,141.00

Law enforcement agencies have begun to tap into crowdsourcing applications and
social media in their practices, such as allowing people to report safety issues
via mobile apps and reporting crimes on Twitter. This research aims to
investigate key factors that motivate and influence people's willingness to
share safety-related information in a mobile social environment. This project
not only focuses on advancing knowledge in different disciplines such as
crowdsourcing systems, human-computer interaction, social computing, and
cognitive decision mechanisms, but also promotes mentoring and training of
early-career scientists. This project will bring together faculty and student
researchers from different disciplines such as computer science and psychology.
Further, using campus safety as a concrete application domain, this work focuses
on establishing collaboration between local campus safety agencies and the
research community, which can be maintained and expanded to promote public
safety in general. Finally, the project will create a mobile crowdsourcing
system that can be adopted by all safety agencies of institutions of higher
education to help improve campus safety. More broadly, the mobile system can
become a model for community policing in an effort to improve public safety
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research will examine how
people make decisions regarding sharing safety information as well as design and
implement nudge mechanisms that can be used to encourage rather than force
people towards sharing such information in an informed and timely manner. Using
computational modeling techniques from cognitive psychology, this project will
build decision models to explain what factors may impact people's sharing
decision-making in this context. Intrinsic factors such as the desire to improve
society or the desire for knowledge may play a role, as well as more
social/community based factors such as whether people will be hurt or property
damaged. The resulting models will be integrated into a mobile crowdsourcing app
for campus safety, called S4S (Sharing for Support/Safety), which will be
deployed to evaluate the nudges, decision models, and the effectiveness of the
system. Success of the proposed research tasks will yield: (a) design
suggestions and discussions on the effectiveness and limitations of mechanisms
that nudge users to share safety information; and (b) the design and
implementation of a production mobile crowdsourcing system, which can be
leveraged by public safety agencies to collect rich information on community
safety more promptly and efficiently.