* 1464064
* ADVANCE PLAN IHE: Center for Research, Excellence and Diversity in Team Science (CREDITS)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Barbara Walker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Erika Tatiana Camacho
* 09/30/2021
* USD 749,623.00

The PLAN-IHE funding track is designed to expand the application of proven-
successful gender-equity initiatives for STEM faculty through networked
adaptation of a specific program or initiative. Careful evaluation is expected
to expand understanding of such initiatives across institutions and institution
types. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Research, Excellence, and Diversity
in Team Science (CREDITS) is an integrated research and training program to
increase and enhance Team Science capacity, effectiveness, and excellence in
California. Over the past two decades, Team Science based research has become
increasingly central in scientific discovery. Scientific research can be
enhanced when informed by diverse points of view and diverse (and thus often
broader) research questions. Diversity on teams is known to have positive
effects on creativity, innovation, and productivity. Diversity in science and in
scientific teams helps ensure scientific questions and research align with
social needs and benefits. The CREDITS project will forge collaborative
relationships and partnerships among Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) in the
University of California (UC) and California State University (CSU) systems. The
program includes three interrelated activities: 1) Annual team science
leadership and team formation retreats; 2) Team science and institutional change
training/seminar for UC and CSU leadership; and 3) Evaluation and research that
will increase our knowledge about team science and diversity and inform CREDITS
programming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CREDITS project links theories about team
science in academic STEM careers with theories about barriers to participation
and advancement in STEM for women and underrepresented minorities. The benefits
of team science to science innovation and individual research careers is
becoming well-known, but less is known about gender and science teams, and there
has been no explicit research to date on racial-ethnic diversity and team
science. CREDITS will begin to study these issues, particularly asking questions
about barriers to diverse participation on science teams, how diversity shapes
the formation of science teams, and how diversity and team science is implicated
in promotion and tenure practices and policies at a variety of institutional
types. The CREDITS project will also build the networks of the faculty
participating in the workshops which is expected to affect their individual
professional outcomes. Women and underrepresented minority scientists are less
likely to participate in team science collaborations, and their participation in
these networks develops later in their careers.