* 1464479
* Research in Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Sergey Denisov, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 218,132.00

This research project covers a range of problems central to classical analysis
and partial differential equations. The research will focus on three topics:
approximation theory, nonlinear nonlocal evolution equations, and the spectral
theory of Schrodinger operators. In approximation theory, the research concerns
problems related to estimating the size of orthonormal polynomials.
Understanding the asymptotics of the orthonormal polynomials has proved to be
crucial for the progress in several fields, including mathematical physics and
probability. The second main theme of the research is analysis of two-
dimensional active scalar equations. These nonlinear and nonlocal evolution
equations appear in the fluid dynamics and atmospheric and ocean sciences. The
physical processes described by these equations are known to be highly unstable,
and this project aims to develop a mathematical explanation for that phenomenon.
The third topic of this project is spectral theory of Schrodinger operators. The
Schrodinger equation is one of the basic equations in mathematical physics. The
project will focus on understanding how the properties of the potential function
affect the scattering of waves.

In the area of approximation theory, the research investigates the following
classical question: what is the size of the polynomial orthonormal on the unit
circle (or the real line) with respect to a measure from a given class. Various
ways to define the size and various classes of measures will be considered. For
example, the project will study a class of weights that have a fixed oscillation
around a given constant. The second part of the project will mainly focus on two
active scalar equations: the two-dimensional Euler equation of fluid dynamics
and the surface quasi-geostrophic equation. Questions of instability will be
addressed; in particular, patch dynamics will be studied and the merging
mechanism of a centrally symmetric pair will be analyzed. The third topic of
this project will address multidimensional scattering. The Schrodinger evolution
with rough potential will be considered and the classical questions of the
scattering theory will be studied. To carry out the proposed research, methods
of harmonic and complex analysis will be used along with techniques from
nonlinear analysis and the theory of partial differential equations. Through the
training of graduate and undergraduate students the project will have an impact
on human resource development.