* 1464008
* CSEDI: Determination of Equilibrium Iron Isotope Fractionation Factors at High Pressure
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Anat Shahar, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2019
* USD 78,066.00

Understanding the composition of the Earth is crucial to constraining under
which conditions it formed along with the rest of the solar system. The more we
can learn about the Earth, the better suited we are to understanding how planets
form in general and why the planets are all so different. Many elements that are
abundant on Earth have stable isotopes (same number of protons, different number
of neutrons) that have been studied extensively for their use as tracers for
physical and chemical processes. However these isotopes have largely not been
explored for how they can trace processes occurring at high pressure, such as
during the formation of our planet's core. This proposal is aimed at studying
the composition of the core of the Earth through experiments at high pressure
and theoretical calculations of the isotopic ratios. The goal is to place an
independent constraint on the composition of the core, which has critical
implications on the formation and evolution of our planet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principle of using stable isotopes to probe the bulk
chemical composition of planets lies with the combination of isotope
fractionation and sequestration of elements in inaccessible reservoirs like the
Earth's core. Experiments at high pressure and temperature can reveal the
equilibrium isotopic fractionation factors that cannot be directly measured in
planetary materials and when combined with isotopic ratios found in natural
materials provide a constraint on the formation conditions of those materials.
The principal aim of this proposal is to understand how the light elements
bonded to iron in the core can affect the distribution of isotopes during core
formation. Ths Pis will do this by determining how various phases (Fe3C, FeO,
FeS, FeHx) isotopic fractionation factors are affected by pressure. This study
relies on mineral physics techniques and experiments (DAC experiments at the
synchrotron using nuclear resonant inelastic x-ray scattering) combined with
isotope geochemistry calculations and analyses. It is a truly interdisciplinary
project that can only be accomplished with the right expertise and has the
potential to make a large imprint on several fields of geoscience. The main
research goals of this proposal are to: reveal how iron stable isotope ratios
under extreme pressure conditions can be used to understand planet formation and
differentiation; determine the effect of bonding partners on iron stable isotope
fractionation so as to investigate the light element in cores of differentiated
objects; and calculate theoretical iron isotopic fractionation factors based on
high pressure NRIXS synchrotron experiments.