* 1464115
* Synthetic Versatility of N-O Bond Rearrangements
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Laura Anderson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program is supporting the research of
Professor Laura L. Anderson of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Illinois at Chicago to explore the design and application of new N-O bond
rearrangements for the efficient and stereoselective synthesis of new and
challenging organic molecules. The Anderson group has previously established the
proof of concept for the value and versatility of these types of transformations
and will advance these synthetic tools toward the efficient preparation of new
potentially "privileged" structures, chiral non-racemic compounds, and key four-
carbon synthons. These advances will have a broad impact on the elucidation of
new pathways to important pharmaceuticals and materials. Furthermore, the
compounds generated in this study will be submitted to the chemical library at
the UICentre for Drug Discovery to be screened against new biological targets.
The mechanistic approach to this research program will expose graduate and
undergraduate student co-workers to elements of both synthetic and physical
organic chemistry. The PI will continue here efforts to broaden participation,
particularly by working with women and undergraduate students to encourage them
to consider career paths in STEM. There is also a high school outreach component
designed to introduce students to data analysis of chemical
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand the use of N-alkenyl
nitrones and O-alkenyl oximes as key intermediates in the rapid and efficient
synthesis of complex organic molecules. Specifically, the following goals will
be pursued: 1) asymmetric hydrogen-bond-donor catalysis will be used to convert
mixtures of N-alkenyl nitrones and allenes to enantioenriched indole-based
heterocycles through a cascade process whose selectivity can be controlled
through a balance of solvent effects; 2) conditions for the electrocyclization
and [4+2]-cycloaddition of N-alkenyl nitrones will be optimized for the
synthesis of new morpholine-based heterocycles and 3) methods for the modular
and stereoselective synthesis of 1,4-iminoketones will be explored through a
copper-mediated coupling and rearrangement approach. In addition, mechanistic
studies will be used to elucidate the origin of the chemoselectivity of the
Chan-Lam reaction for the synthesis of N-alkenyl nitrones and O-alkenyl oximes
to facilitate access to a wider variety of modular substrates for rearrangement.
Completion of these goals will advance synthetic chemistry by providing new
tools for retrosynthetic analysis and expanding chemical space through access to
new structural motifs.