* 1464389
* LTREB Renewal:  Long-Term Studies of Seedling and Small Sapling Community Dynamics in a Neotropical Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Liza Comita, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2018
* USD 316,711.00

Tropical forests possess the most diverse plant communities on earth. How
hundreds of similar species can coexist, without a few dominant species
outcompeting all others, is a major unresolved question in ecology. Processes
occurring early in a tree?s life are thought to be critical for allowing such
large numbers of species to coexist. This project extends a twelve-year study
that tests multiple hypotheses proposed to explain plant species coexistence
through long-term measurements of seedlings and saplings in lowland tropical
forest on Barro Colorado Island, Panama. The fate of over 100,000 seedlings of
350 tree, shrub and woody vine species will be followed within a mapped forest
inventory plot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical forests provide critical ecosystem
services upon which humans depend, but nonetheless are being lost at an alarming
rate. Results from this study will help to predict and to mitigate the effects
of global change on forests and their critical ecosystem services. Data
collected on regeneration requirements for hundreds of tropical plant species
will be useful in silviculture, forest management and biodiversity conservation.
The project promotes international scientific collaboration and provides
training and jobs for undergraduate and graduate students and early career
biologists.