* 1464226
* CRII: CHS: Human-Robot Collaboration in Special Education: A Robot that Learns Service Delivery from Teachers' Demonstrations
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Momotaz Begum, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2017
* USD 190,667.00

This project focuses on improving the quality of life for children with special
needs through the use of robot technologies. In 2011, 13% of children enrolled
in schools in the United States required some form of special education; in
2010, 1 in 68 children in the U.S. was diagnosed with some form of autism
spectrum disorder (ASD), a developmental condition that almost always triggers
the need for special education. A significant amount of robotics research over
the past decade has indicated that many children with ASD have a strong interest
in robotic toys, and suggested that robots are potentially valuable tools in
special education for these children. But the clinical community and educators,
who have the authority to approve the use of such devices in special education,
remain unconvinced. One reason for this gap is that the robotics research in
this domain has not had a strong focus on effectiveness. The PI recently
completed a preliminary study involving children with ASD that confirmed the
clinical feasibility of special education service delivery through human-robot
interaction (HRI). Her goal in the current project is to establish a research
program that builds on these findings to develop a framework, including methods
and algorithms, for robot-mediated special education service delivery to
children with ASD and other disorders of a similar nature. The PI's vision is to
lay the foundations for a future where educators deliver services in
collaboration with robots, thereby making a significant impact by increasing the
effectiveness of special education services while reducing the burden on the
educator during the service delivery process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
proposes a "Learning from Demonstration" (LfD) approach where the robot learns
service delivery from a series of demonstrations by human educators in real
special education scenarios. When the human educator has sufficient confidence
in the robot's ability, s/he will initiate a collaborative service delivery
scenario in which the robot autonomously delivers some steps of a specific
educational service but asks for the educator's assistances in cases where it
has low confidence in its perception and/or planned actions. A multi-modal
activity recognition framework will provide information about the responses and
activities of children with special needs as they engage with the robot. To
facilitate educator/robot interaction, a focus group will be organized with
educators and clinicians to accommodate their needs and expectations in the
design of the control interface for the special education service delivery
robot. An HRI study will test the effectiveness of the proposed framework in
real-world settings. The design and implementation of robots that can deliver
special education services in collaboration with a human educator will open up
many opportunities to advance the state of the art in robot learning (especially
high-level concept learning), robot vision and activity recognition, and HRI.