* 1464671
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Computation Intensive Big Data Analytics for Multimodal Temporal Prediction, Retrieval, and Attribution
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Ramakrishna Akella, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 04/30/2017
* USD 14,500.00

Recently, both leading technological firms and academic institutions have
developed a new capability to capture and process data at a scale many orders
larger than previously possible. Firms, particularly in Silicon Valley, have
demonstrated how this capability, when blended with Analytics, can be exploited
to solve a host of new problems of great practical value. These range from
Computational (or Online) Advertising, with immense commercial value being
realized, to Healthcare Analytics, which is of tremendous and critical value
societally. At our Research Site at the University of California, Santa Cruz, we
focus on enhancing the predictions and searches based on Variety of data (in
addition to Volume and Velocity), since data such as Electronic Healthcare
Records (EHRs) include not just numerical data (about vitals and labs), but also
text (notations by doctors and nurses), images (X-rays etc.), video (such as a
doctor?s examination), body sensors, etc. We also explore and exploit ways of
identifying more informative data on-the-go, as well as identifying effective
ways to speed up and slow down the rate of obtaining this informative data
automatically based on need and context, to achieve superior prediction.
Finally, we develop new ways of evaluating the true impact of each data
type/source on the desired outcome. The fundamental discoveries will concern
methods for determining the value of each type or source of data in more
effective prediction (and search) of dynamic system state and intervention
decisions.

Our research concerns analyzing multi-type and source data for enhanced
prediction, search, and decision making. Our collaborative research site focuses
on research and development of novel scalable Big Data Analytics (BDA) solutions
for multimodal data and streaming data suitable for various computing
architectures (where the knowledge extracted from multiple modes is far greater
than the sum of knowledge discovered from individual data-types); and novel
interoperable solutions to combine analytics tools and solutions. Specific sub-
thrusts include: 1. Scalable temporal prediction/classification, including
recommenders, for multi-type data, incorporating latent business processes and
ontologies. 2. Bayesian interactive information retrieval for massive data sets,
combined with extraction incorporating latent business processes and ontologies
in mining data. 3. Data type and source characterization in terms of power of
prediction/classification/retrieval, including causality in marketplaces and
temporal aspects. 4. Interoperable solutions for BDA that enable seamless and
efficient knowledge discovery from multimodal data involving different solutions
and tools in different languages and different APIs, and Programmable File and
Storage Systems for Big Data Analytics. 5. User behavioral modeling analytics
and the analytics/economics of decisions and interventions.

The domains and contexts we propose to explore include a subset of: system
health (e.g. aviation safety, jet engine maintenance) and analytic services
based on heterogeneous data and data/text mining, extraction, and retrieval for
service centers (e.g. in network health or financial, sales and marketing
services), principled knowledge discovery for personalized healthcare and web
analytics, diagnostics and prognostics in Internet of Things.