* 1464310
* CRII:AF: Scaling up Dynamic Programming for Certain Optimization Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Barna Saha, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2019
* USD 174,937.00

Dynamic programming is one of the most fundamental and systematic techniques for
algorithm design and analysis. Pioneered by Richard Bellman in 1940s for
applications in engineering control theory, this method has since been extremely
popular in a huge variety of optimization problems in computer science, applied
mathematics, engineering, biology and economics. However, dynamic programming
algorithms typically have high polynomial time complexity--quadratic, cubic or
even more--and high space requirements as well. This significantly limits the
practicality of this method. Any advancement in the scalability of a generic
tool like dynamic programming is likely to have a huge impact across different
fields.

There has been a significant effort in accelerating dynamic programming over the
last several decades; however, the speedup gains have mostly been limited to
only a poly-logarithmic factor improvement at best (e.g., the Four Russians
Method). This limitation is primarily due to the focus on developing exact
optimal algorithms. On the other hand, there are many applications where one may
relax the need for optimality, and instead settle for an approximate solution.
Allowing even a small suboptimality may lead to a huge benefit in time and space
requirements.

The principal motivation for this project is to introduce new techniques to
develop highly scalable dynamic programming methodology as a generic toolkit for
designing scalable algorithms. Understanding the tradeoff between
approximability and time complexity remains a major goal. To achieve this goal,
a new suite of mathematical tools will be required since existing methods mostly
give only a poly-logarithmic improvement in time complexity, or can handle only
the case when data satisfies additional local properties. Randomization will
play a crucial role in this project. Various randomized sketching methods and
compression techniques will be considered, incorporating fresh tools from
information theory, graph theory, and the probabilistic method. While the major
focus is on improving running time, the approaches developed under this project
will have a direct effect in reducing space usage as well. Finally, a class of
basic problems in scheduling and pattern recognition over sequences will be
studied, which are not only of theoretical interest, but also have wide
application in large scale data management, bioinformatics, and sustainable
computing.

The proposed work will significantly improve the state of the art in the design
of scalable algorithms for major optimization problems arising in Big Data
domains. The algorithms will be implemented and tested on a variety of publicly
available data sets in bioinformatics, industrial cloud cluster usage data,
dynamic network routing data, etc. The close connection of the PI with industry
will result in collaborations with practitioners and possible adaptations of the
developed methodologies when possible. The PI has experience in mentoring
minority students and is committed to involvement of under-represented
minorities, at both graduate and undergraduate levels, in cutting edge research.