* 1464535
* I-Corps: A Closed Loop Process for Recycling Spent Lithium Ion Battery
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Yan Wang, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 04/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Lithium ion (Li-ion) batteries have received more attention than any other
battery Technology since Sony made the first commercial cell in 1991. Two
decades later, they remain widely used and account for about 60% of worldwide
sales of portable batteries. Due to their high energy density, long lifespan and
lightweight, Li-ion batteries make ideal candidates for use in hybrid electric
vehicles (HEVs) and electric vehicles (EVs). One reason for the increased use of
Li-ion batteries in the vehicle market is the ever-stricter CO2 emission
standards automobile manufacturers must meet. However, Li-ion batteries are not
widely recycled because current technologies cannot recycle them efficiently.
The recycling process developed by the I-Corps team recovers the cathode
materials from spent Li-ion batteries; the goal of the process to recover any of
the transition metals used in Li-ion battery cathodes. The recovered cathode
materials can then be used as precursors for new lithium ion batteries. This
results in a closed loop recycling process where old battery materials are used
in new batteries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The customer need is high purity
Ni0.33Mn0.33Co0.33(OH)2 or high performance LiNi0.33Mn0.33Co0.33O2 cathode
material. In this project, the team combines the recycling process with material
synthesis. The high efficient and effective recycling process for Li-ion
batteries can guarantee that Ni0.33Mn0.33Co0.33(OH)2 is in high purity and
LiNi0.33Mn0.33Co0.33O2 has good electrochemical properties. Since the main focus
is on generating new cathode precursors the typical customer for the recycled
products are the battery cathode manufacturers. Currently, the proposed project
is in the proof-of-concept stage and preliminary results indicate that mixed
cathode materials can be recycled with high efficiency, and synthesized cathode
materials demonstrate promising electrochemical performance. The team has
successfully produced cathode materials (similar to those synthesized with fresh
materials) from 1 kg of recycle Li-ion batteries.