* 1464377
* CRII: CHS: Augmented Fabrication for Non-Expert Users of Digital Fabrication Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Matt Huenerfauth, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2019
* USD 190,995.00

Digital fabrication equipment such as 3D printers and laser cutters is becoming
increasingly available to non-professionals, and many such devices have reached
price points where nearly any household may own one. Although much attention has
been paid to the ability of such equipment to produce new objects, the repair
and/or customization of existing objects (e.g., to prolong or restore the
utility of damaged objects or to apply creative personalizations to mass-
produced items) is likely to be equally attractive to the everyday consumer.
While tools exist for designing objects for fabrication, they are complex and
appropriate mainly for professionals or highly-motivated hobbyists, and provide
little or no support for users working with existing objects. The PI's goal in
this project is to address these shortcomings, in order to reduce the currently
high barrier to using digital fabrication technology. To this end, he will
develop a research program to explore augmented/digital fabrication systems that
allow users to design and fabricate directly in conjunction with the relevant
existing object(s), rather than being constrained to traditional computer-aided
design interfaces. To enhance dissemination of the work among members of the
target community, the PI will open-source his prototype
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior work in augmented reality, tangible
interfaces, and digital fabrication suggests that enabling a fast iterative
design process using direct manipulation will enhance the ability of non-expert
users to design a desired outcome and to understand what the output from the
device will be. The PI will leverage this research to prototype and study
augmented fabrication systems for non-expert users in four categories: design ad
rem (placing an existing object into a digital fabrication machine and designing
around that object); fabrication ad rem (the step following design ad rem,
fabricating with the given object); design in situ (designing an object or with
an object in the place where it is found or will be used); and fabrication in
situ (performing the digital fabrication where the result will be used). Each of
these areas requires methods to get information about existing objects into the
design, and for the system to communicate to the user what the result of
fabrication will be. The PI will conduct research around smart tools to enable a
user to capture relevant information about existing objects, and output
mechanisms to help the user understand how the objects will be changed or
augmented when fabrication commences.