* 1464869
* Mean-Field Limits of Quantum Many-Body Dynamics and Free Boundaries in Kinetic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Xuwen Chen, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 162,349.00

This research program concerns the study of the rigorous justification of mean-
field limits of quantum many-body dynamics and free boundaries problems in
kinetic theory. Many-body systems arise naturally as fundamental models for
physical systems. Since these many-body systems could contain 10^23 particles or
more, the simulation of such systems is only possible via some approximation,
such as the so-called mean-field limits. The mathematical justification of these
mean-field limits, from the many-body systems they are supposed to describe, is
therefore an issue of fundamental scientific importance. Two projects arise from
the study of Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC). BEC is a state of matter of a
dilute gas of bosons cooled to temperatures very close to absolute zero. A large
fraction of the bosons occupy the same quantum state, at which point quantum
effects become apparent on a macroscopic scale. Since the Nobel-Prize-winning
first observation of BEC in 1995, the investigation of this new state of matter
has become one of the most active areas of contemporary research. Another
project involves the determination of the motion of an object that is influenced
by a sea of particles around it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular scope of
this research project is to investigate several problems concerning the fine
properties of solutions to the time-dependent many-body Schrödinger equation
when the particle number tends to infinity and free boundary problems in kinetic
theory. This research project encompasses three broad directions. The first
direction concerns the space-time regularity of the solution to the BBGKY
hierarchy under Gross-Pitaevskii scaling in three dimensions in the important
case in which the scattering length of the microscopic interaction potential
emerges. The second direction focuses on the derivation of focusing nonlinear
Schrödinger equations from quantum many-body systems with focusing interactions.
The third direction turns to the study of kinetic theory with boundaries and
focuses on the effects on the asymptotic behaviors near equilibrium in caused by
free boundaries. The PI and collaborators will use techniques from harmonic
analysis, probability, and spectral theory to analyze these problems.