* 1464729
* Novel Cation Radical and Exciplex Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Joseph Dinnocenzo, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2018
* USD 570,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism B Program is
supporting Professor Joseph P. Dinnocenzo at the University of Rochester to
investigate the selective formation of highly reactive aryl radicals under mild
conditions. The mechanistic insight gained from these studies can provide the
knowledge necessary to rationally utilize the chemistry in synthesis and in the
design of new materials. In addition, research on newly discovered cationic
exciplexes and exciplexes that exhibit dual emissions will provide knowledge on
these novel excited state intermediates. Research to better understand the
fundamental photophysical properties these exciplexes intermediates will provide
valuable knowledge for the design of efficient photoinduced electron transfer
reactions and for potential use in sensing applications. Student co-workers will
learn to carry out chemical syntheis and to conduct mechanistic studies in
photochemistry. including a range of less traditional techniques (fluorometry,
transient absorption spectroscopy, time-correlated single photon counting,
electrochemistry, and modern computational methods). Thus, students trained with
NSF support will be well prepared to tackle a variety of multidisciplinary
problems in their professional, scientific careers.This project will also
benefit undergraduate students through the NSF REU summer program at the
University of Rochester with particular attention paid to recruiting students
from groups traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work in the Dinnocenzo laboratory has
revealed that aryltrialkylstannane cation radicals undergo nucleophile-assisted
fragmentation reactions in which less stable aryl radicals are often formed in
preference to more stable alkyl radicals - an seemingly contrathermodynamic
result. This selectivity is unprecedented in ion radical chemistry. Proposed
research will test the generality of these remarkable results by exploring the
fragmentation reactions of aryltrialkyl-germane and -silane cation radicals
through the combined use of synthesis, steady-state photooxidation experiments,
and nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy. In addition, two types of
novel, charge-transfer exciplex intermediates recently discovered in the
Dinnocenzo laboratory will be investigated. One type of exciplex is formed by
reaction of cationic, excited state acceptors with neutral donors, which leads
to the formation of emissive cationic exciplexes that are without precedent.
Research objectives include determining the electronic nature of the exciplexes
(e.g. electronic coupling matrix elements) through theoretical fitting of the
radiative lifetimes of the exciplexes (determined by time-correlated single
photon counting) and their fluorescence spectra, exploring the generality of
cationic exciplexes, and measuring some of their photophysical properties. A
related project will investigate examples uncovered in the PI's lab where two
exciplex emissions are observed from a single acceptor and donor. Preliminary
results indicate dramatically different solvent reorganization energies for the
two types of exciplexes. Proposed research will determine the electronic
properties of the exciplexes and explore their generality.