* 1464740
* Ionic Liquids of Improved Thermal Stability
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* James Davis, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2018
* USD 285,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor James Davis and his students of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of South Alabama will explore the
synthesis, characterization, and properties of a new type of ionic liquids
(liquid salts). The liquid salts to be investigated are expected to be highly
resistant to heat and to retain their liquid character, without evaporation,
decomposition, or flammability, for long periods of time. Salts of this type
can, in principle, be used as substitutes for more traditional liquids in
applications ranging from heat transfer fluids and high-performance lubricants
to biomass processing and the synthesis of important electronic materials such
as semiconductors. The project brings together elements of chemical synthesis as
well as material science and engineering, and offers engaged students a broad
opportunity for gaining experience from a spectrum of activities. Since the
institution at which the research will take place serves a high proportion of
individuals from groups underrepresented in the sciences and engineering, the
present project will provide important opportunities to engage in the
professional training of individuals from these
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionic liquids (ILs) are materials of
considerable fundamental interest and growing practical utility. Because of
their non-volatility, ionic liquids can be used in applications requiring high
temperatures, such as in heat transfer, lubrication, or high-temperature
materials synthesis. Although typical ILs have relatively high degrees of
thermal stability, they are still incapable of being used for long durations at
temperatures above 200 degrees Celsius. In the present project, ILs will be
prepared using the tetraphenylphosphonium cation and derivatives thereof.
Preliminary work has revealed that the former cation is stable to temperatures
in excess of 300 degrees Celsius for days without decomposition or evaporation.
Building on these findings, the mechanism by which thermal decomposition
eventually does occur will be studied, and that knowledge will be harnessed to
create salts of still higher thermal stability. In addition to creating new
molten salts of high thermal stability, the use of these liquids in facilitating
the rapid pyrolysis of biomass (for production of bio-oil) and in the thermal
synthesis of electronically important materials such as ZnS and CdSe will be
investigated.