* 1464379
* CRII: AF: Principled Divide-and-Conquer for Topological Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Donald Sheehy, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 01/31/2018
* USD 173,034.00

Many data sets undergo transformations either before, after, during the
collection process which are most often corrected by smoothing, de-noising, or
registration. Topological Data Analysis (TDA) makes it possible to extract
robust signatures from data that are invariant to these transformations.
However, in TDA, even a relatively small data set can easily blow up to fill
memory when considering the space needed for edges, triangles, and other
simplices that represent (or estimate) the connectivity of the underlying data.
There is a need for fast, parallel, and distributed algorithms that partition
the input in a principled way that leads to both strong theoretical guarantees
and also practical performance. This project aims to fill this need by combining
nested dissection, a well-studied theory from numerical analysis (NA) with
persistent homology, the main technique of TDA, with the expectation that both
fields will benefit. A potential broader impact of the project is to improve
communication between researchers in TDA and NA. The PI will train both
undergraduate and graduate researchers and incorporate advanced concepts in
combinatorial topology in undergraduate and graduate
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aim is to develop a theory of
nested dissection on simplicial complexes that allows for fast, parallel
computation of persistent homology. A second specific aim is to develop and
analyze new efficient data representations for the partially reduced simplicial
complexes that appear in the course of persistent homology computation. This
will involve a topological generalization of the Union-Find problem, a new
approach to combining persistent homology and discrete Morse theory, an
extension of the theory of nested dissection to work directly over quotient
vector spaces (such as homology groups over fields), and also a separator theory
that applies to filtrations or other situations where the underlying graph or
complex is changing in time. Preliminary examples indicate that these extensions
may produce significantly better theoretical guarantees. A third specific aim is
to implement this approach, compare it with, and possibly integrate it with
existing open source codes.