* 1464421
* CRII: NeTS: Data-Driven QoE for Mobile Videos
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Amit Pande, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Mobile data traffic was around 18 Exabytes in 2013 and is expected to double
every year. Of this, 67% is video traffic currently and this percentage is
estimated to increase. This necessitates development of strategies to map
subjective human scores into on-line deployable methods for Quality of user
Experience (QoE) assessment, which can in turn control the underlying service
architecture used by network and application providers.

The goal of this CISE Research Initiation Initiative project is to develop data-
driven mobile video QoE models which can be used for real-time estimation of
mobile-video quality in smart devices. The researchers envision collecting large
volume of actual video-watch data using a customized application and processing
the data to mine important patterns and trends. This work will build a data-
driven video QoE model from the user's viewing experience to assess and improve
the performance of mobile video applications in contrast to existing work, which
has used distortion-specific metrics or full-reference approaches or have data-
driven models to model user engagement. The research entails building mobile
applications to measure video quality in mobile devices and collect subjective
user-experience scores. The anticipated outcomes of this two-year project
include answers to key research questions in video delivery for mobile devices:
Can we define new objective models for QoE of mobile-multimedia to incorporate
the loss in quality caused by freezing, distortions and other factors? Is it
possible to develop simpler, more reliable and cost-effective methods for
objective evaluation of video quality in battery constraint mobile devices? What
is the impact of device aesthetics, network resources and user preferences, and
can this impact be accurately modeled? What kinds of guarantees can be made in
different application scenarios and what cannot? How can the new metrics be used
to design better video delivery system with a focus to enhance user's quality of
experience?

The researchers will first generate a mobile application to a generate pool of
video data obtaining user's subjective video assessment as well as
content/network/device/visual quality metadata while allowing a user to play
videos from a project-generated dataset or content from popular websites such as
Youtube or Netflix. This will be accompanied by development of metrics for
quality assessment to capture delivery losses and their proportional impact on
video quality. A machine learning model will be developed to model distortions
as well as factors such as screen resolution, video resolution, freeze frequency
and intensity which impact video quality perception and their proportional
impact on video QoE.

The development of proposed quality-assessment tools can be used by content and
network providers to identify the bottlenecks in ensuring video quality and
rectify them with QoE-aware adaptive streaming, caching, transcoding and
optimizations. The PI is also committed to including a strong educational plan
that has both a conventional component using the project results to drive
coursework and involvement of graduate and undergraduates students in research
and in building a QoE application for smart phones to involve undergraduate and
graduate students.