* 1464841
* A Coordination Chemistry Approach to the Synthesis of Single-Molecule Magnets
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Jeffrey Long, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2018
* USD 496,670.00

The goal of this research project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &
Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division, is to design and study new
single-molecule magnets based upon transition metal and lanthanide elements. The
research will be carried out by Professor Jeffrey R. Long and coworkers at the
University of California, Berkeley. Single-molecule magnets are a relatively new
class of materials that exhibit properties once thought to be relegated to bulk
magnetic materials. At very low temperatures, these molecules can retain their
magnetization without succumbing to thermal randomization, thus rendering them
intriguing candidates for replacing current technologies in applications such as
computer hard drives and spintronics devices. The research will depend heavily
on synthetic chemistry and physical characterization techniques, enabling
graduate students and post-doctoral fellows to learn a wide array of skills in
preparation for future careers in academia or industry. Importantly, the project
will also devote time to outreach activities at elementary schools in the San
Francisco Bay Area, through participation in a program intended to introduce
young students to various topics in science and the rewards of higher education.
The project will also redesign the Wikipedia Single-Molecule Magnets page to
most accurately and comprehensively reflect the state of the field, while also
appealing to a broader audience interested in expanding their scientific
literacy.

This project will seek to further elucidate the structure-function relationship
in single-molecule magnets, and how their properties can be most effectively
tuned to generate higher operating temperatures necessary for practical
applications. The proposed work falls into three broad categories. The primary
aim will be to better understand the roles of symmetry and ligand field strength
in enhancing magnetic anisotropy. For both transition metals and lanthanides the
focus will be directed toward molecules with enhanced magnetic anisotropy that
is enforced by high axial symmetry. In the case of transition metals, linear
two-coordinate systems will be targeted, while for the lanthanides, axial or
equatorial ligand fields will be selectively chosen based on the shape of the
magnetic anisotropy for each trivalent metal. Second, magnetic relaxation
phenomenon will be correlated with electronic modifications made within these
broader ligand field categories to unravel the factors that contribute most to
detrimental through-barrier (tunneling) processes, with the ultimate goal of
enhancing magnetic blocking temperatures. Isotopically labeled analogues of
these new molecules will also be studied to understand the role of hyperfine
interactions in through-barrier relaxation processes. A final approach will be
to use such highly anisotropic mononuclear complexes as building units in
radical-bridged molecules, which can exhibit strong coupling and large spin
ground states that greatly minimize the likelihood of rapid relaxation and
randomization.