* 1464089
* Infinite Possibilities Conference 2015
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Tanya Moore, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 02/29/2016
* USD 48,950.00

In March of 2015 the 5th Infinite Possibilities Conference (IPC) will be held at
the Oregon State University (OSU) in Corvallis, OR. This conference, which will
be jointly sponsored by OSU and the non-profit organization Building Diversity
in Science, is the only such national meeting to focus specifically on issues
related to educating, encouraging and supporting minority women interested in
mathematics and statistics. African-American, Hispanic/Latina, and Native
American women have been historically underrepresented in mathematics. In 2012,
less than 2% of the doctoral degrees in the mathematical sciences were awarded
to American women from underrepresented minority groups. Responding to this
issue, the conference provides students at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels an opportunity to interact with peers and more established women
mathematicians in a supportive and collegial atmosphere that is unique for a
professional conference. One of the major goals of IPC is to establish
connections between mentors and mentees and to provide role models for junior
women mathematicians seeking to enter the field but concerned about the
differences they see between themselves and traditional mathematicians. The IPC
seeks to make participants aware of the many ways in which mathematicians and
statisticians can make valuable contributions to society at large (the
importance of mathematics) and to build networks and provide resources for
junior women mathematicians to encourage and support their aspirations towards
such a career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Infinite Possibilities Conference
provides a supportive environment in which minority women mathematicians can
learn about the possible career paths available to them in the mathematical
sciences and aims to counteract the pervasive sense of isolation that
accompanies anyone seeking to enter a predominantly male scientific field such
as mathematics. As in past IPCs, there will be plenary research talks by
established mathematicians as well as shorter research presentations and posters
presented by more junior mathematicians. These presentations provide a forum for
dissemination of new mathematical ideas at all levels and in all areas of
mathematics, as well as a way for junior mathematicians to receive feedback on
their work and their method of presentation in a supportive environment.
Workshops and panel discussions at the conference will support participants'
success in navigating their education and careers in the mathematical sciences.
Such sessions will include information on acquiring the necessary skills for
graduate school; tools for professional development; information on career
options in mathematics; and awareness of resources and organizations that are
supportive of minority and/or women mathematicians. Prior to the general
conference will be a one-day short course on biostatistics, organized in
partnership with the Mathematical Biosciences Institute. See
www.diversityinscience.org/infinite-possibilities-conference.