* 1464876
* Dinitrogen Activation by Designed Trinuclear Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Leslie Murray, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 04/30/2019
* USD 414,976.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Leslie Murray of the University of Florida is developing
molecular systems that will mirror and improve our understanding of the
reactivity of metal clusters found in numerous enzymes in biology. The
biological metal clusters perform reactions ranging from the conversion of
greenhouse gases (e.g., nitrous oxide or carbon dioxide) into benign products
(e.g., water and nitrogen) or fuels (e.g., carbohydrates). Therefore, this
project ultimately aims to develop bioinspired approaches to performing
efficiently these types of reactions, all of which are of significant societal
importance. This project also includes outreach to K-12 students. The central
hypothesis of this project is that high spin late 3d metal ions can react
cooperatively in clusters to activate strong bonds and subsequently perform
heteroatom transfer at relatively low energetic cost. This project focuses on
using macrobicycles as ligands to support and template triiron clusters. These
ligands provides steric protection for the three metal centers to afford low
coordinate metal centers, which limits the formation of metal-metal bonds or
strong interactions in the clusters and, simultaneously, templates an internal
cavity for possible substrate binding. Upon chemical reduction, these triiron
clusters can complex and activate dinitrogen by these compounds upon chemical
reduction. Mechanistic studies of this reduction will involve changing reaction
outcomes by introducing structural changes as well as examining the reactivity
of intermediates with exogenous substrates (e.g., X-H bond activation). Reaction
intermediates and products will be characterized by physical methods including
X-ray crystallography, EPR spectroscopy, MÃ¶ssbauer spectroscopy and X-ray
absorption spectroscopy. An outreach program couples established university-
based chemistry department programs with K-12 institutions that serve local
students from predominantly underrepresented groups. The broader impacts of this
work include the potential societal benefits from a fundamental understanding of
how biological systems catalyze challenging reactions which relate to the
development of new molecular approaches geared toward energy independence.