* 1464761
* RUI: Investigations of a Novel, Bimetallic Ring System for Nucleating Beta-Sheets
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Timothy Curran, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2019
* USD 234,956.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B Program of
the Division of Chemistry is fudning Professor Timothy Curran of the Department
of Chemistry at Trinity College to develop model systems for exploring the
physical and chemical properties of beta-sheets, a common protein secondary
structure wherein two protein chains are aligned parallel to each other.
Formation of beta-sheets has been implicated in amyloid diseases such as
Alzheimer's disease. Although there are existing model systems for beta-sheets,
their use has been limited because these model systems aggregate and become
insoluble, making them difficult to study. Professor Curran and his students
have discovered a rigid, cyclic molecule that incorporates the metals, iron and
tungsten, and they have discovered ways to append two short protein chains to
this cyclic molecule. These protein chains are aligned parallel to each other.
The goal of this research is to determine whether the two protein chains linked
to the rigid cyclic molecule will form beta-sheets, and whether changes to the
iron and tungsten atoms can prevent the problem of aggregation. If successful
this work will enable other researchers to better understand the forces that
drive beta-sheet formation. The project lies at the interface of organic,
inorganic and biochemistry, and is therefore well suited to the education of
undergraduate science students. Undergraduate co-workers, including those from
groups underrepresented in sciences, and some high school students will take
part in this funded project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tungsten bis(alkyne)complexes
are ununsual in that they are air stable. In general, the alkyne ligands rotate
around the tungsten center; this is true for both acyclic and cyclic complexes.
In recent work, a cyclic tungsten bis(alkyne) complex derived from a dialkynyl
1,1'-disubstitutedferrocene has been discovered and found to rather rigidly
juxtapose the two alkyne ligands in solution. The rigid nature of this ring
system and its ability to hold the two alkynes in close proximity will be used
to explore whether peptides appended to the two alkynes will develop cross-
strand hydrogen bonds and adopt beta-sheet conformations. Peptides will be
appended to the alkynes via amide bonds made to either methyleneamine or
methylenecarboxyl linkers. If these peptide derivatives do adopt beta-sheet
conformations, then their ability to aggregate will be assessed. If aggregation
is observed, oxidation of the iron atom in the ferrocene moiety will be examined
to determine whether charge-charge repulsion can disrupt aggregation. The long-
term goal of this work is to develop a model system for studying beta-sheets and
the factors that contribute to their aggregation.