* 1464816
* Mechanisms of Surface Hydrogenation Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Michael Trenary, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2019
* USD 567,474.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Michael Trenary of the
University of Illinois at Chicago to conduct experimental work looking at the
catalytic hydrogenation of molecules on metal alloy surfaces. These reactions
are important in industrial as well as in organic synthesis applications. The
particular metal catalysts that the Trenary group is looking at have a small
amount of an expensive metal alloyed with the surface of an inexpensive metal.
The ultimate goal of research like this is to obtain catalysts that have the
same effectiveness as more expensive catalysts at much lower cost. The graduate
and undergraduate students, many from underrepresented groups, working on this
project will receive training in ultrahigh vacuum science methods, while working
on societally-important chemical problems with very broad impact. Prof. Trenary
begins a new collaboration with Olive-Harvey College, a Chicago-area college
with a predominantly African-American student body, providing Olive-Harvey
undergraduates with the opportunity to do research in his
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Michael Trenary and his research
group will use reflection/adsorption infrared spectroscopy (RAIRS) to monitor
the reactivity of simple molecules adsorbed to a metal surface that has been
modified (alloyed) with a small amount of a catalytically active metal. The
RAIRS experiments will include time dependent studies designed to measure
activation energies of elementary reaction steps and in situ studies at elevated
hydrogen pressures designed to maintain hydrogen surface coverages at the
temperatures where the hydrogenation reactions occur. The metal systems to be
studied include Pd-Cu(111) and Pt-Ru(0001). Reactions to be studied include the
hydrogenation of acrolein, the selective hydrogenation of acetylene to ethylene,
the hydrogenation of surface N atoms; and the hydrogenation of adsorbed CN to
methane and ammonia. The work will take on an international dimension through
collaboration with STM researchers at RIKEN in Japan.