* 1464114
* CRII: NeTS: A Proactive Perspective on Preventing Network Inference: Shifting from Optimized to Dynamic Wireless Network Design
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Zhuo Lu, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 12/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

This project will design strategies to thwart malicious efforts targeting the
inference of information from wireless networks. New proactive anti-inference
strategies will be developed and tested to make networks more dynamic and less
inference-susceptible. The project involves the training of undergraduate and
graduate students in network inference/anti-inference theoretical and
experimental activities, and is expected to significantly impact the security
design of mission-critical wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network
inference is an effective way to infer the information of network statistics and
properties from network measurements. Network inference has enabled a wide range
of applications, such as network surveillance, management and diagnosis;
however, in certain circumstances, such as wireless networks for military
applications, it is important to mask this information to prevent the use of
inference for malicious intent. To date, strategies for anti-inference in
wireless networks have been overlooked and under-explored. The central goal of
this effort is to address the current gap in understanding by exploring the
fundamental aspects of proactive strategies that will enable a wide range of
anti-inference applications. Specific objectives are to (1) develop a
theoretical framework to analyze the behaviors of proactive strategies that
enhance network dynamics to achieve anti-inference; (2) reveal the fundamental
relationship between the impacts and costs of network dynamics based anti-
inference strategies; and (3) implement efficient anti-inference design for
network applications. To accomplish these objectives, both deception traffic and
routing changing strategies will be utilized to induce higher dynamics in the
network to make inference inaccurate. In addition, the cost-benefit impact of
these strategies will be examined by shifting from optimized to dynamic network
design.