* 1464542
* Collaborative Research:  I/UCRC Phase II:  Center for Resource Recovery &amp; Recycling
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Patrick Taylor, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 135,000.00

Materials resource recovery and recycling is a critical need for sustainable
development in the 21st Century. Materials are not renewable and yet they have
major impacts in every industry and product area important to the national and
global economy. The industries that carry out resource recovery and recycling as
well as supply equipment and technologies for it comprise a broad range of
companies, a large fraction of which are small and medium enterprises. Over
56,000 such companies, engaged in some aspect of resource recovery and
recycling, produce $236 billion in goods, and employ 1.21 million in primary and
downstream industries. It is the purpose of the Center for Resource Recovery and
Recycling (CR3) to address these opportunities through cross-sector engagement
in the resource recovery and recycling value chain. Resource recovery and
recycling technologies have widespread applications impacting all materials
manufacturing, including, metals, plastics, paper, electronics, glass, organics,
polymers &amp; chemicals, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a number of key
industry challenges in the area of resource recovery and recycling.
Specifically: &lt;br/&gt;* Scarcity of feed stock materials and increasing cost
of material resources&lt;br/&gt;* Increasing amounts of waste from industrial
processes as well as end-of-life products&lt;br/&gt;* Need for solutions for
resource recovery, reuse, and recycling of critical materials&lt;br/&gt;* Need
for energetically favorable, environmentally compatible and economically viable
industrial processes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasingly rapid development of
new technologies in areas such as sensors, computational modeling, simulation
and visualization, big data and analytics, advanced materials, automation, and
robotics offers potentially significant impacts that could greatly expand the
capabilities as well as increase the efficiency of materials resource recovery
and recycling and benefit the industries involved in addition to development of
physical and chemical processes for sortation, beneficiation and concentration
as well as value-extraction. The industries comprising the resource and recovery
area tend to be disaggregated based on the type of materials recovery and
recycling they carry out, and are predominantly small and medium enterprises.
Therefore they not only often lack the resources to carry out the needed R&amp;D
but also those advanced manufacturing technologies that are available do not
have a natural route to implementation in industry. CR3 brings together key
constituencies in the resource recovery and recycling area to develop
comprehensive technology transfer pathways to industry. The primary focus of CR3
is on key sectors of iron and steel, non-ferrous structural metals, light
metals, rare-earths and photovoltaic metals, high-value refractory metals and
electronic materials where technology development will address the product
manufacturing wastes, post-consumer wastes, instrumentation, sensors and
controls, design for disassembly and conversion of trash to treasure.