* 1464471
* CAREER:   Polyploid speciation in the Achillea millefolium aggregate
* BIO,DEB
* 08/22/2014,01/31/2016
* Justin Ramsey, Black Hills State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2016
* USD 143,792.00

Nearly all animals are diploid, i.e., they have two sets of chromosomes. In
contrast, many plants are polyploid and have four or more sets of chromosomes,
yet the role of polyploidy in speciation remains sharply debated. Polyploid
plants that cannot interbreed with diploid plants are rarely recognized as
different species, in large part because it is uncertain whether diploids and
polyploids are ecologically distinct. This project combines field observations
and transplant experiments to investigate reproductive barriers between diploid
and polyploid populations of wild yarrow, a native perennial wildflower, and
rigorously test the nature of polyploid speciation. The project will use
naturally-occurring polyploid lineages and new polyploid mutants that arise
spontaneously within diploid populations to separate the effects of ecological
divergence and ploidy-based barriers on reproductive isolation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has broad implications for the interpretation
of global biodiversity patterns. Taxonomic recognition of polyploids, which are
common at high latitudes, could double the number of flowering plant species and
fundamentally alter understanding of species diversity, which is generally
thought to be greatest in tropical regions. This project will involve faculty
and graduate students not only in the laboratory and field research, but also in
development of a public education and outreach program on urban forests and
their conservation. Urban forests provide critical habitat for wildlife as well
as recreational opportunities for urban and suburban citizens, yet are
increasingly threatened by habitat fragmentation and invasive organisms. The
project will develop urban forests as sites of formal and informal biology
education and as a public resource. &lt;br/&gt;