* 1464416
* Measuring Microscopic Charge Exchange in Heterogeneous Organic Thin Films
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Aaron Massari, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Peebles
* 07/31/2020
* USD 390,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Aaron Massari of the
University of Minnesota and his graduate and undergraduate student colleagues
are investigating the ways that microscopic heterogeneity influence the physical
properties in molecular electronic materials. Prof. Massari's research uses
sophisticated spectroscopic techniques to measure the molecular dynamics in
materials while they are being electrically driven. The ultimate goal of
research like this is to develop better electronic materials. Students working
in the Massari group receive training in ultrafast laser techniques and in
cutting-edge spectroscopic and optical methods. The Massari group also conducts
educational outreach trips to do hands-on chemistry activities with large
numbers of students and teachers from rural, geographically-isolated parts of
Minnesota, through the University of the Prairie program at the University of
Minnesota Southwest Regional Outreach Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Aaron
Massari and his research group conduct a series of experiments to probe the ways
in which molecular-scale heterogeneity in molecular electronic materials impacts
performance. Specifically, Massari and his group use two-dimensional infrared
spectroscopy to probe short-range charge exchange in materials with variable
amounts of heterogeneity. Specific molecular systems to be studied include a
number of ruthenium-based dyes (N3, Z907, etc.) as well as some indoline-based
dyes (D102, D149, etc.) p-doped with iodine. Additional experiments use organic
p-dopants. Experiments are combined with MD simulations to help with the
modeling/analysis. The specific goals of the research include: (1) measuring and
modeling the site-to-site carrier exchange in thin molecular films; (2)
identifying the role of molecular aggregation on charge transport in both dye
systems, and (3) investigating the influence of the nature of p-type dopants on
the charge transport phenomenon. The Massari research group includes active
involvement by a diverse group of undergraduates in research, including students
from groups underrepresented in the sciences.