* 1464336
* CRII: CIF: Towards a Systematic Interference Alignment Approach for Network Information Flow
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Viveck Cadambe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 174,371.00

Communication and storage networks play an integral role in various aspects of
modern life. The design of an efficient infrastructure of communication and
storage relies significantly on algorithms for efficient information flow among
its various components. The multiple unicast network capacity characterization
problem is an information theoretic abstraction that captures the fundamental
challenges in information flow in several communication and storage systems.
Despite its importance, development of optimal codes in multiple unicast
networks is a challenging unsolved problem in information theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently the idea of interference alignment, which was
originally discovered in the context of wireless systems, has been shown to be
an important tool in multiple unicast network coding. However, uncovering
interference alignment based achievable coding schemes remains an art;
alignment-based solutions typically must be carefully handcrafted based on the
specific network scenario under consideration. A dearth of systematic alignment
based approaches has restricted the impact of this idea to a narrow class of
network topologies and configurations. The objective of this project is to fill
this gap by developing systematic interference alignment based algorithms for
multiple unicast network coding. The project will include the study of several
toy models of networks, which are tailor-made to expose the role of alignment.
Insights obtained from the toy models will be incorporated into network coding
algorithms for general networks over directed acyclic graphs. The performance of
the algorithms developed will be studied through analytical and numerical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work involves fundamental
contributions to the field of network information theory, specifically to the
sub-topic of network coding, through the study of canonical problems in the
field. The developments of the project will impact the design of data centers,
content distribution networks and wireless communication networks. The research
developed will be disseminated through peer-reviewed conferences and journals.
The source code for algorithms developed will be made available to the public.