* 1464205
* CRII: CIF: Measure Estimation from Moments: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Gongguo Tang, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 04/30/2017
* USD 175,000.00

From phase imaging in microscopy to semantic analysis of neural signals,
scientific discovery relies on identifying models from massive noisy,
incomplete, and corrupted data. One critical challenge for model identification
is the nonlinearity inherent in most scientific models and data analysis tasks.
However, as suggested by several successful approaches developed across machine
learning, statistics, and optimization, nonlinear problems could become linear
when "lifted" into higher dimensional spaces. Exploring the power and
limitations of such "linearization" techniques plays an important role in
complex model identification.

The research develops a unified framework of formulating nonlinear problems as
infinite-dimensional linear problems using measure, a foundational concept of
modern mathematics that abstracts the notion of volume and mass. In many measure
estimation problems arising in physical and information sciences, the
observations are linear functions of the measure's moments and the true measure
describing the system is atomic with a small support. The work first delineates
the class of model identification tasks that can be formulated as measure
estimation from moments. Notable examples include tensor decomposition and
completion, non-negative matrix factorization, and solving high-order multi-
variate polynomial equations. Second, the project develops a unified theoretical
and computational approach to solve measure estimation using semidefinite
programming with guaranteed performance. Finally, the project provides efficient
and scalable algorithms for applications in computational optics and large-scale
data analysis, where the problems of measure estimation from moments arise
frequently.