* 1464548
* Dissociative Photodetachment Dynamics of Multiply Charged Anions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Robert Continetti, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2019
* USD 515,819.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry supports Dr. Robert Continetti at the
University of California-San Diego in his studies of isolated multiply charged
anions. These molecules with extra electrons play an important role in a wide
range of chemistry, including biological systems, catalysts and as building
blocks in ionic solids. However, they are very difficult to study experimentally
in an isolated state. This research program involves novel measurements of the
stability and chemistry of isolated multiply charged anions, with the
information gained providing new insights and guiding the development of an
improved theoretical understanding of these important chemical building blocks.
Students involved in this project are learning about the design, construction
and chemical application of a unique apparatus. The PI also uses contacts with
local industry in San Diego (Cymer, Illumina, Air Products and others) to
arrange quarterly tours of industrial labs and seminars by industrial scientists
to enhance the career development of underrepresented minority and women
graduate students across the Dept. of Chemistry and Biochemistry at
UCSD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a more technical level, this award enables
experimental studies of the energetics, photochemistry and dissociation dynamics
of multiply charged anions (MCAs) with a particular focus on dissociative
photodetachment. Isolated MCAs are challenging systems for study theoretically
and experimentally, but important progress has been made using photoelectron and
photodissociation spectroscopies. However, many MCAs can undergo complex
multiple photodetachment and dissociation processes. These studies use an
electrospray ionization source coupled with a cryogenic accumulator ion trap
prior to injection into a high-energy electrostatic ion beam trap where the
photoelectron and photofragment measurements are made. Time- and position-
sensitive detectors are used to make three-dimensional, kinematically complete
measurements of the photodetachment, multiple photodetachment, photodissociation
and dissociative photodetachment processes observed. In addition, the lifetimes
of metastable polyanions and photofragment anions are measured in the
electrostatic ion beam trap. The first focus of the project is on the stable
dianions formed from dicarboxylic acids, later to be extended to phthalocyanines
and biologically relevant sulfonates. In a collaboration with the synthetic
inorganic laboratory of Figueroa at UCSD, novel metal carbonyl and isocyanide
complexes synthesized for applications in catalysis are also under study. For
these systems, there is no prior experimental information available on the
ligand dissociation processes and electron-capture energetics that this project
is providing. This information is essential for guiding the design of future
catalysts and the development of an improved theory of MCAs.