* 1464216
* CRII: SHF: A Compiler and Runtime Infrastructure for Flexible Scheduling and Scheduling-Enabled Optimizations on GPUs
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Bo Wu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2018
* USD 175,000.00

Title: CRII:SHF: A Compiler and Runtime Infrastructure for Flexible Scheduling
and Scheduling-Enabled Optimizations on GPUs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computing
power of a GPU (Graphics Processing Unit) lies in its abundant memory bandwidth
and massive parallelism. However, its hardware thread schedulers, despite being
able to quickly distribute computation to processors, often fail to capitalize
on program characteristics effectively, achieving only a fraction of the GPUs'
full potential. Moreover, current GPUs do not allow programmers or compilers to
control thread scheduling, forfeiting important optimization opportunities at
the program level. This research aims to develop a new software-level
infrastructure for flexible scheduling and scheduling-enabled optimizations on
GPUs. The intellectual merits of the research are two-fold: 1) It develops
compiler techniques to circumvent the restrictions from the hardware thread
scheduler, which enable programmers or the runtime to flexibly schedule tasks to
the GPU processors; 2) It designs runtime optimizations to leverage the flexible
scheduling. The project's broader significance and importance are that it
provides essential support enhancing the computing efficiency of data-intensive
applications in the era of GPU computing and, due to the importance of these
applications, fosters sustained advances in science, engineering, humanity, and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project designs a code transformation component
to enable flexible scheduling. The transformation, named SM (Streaming
Multiprocessor)-centric transformation, consists of two techniques. The first
technique is SM-centric task selection, which breaks the mapping between tasks
and thread blocks and directly associates tasks with processors. The second
technique is a filling and retreating scheme, which addresses some behaviors of
the hardware scheduler and flexibly controls the number of active tasks for each
processor. The project also designs three types of optimizations, namely
parallelism control, affinity-based scheduling, and processor partitioning,
which leverage the scheduling support to optimize for parallelism, locality, and
resource allocation. The project develops both static and dynamic approaches to
efficiently searching for the optimal scheduling strategies adapted to address
various program and input features.