* 1464766
* Computational Studies of Aqueous Solvation of Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Toshiko Ichiye, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) are supporting Toshiko
Ichiye of Georgetown University for computational studies of the aqueous
solvation of proteins. Although water is the most common liquid on this planet,
the molecular bases of its unique properties as a liquid and a solvent that make
it critical for life are still unclear. While it is generally accepted that the
tetrahedral network of hydrogen bonds is essential, the critical features in a
water molecule that lead to hydrogen bonds are just beginning to be understood.
Given its unique liquid properties, this is not surprising but it makes modeling
water in computer simulations difficult. However, since computer simulations
using atomistic representations of biological macromolecules in aqueous
solutions have become critical in understanding many biological problems,
accurate representations of both the bio-macromolecule and its surrounding water
are essential. Therefore, identifying these features and determining the best
ways to model them will impact the understanding of structure and function of
biological molecules, including proteins, nucleic acids, lipid membranes, and
their assemblies. Moreover, computer simulations are being used to understand
scientific questions in many areas of chemistry and physics, and given the
importance of water as a liquid and solvent; these studies will have a broad
impact on other fields. In addition, the implementation into a commonly used
biomolecular simulation package means that our methods will be widely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is to develop a molecular
understanding of water and aqueous solutions and, based on this, to develop new
atomistic models for water and proteins in computer simulations. The approach of
Ichiye and her research group is to understand water is by determining the
minimal molecular features necessary to model its unique properties in molecular
dynamics computer simulations, which must be its essential molecular features.
This approach has been used to understand water as a pure liquid; now the
anomalous properties of aqueous ionic solutions are being studied. This approach
to modeling water is also unique in that molecular multipoles centered only on
the oxygen are used to represent the charge distribution due to both the nuclei
and the electron density, which is especially important for reproducing the
properties of water. Molecular multipoles are superior to adding dummy sites
representing electron density in a site model, because electrons are not point
particles. Thus, these models are more accurate than four- and five-site water
models and at least two times computationally faster than even three-site
models. These ideas will now be used to develop an accurate but efficient force
field for ions, co-solutes, and eventually proteins. Molecular multipoles will
also be used: multipoles will be placed on the heavy atoms somewhat like the
traditional united atom approach, except that the electrostatics of both the
hydrogens and electron density will be treated via the multipoles. The aim is to
develop a force field that is more accurate than the most commonly used non-
polarizable force fields for biomolecules and that is also two to three times
faster computationally.