* 1464003
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Understanding the nature of water and melt transport between the transition zone and the lower mantle combining mineral physics and seismology
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Jeffrey Park, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2017
* USD 173,268.00

Water and other volatile components circulate in the Earth's interior and this
circulation controls the way in which Earth keeps its oceans and atmosphere on
its surface. It is now well established that the transition zone (a layer
between 410 to 660 km depth) can contain a substantial mount of water, and if
the transition zone has a large amount of water, then the transportation of
water-rich materials from that region up into the upper mantle or down to the
lower mantle would induce partial melting. If melting occurs, chemical
composition of materials will be modified and it has an important implication
for the chemical evolution of this planet. In this proposal, we will investigate
the nature of melting near the boundary between the transition zone and the
lower mantle through an interdisciplinary approach including mineral physics and
seismology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Melting in the lower mantle occurs only when
some volatile (incompatible) elements (such as hydrogen and carbon) are present.
When the amount of volatiles (such as hydrogen) exceeds a critical value, then
partial melting should occur. The critical factors that define this value are
(a) the solubility of water (hydrogen) in the lower mantle minerals and (b) the
amount of metallic Fe in the lower mantle. Both of these factors are poorly
constrained by mineral physics experiments at present, and the investigators
propose to conduct experimental work to better understand these processes. The
consequence of partial melting depends on the density of melt (relative to the
co-existing minerals) and its geometry (dihedral angle), and the team plans to
conduct theoretical and experimental studies on these issues. Also important is
seismological detection of melting. In this project, the team plans to conduct a
seismological study to investigate the evidence of melting using the frequency-
dependent and anisotropic receiver functions. Combining these studies, the
interdisciplinary team will investigate the nature of volatile transport in the
Earth's mantle near the transition zone-lower mantle boundary.