* 1464475
* Descriptive Set Theory and Its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2021
* Alexander Kechris, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2021
* USD 500,060.00

A fundamental question that arises in many fields of mathematics is that of
classifying a given collection of objects under study. This amounts to providing
a "catalog" or "listing" of these objects, in principle not unlike that of
cataloging species in biology or stars and galaxies in astronomy. If such a
classification is possible, one has a "complete" understanding of the
mathematical structures involved. Otherwise a more or less "chaotic" behavior is
expected. It is thus very important to understand under what circumstances a
classification is possible. This difficult foundational question is further
complicated by the fact that what constitutes an acceptable classification is
very much dependent on the particular field of mathematics studied, so the
criteria for a "good" classification in one area might not be appropriate in
another. At its basic level, this project aims to develop a general quantitative
theory, which in many situations can precisely measure the complexity of a
classification problem and thus provide objective means by which one can decide,
in any given field, whether a satisfactory classification of the objects in
question is possible. Developments arising in this program often lead to the
study of the symmetries of various mathematical structures and their dynamics as
well as connections to areas of discrete mathematics or probability and this is
another important aspect of this project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The general aim
of this project is the development of the theory of definable actions of Polish
groups, the structure and classification of their orbit spaces, and the closely
related study of definable equivalence relations and graphs. This work is
motivated by basic foundational questions, like understanding the nature of
complete classification of mathematical objects, up to some notion of
equivalence, by invariants, and creating a mathematical framework for measuring
the complexity of such classification problems. This theory is developed within
the context of descriptive set theory, which provides the basic underlying
concepts and methods. On the other hand, in view of its broad scope, it has
natural interactions with many other areas of mathematics, such as model theory,
group theory, topological dynamics, ergodic theory, probability theory and
combinatorics. Within this general program Kechris proposes to study: (i) newly
developed connections between the topological dynamics and ergodic theory of
automorphism groups of countable structures and finite Ramsey theory; (ii)
descriptive aspects of the global theory of ergodic group actions and
equivalence relations, including the study of complexity of classification
problems arising in ergodic theory; (iii) descriptive graph combinatorics,
including its relations to ergodic theory, geometric group theory and
probability theory; (iv) structurability for countable Borel equivalence
relations.