* 1464904
* Water-Mediated Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Dor Ben-Amotz, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2018
* USD 439,200.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Dor Ben-Amotz of Purdue
University of Colorado and his graduate and undergraduate student colleagues are
studying the way water influences the behavior of substances dissolved in it.
Water-mediated interactions play a central role in biological, medicinal,
environmental, and materials chemistry, and yet the magnitudes (and in some
cases even the signs) of most such interactions have not been experimentally
determined. Hydration-shell spectroscopic measurements are combined with
theoretical and simulation analysis to quantify the free energy driving forces
and the structural changes associated with the water-mediated aggregation of
solutes such as dissolved alcohols, salts, gases, carboxylic acids, and
surfactants. The quantitative experimental and theoretical studies of water-
mediated interactions may advance the understanding of biochemical systems and
of self-assembled devices. The research provides training and mentoring
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, as they participate in
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Ben-Amotz and his research group
conducts combined Raman spectroscopy with multivariate curve resolution (Raman-
MCR) to measure aggregation-induced changes in hydration-shells of aqueous
solutes. A new sequential self-modeling curve resolution strategy is used to
quantify changes in the concentrations of non-aggregated and aggregated solute
species. Random mixing and molecular dynamics simulations, combined with finite
lattice and weighted random mixing theoretical analysis strategies are used to
separate direct and water-mediated, as well as energetic and entropic,
contributions to the aggregation potential of mean force associated with both
binary interactions between pairs of solutes and cooperative interactions
between multiple solutes.