* 1464798
* Encouraging pi-electron delocalization through boron-based heteroaromatic subunits
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* John Tovar, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2019
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor John D Tovar of the Department of
Chemistry at Johns Hopkins University will develop new classes of boron-based
molecular materials that have properties akin to traditional inorganic
semiconductors. These organic molecules have emerged as attractive components
for contemporary organic electronics, with applications spanning anion sensing,
non-linear optics and light-emitting devices. Students in these areas will play
critical roles in the future developments both on the commercial and academic
fronts. One unusual and attractive element of this particular research program
is the training environment it will offer to undergraduate and graduate
students. Outside of the training in synthetic organic chemistry requisite for
obtaining specific pi-conjugated materials, students will be exposed to
optoelectronic characterization methods and will serve as intimate participants
in collaborative efforts to make new devices. Under the umbrella of this
project, the PI will help to increase participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in advanced degree programs through continued
support of research opportunities at the graduate and undergraduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boron-based pi-electron materials have emerged as
attractive components for contemporary organic electronics. Typical structural
motifs through which pi-conjugated organoboranes can be included into organic
electronic materials consist of triarylboranes as well as boron-containing
annulenes with aromatic (such as formally charged azaborine and boratabenzene
rings) and antiaromatic (such as borole rings) character. Lacking on this list
are formally neutral boron aromatics such as those exemplified by the borepin
ring. A primary scientific motivation for borepin inclusion into organic
electronic scaffolds is to understand fundamental issues about how the weak
borepin aromaticity would influence pi-electron delocalization and polarization
given that these molecules would be expected to maintain high degrees of "cyclic
polyene" character yet still provide some degree of aromatic resonance
stabilization energy. To understand how these unique conjugation features might
be exploited for new materials designs, new borepin architectures with varying
degrees of intra- and inter-molecular electronic delocalization will be studied.
These borepin scaffolds will be fully characterized electronically to understand
their novel aromaticities and polarizabilities, and they will be transitioned
into collaborative efforts to explore a variety of organic electronics
applications.