* 1464595
* Collaborative Research:  I/UCRC Phase I:  The Center for Rational Catalyst Synthesis
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Bernard Gupton, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2020
* USD 389,000.00

Catalysis is a hidden but high impact science at the heart of the energy,
chemical and environmental industries. Catalysts are perhaps best known in
automobile catalytic converters, but the same types of catalytic processes are
responsible for commodity chemicals such as gasoline, textiles, and fertilizer
and specialty chemicals such as pharmaceuticals. It has been estimated that
catalysis accounts for over 95% (by volume) of all products and over 80% of
added value in the chemical industry. About one third of the world?s economy
depends directly or indirectly on catalysis. In spite of their immense
importance, the development of new heterogeneous catalysts is still largely
empirical, which is to say, time-consuming and expensive, particularly at the
stage of synthesis. A grand challenge of catalysis is precisely the ?design and
controlled synthesis of catalytic structures.? Our fundamental research in
transforming catalyst synthesis from an art to a science will save tremendous
amounts of time and energy in the development of new catalysts for petroleum,
chemical and pharmaceutical companies as well as catalyst manufacturers.
Optimized catalysts allow chemical conversions to be achieved in the most
efficient, economical, and environmentally responsible manner, reducing raw
material usage, energy requirements and greenhouse gas emissions.&lt;br/&gt;The
Center for Rational Catalyst Synthesis (CeRCaS) will be the world?s first and
only research center with the focus on understanding the chemical fundamentals
of catalyst synthesis. CeRCaS will bring to bear powerful, complementary
expertise at the University of South Carolina and Virginia Commonwealth
University. The research projects which our industrial partners will help us
select and refine are in three thrusts, first, The Fundamentals of Metal
Deposition including in-situ observation of metal deposition mechanisms and a
variety of methods for nanoparticle genesis, second, Thermodynamics and Kinetics
of Solid-Solid Bonding, to be explored with theory and experiment to allow
prediction of the wetting or sintering of metal oxides on support surfaces, and
prediction of the size, shape and, in the case of bimetallics, composition of
supported nanoparticles, and third, Precision Site Synthesis for Specific
Reactions, in which nanoparticles will be synthesized with specific size,
content (single or multi-metals) and morphology and so be optimized for
particular catalytic reactions or to minimize the content of expensive precious
metals. Graduate students will be mentored with the practical mindset akin to an
NSF Engineering Research Center. This industrial bent will stem from two
sources; first, internally, from VCU?s site Director (Gupton) and USC?s Deputy
Director (Monnier) who hail from distinguished research careers in industry, and
second, externally, from direct involvement of industrial research in individual
research projects. Educational outreach will include the recruitment and
eventual industrial placement of underrepresented groups. Both Universities have
significant pools of women and minorities with whom to work.