* 1464673
* Collaborative Research: Optimization of Sperm Sorting in Microfluidic Channels Using Coarse-Grained Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Utkan Demirci, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 215,316.00

5.3 million American couples of reproductive age are affected by infertility.
Among these cases, male factors account for up to 50%, necessitating the
identification of key parameters dictating male fertility, including sperm
count, morphology and motility. Assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs) have
emerged as powerful tools to address male infertility problems in modern
clinical practice. In vitro fertilization (IVF) with or without intra
cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) has become the most widely used assisted
reproductive technology (ART) in modern clinical practice to overcome male
infertility challenges. One of the obstacles of IVF and ICSI lies in identifying
and isolating the most motile, and healthiest sperm from semen samples that have
low sperm counts (oligozoospermia), low sperm motility (oligospermaesthenia).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Selection of the best performing sperm based in the
selection criteria including motility is the keystone for successful outcomes of
fertilization and full term pregnancy. However, it remains a clinical challenge
to select the most motile normal/healthy sperm. The researchers propose to
develop a GPU accelerated computational framework that will enable the multi-
scale coarsegrained modeling of sperm motility in micro-channels. Towards
achieving this goal, they will develop a computationally efficient model of
sperm motility and interactions, and design a computer-optimized space-
constrained microfluidic sorting (SCMS) system, integrated with a lensless
technology, for rapid monitoring, selection and sorting of sperm. As they are
utilizing such microchip technology, the proposed device can be easily
transformed into a scalable device composed of multiplexed channels. In the long
term, this computational platform can be used to design micro-fluidic devices
for the selection and sorting of not only spermatozoa, but also other types of
biological entities, such as circulating tumors cells (CTCs) or HIV from blood.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal include educational
and scientific outcomes that will open new avenues for physical and biological
research and have a considerable impact on fundamental and applied science,
education, and medicine. This proposal will facilitate the participation of
undergraduates in year round research activities, and directly support the
training of graduate students at the interface between physics, engineering and
medicine at Harvard, MIT and WPI. The PIs will actively participate in
recruitment efforts to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
the biological, physical sciences, and engineering by attending national
meetings and via Harvard's underrepresented minority program. They will continue
to advise undergraduates through the Undergraduate Research Opportunities
Program (UROP) and the mandatory senior theses (MQPs) at WPI. The PIs will also
develop graduate courses, and arrange field trips with local high schools in
educating students about computational biophysics and microfluidics research. At
the national and international level, the PIs will educate the students and the
public at other institutions on technological and scientific challenges by
giving lectures at NSF supported international summer schools, and by organizing
hands-on workshops.