* 1464387
* CRII: SCH: Modeling and Analysis of Genetic Regulatory Networks under Drug Perturbation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Xiangfang Li, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2021
* USD 175,000.00

CRII: Modeling and Analysis of Genetic Regulatory Networks under Drug
Perturbation

In recent years, it has become increasingly clear that sophisticated
computational methods and mathematical modeling will be needed to manage,
interpret and understand the complexity of biological data. Considering drug
discovery today is a complex, expensive, and time-consuming process with high
attrition rate, a more systematic approach is needed to analyze the underlying
genetic regulation in order to lead to more effective and efficient drug
development. This project targets the dynamics of Genetic Regulatory Networks
(GRNs) under drug perturbation using hybrid systems, in order to quantify drug
effectiveness regarding different dosing regimens, optimal target(s), and
combinational therapy. The interdisciplinary nature of this project promises to
foster cross-fertilization of ideas between computational science and biomedical
research. It is promising that such study would advance research in effective
and affordable treatment of genetic diseases like cancer. Moreover, the project
will take place at Prairie View A&M University, an HBCU, which historically has
a strong national presence as a producer of African American engineers. Ample
efforts will be carried out by the PI to involve students in research and
encourage promising undergraduates to pursue graduate study. The proposed
research and education activities will greatly improve African American
involvement in the emerging field of computational biology.

Molecularly targeted agents (MTAs) are increasingly used for the treatment of
cancer in recent years to improve the efficacy and selectivity by interfering
with specific targeted molecules needed for carcinogenesis and tumor growth.
While the lack of specificity of the traditional cytotoxic drugs allowed a
relatively straightforward approach in preclinical and clinical study,
developing a paradigm to better analyze the efficacy of MTAs is substantially
more complex. Moreover, complex diseases such as cancer involved the interaction
of more complicated and dynamic biological systems. This proposed research
investigates both deterministic and stochastic hybrid systems models to study
dynamics of the underlying GRN under drug perturbations in order to provide
systematic mathematical analysis for different drug perturbation scenarios.
While the deterministic hybrid systems model integrates continuous and discrete
dynamics of GRN, the stochastic hybrid systems model captures the inherent
stochasticity in genetic regulations and uncertainties introduced by drug
effects. A realistic drug pharmacology model is taken into account in the
proposed model, including drug pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics information
linked through a state-space approach. The objective is to understand how the
GRN reacts when perturbed and provide suggestions for better therapeutic
interventions.