* 1464026
* Syntheses and Structures of Functionalized [n]Cycloparaphenylenes and Related Carbon Nanohoops
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Kung Wang, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 06/30/2019
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis program is supporting fundamental
research of Professor Kung K. Wang at West Virginia University. Professor Wang
will use organic reactions for the construction of a group of organic molecules
called cycloparaphenylenes (CPPs) and related carbon nanohoops. The structures
of CPPs represent the shortest segments of the repeating hoop-like structures of
armchair carbon nanotubes. The intense current interest in CPPs is due in part
to the possibility of using these hoop-like molecules as templates for growing
armchair single-walled carbon nanotubes. This synthetic approach offers a
potential advantage over existing empirical methods in its potential to produce
carbon nanotubes of a uniform diameter and structural arrangement, two factors
of critical importance for applications in a variety of nanotechnology fields,
including electronics, energy, and nanophotonic devices. Professor Wang will
integrate the research and educational components of this project by training
graduate students in the design of new synthetic strategies and by providing
them with the opportunities to acquire high-level laboratory skills. The
development of well-trained synthetic organic chemists during the course of
their involvements in this research project will add to the human resources for
chemical and pharmaceutical industries. In addition, undergraduate students who
are selected to participate in the West Virginia University NSF-Research
Experiences for Undergraduates program and in the WVU Summer Undergraduate
Research Experience program will be invited to participate in this research
project. Many of these undergraduate students are from populations that are
underrepresented in higher education or are first generation college students.
Providing the opportunity to involve these students in a research environment
during their college years will encourage them pursue careers in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, new methods will be developed for the
synthesis of CPPs. Specifically, the use of the Diels-Alder reactions between
1,4-bis(haloaryl)-1,3-dienes and dienophiles are expected to produce precursors
of functionalized CPPs and related carbon nanohoops with diverse structural
features. The high stereoselectivity of the Diels-Alder reaction will place the
two haloaryl substituents on the same side of the resulting cyclohexenyl
structure, which is essential for the success of the subsequent homo- or cross-
coupling step to form macrocyclic CPP precursors. Oxidative aromatization of the
CPP precursors, either with 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone or other
oxidizing agents, is expected to lead to the corresponding CPPs.