* 1464980
* SusChEM: Mechanism-based development of new nickel-catalyzed stereospecific ring-contraction and reductive coupling reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Elizabeth Jarvo, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2019
* USD 486,433.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Elizabeth Jarvo of the University
of California, Irvine is developing earth abundant nickel catalysts for
stereoselective synthesis. The broader impacts of this research include
development of readily available catalysts from earth abundant elements,
reducing the US dependence on precious metal catalysts, and increasing
sustainability. Graduate students are trained in organic and organometallic
laboratory techniques and in mechanistic investigation. Mentoring and career-
development workshops that target women and minority graduate students and
faculty are integrated into the program. Outreach efforts engage
underrepresented groups and develop skills sets for retention across a wide
range of ages, from middle school students to graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and junior faculty. Through partnering with local schools, underserved
middle school students participate in STEM research environment and
opportunities at UC Irvine. The LEAPS outreach program co-founded by Professor
Jarvo provides underserved and underrepresented middle school students with a
day at college experience, including hands on experiments that connect their
classwork with cutting-edge research in chemistry and physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on refining the mechanistic
understanding of two-electron reactions of organonickel complexes, a critical
step forward in the development of nickel catalysts for a range of
transformations. In addition to providing a more sustainable alternative for
precious palladium catalysts, nickel catalysts provide unique reactivity
patterns and advantages, particularly in reactions of typically sluggish
substrates and for the synthesis of new tertiary stereogenic centers. The
identities of active catalysts are being defined using kinetic and structural
analysis, including NMR and EPR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography. New
reactivity manifolds, including reductive ring-contractions of
halotetrahydrofurans, are being developed to challenge the mechanistic
hypotheses and provide practical syntheses of substituted cyclopropanes,
pharmacophores in medicinal chemistry.