* 1464864
* Synthetic Studies on Rare and Novel Marine Alkaloids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Gary Sulikowski, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 08/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of
the Chemistry Division is funding Professor Gary Sulikowski of the Department of
Chemistry at Vanderbilt University to develop synthetic routes to structurally
novel and rare marine alkaloids isolated from marine sponges. This work provides
efficient methods to access marine natural products for biomedical study. The
chemistry developed during the course of these studies has a broad relevance in
areas ranging from the pharmaceutical, chemical, and biotechnology industries to
basic biological and chemical research endeavors. The marine natural products of
interest possess unique molecular structures with minimal information on their
biological properties and potential as therapeutic leads. Studies include the
synthesis of upenamide, halicyclamines, xestocyclamine and haliclonin A marine
alkaloids. The chemical synthesis of these natural products enables deeper
investigation into their biological properties and a foundation for use as
therapeutic agents for the treatment of cancer and microbial infections. In
addition, the project provides excellent training of graduate and undergraduate
students for entry into the pharmaceutical and chemical
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In each proposed chemical synthesis,
new transformations are incorporated into multi-step synthetic schemes enabling
the assembly of not only the marine alkaloids of interest but advance nitrogen
heterocycle synthesis broadly. The use of bromomaleic anhydride as a dienophile
in stereoselective Diels-Alder reactions is featured in each proposed total
synthesis. The products of the key cycloaddition reaction are advanced to
complex polycyclic structures by employing reactions that take advantage of key
stereochemistry and functionality emerging from the initial Diels-Alder
reaction.