* 1464476
* I-Corps:  Practical and Provably Secure Random Number Generator
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Yaoyun Shi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Random numbers are vital resources for modern day information processing,
especially for information security. Random Number Generators (RNGs) are
ubiquitous in computing and communication devices. However, none of the current
solutions is completely satisfactory, undermining the very foundation of digital
security. Thus enhancing the security of the current RNGs is imperative for
safeguarding a prosperous secure information society. The proposed technology
exploits a new solution space, and represents one of the first concrete
applications of quantum information science, and has the potential to draw even
more public interest to the field. Randomness is universal, and its applications
are across many fields. The target customer is a business which uses random
numbers on a routine basis, and who has the potential for large losses if its
randomness sources turn out to not be random. Two examples might be companies
that manage electronic transactions and gambling casinos.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology is a certifiable random number
generator based on quantum physics. The team can design an apparatus that will
generate random bits while at the same certifying that the bits are random -
even without any trust in the apparatus used. At the center of the technology is
the idea that measurements on an entangled quantum state cannot be faked by any
classical process. Based on this principle, a client can fully trust the outputs
of the generator based on a simple assumption about the operation of the device
(specifically, that no communication occurs between two separate components of
the device).