* 1464776
* Visualizing Charge Carrier Dynamics in Semiconductor Nanowires Using Femtosecond Pump-Probe Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,02/29/2020
* James Cahoon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/29/2020
* USD 435,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms Program of the
Chemistry Division is funding Professor John M. Papanikolas of the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill to use time-resolved microscopy to image the
motion of charges in one-dimensional semiconductor nanowires on ultrafast time
scales. The derived information is fundamentally important and critical to
understanding many aspects of nanoscience and nanotechnology. Variation in
behavior from structure-to-structure (and even between different locations
within the same structure) is a hallmark of complexity and poses a major
challenge to those wishing to use nanoscale materials in device applications. In
addition to providing new insights into charge behavior in complex
nanostructures, the project will promote the development of future scientists.
Graduate, undergraduate, and high school students will participate in this
research. They will develop the technologically complex instrumentation, apply
those instruments to methods for the study of single nanostructures, and take
part in the communication of their results at national
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Papanikolas and his students will
utilize a new pump-probe microscopy technique that excites nanowires in one
spatial location and probes them in another, on time scales ranging from
femtoseconds to nanoseconds. They will use this spatially-separated pump-probe
microscope to visualize the motion of charges (electrons and holes) in nanowires
with complex shapes and compositional variations, including Si nanowires encoded
with axial constrictions, as well as bent and kinked nanowires. They will also
develop low-temperature capabilities that will enable them to observe ballistic
transport in Si/Ge core-shell nanowires. This project aims to enhance basic
understanding of how structural features influence the flow of charges through
individual nanowires, and thereby provide valuable information that could be
used in future nano-device applications.