* 1464551
* Molecular Modeling of Biological Nanopores
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Rob Coalson, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Walter Ermler
* 01/31/2020
* USD 470,000.00

Rob Coalson of the University of Pittsburgh is supported by the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division for
computational and theoretical studies of biological ion channels and nanopores.
The Cellular Dynamics and Function Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences contributes to the award. The cell uses membranes composed
of lipid bilayers to compartmentalize its contents. Specialized proteins insert
into the membrane and allow transport through it as required for physiological
function. For the cell membrane, the relevant membrane- bound proteins are
called ion channels. They selectively pass ions through the membrane and are
essential for nerve signal propagation, muscle contraction, auto-regulation of
cell volume and production of biochemicals like insulin. The large Nuclear Pore
Complex (NPC) plays a similar role in regulating the flow of molecular material
into and out of the nucleus of eukaryotic cells. Residing in the nuclear
membrane, NPCs controlthe flow of large biomolecules including proteins and RNAs
between the cell nucleus and its cytoplasm. The work to be undertaken here
entails large-scale computer simulations of the flow of material through these
biological nanopores, using an appropriate level of atomic resolution, focusing
on the molecular mechanisms that control these transport phenomena. It has
importance for fundamental molecular biology, and ultimately may have relevance
to medicine, as serious diseases are associated with improper function of ion
channels and NPCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; When a protein channel spanning a
bilayer membrane is in its open state (i.e., is characterized by an appropriate
aqueous pore), ions are driven through itby an electrochemical gradient which
arises either from a concentration or an electrical potential difference across
the membrane. Channel gating is a more complex process. Most gates operate on a
time scale of milliseconds to seconds, too long to be simulated via brute force
all atom Molecular Dynamics simulation. Understanding these processes requires
the development of novel scale-spanning computational techniques. Another
intriguing class of biological nanopores is comprised of large protein complexes
which span the nuclear envelope in eukaryotic cells. The size and complexity of
these Nuclear Pore Complexes (NPCs) present major challenges to molecular
modeling analysis. The work to be performed on ion channel modeling will employ
a novel divide and conquer multi-scale modeling approach. Molecular level detail
extracted from relatively short all-atom Molecular Dynamics simulations will be
fed into coarse-grained kinetic models. In addition to calculating ion
permeation through realistic 3D models of channel proteins, problems involving
mechanisms of ion channel gating and the coupling between permeation and gating
will be tackled. The work on NPCs entails development of physico-chemically
grounded coarse-grained simulation models combined with statistical mechanical
analysis. These tools will enable study of larger systems and longer time scales
than can be accessed by atomistic Molecular Dynamics simulations, namely,
mesoscopic scales where collective behavior of many large molecules impacts the
pore's ability to select molecular cargos to pass through it.