* 1464155
* CRII: SaTC: Lockdown: Guarded Control-Flow and Data Privacy for Sensitive Data
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Mathias Payer, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 06/30/2017
* USD 175,000.00

Software systems are under constant attack: extracting sensitive data from
running computer systems is a prime and highly lucrative target for attackers.
Yet, current defense mechanisms fail to protect confidential or private data
along with the integrity and availability of the underlying system. While it is
important to find and fix vulnerabilities, it is unlikely that all
vulnerabilities will ever be discovered. Therefore, there is an argument to be
had for stronger defense mechanisms that protect software systems even in the
presence of vulnerabilities. The research in this project will improve the
security of legacy and newly developed source code by enforcing both integrity
and confidentiality for a well-defined sub-set of identified sensitive data. The
project proposes new security policies that increase the resilience of legacy
software against attacks, protecting running programs against attacker-imposed
deviations and and protecting a subset of important data even if the application
is compromised.

The majority of software that runs on today's systems is written in memory
unsafe languages. Memory safety vulnerabilities are abundant and are often used
to compromise systems. Existing techniques that retrofit memory safety on top of
C/C++ often result in prohibitive overhead, are not compatible with legacy code,
or only provide partial protection. Building on Code-Pointer Integrity (CPI), a
compiler-based technique that enforces memory safety for code pointers, this
project proposes to guard the control-flow and to enforce data confidentiality
for sensitive data. Both techniques will be implemented as compiler-passes.
Guarded control-flow will leverage a compiler-based static analysis to identify
all data that may be used in conditional control-flow decisions. In a second
step, the compiler instruments the program with guards to protect this data
alongside code pointers, thereby protecting from any attacker-induced control-
flow deviation. Data confidentiality will introduce a static compiler-based
analysis that identifies and tags sensitive data like passwords, cryptographic
keys, or authentication tokens. An instrumentation pass will then add guards to
enforce confidentiality guarantees at runtime. These guards keep the subset of
sensitive data private and secure from attackers. Data confidentiality enforces
integrity and confidentiality even if the attacker has full memory read access.
In addition, this project will develop metrics and benchmarks to evaluate the
effectiveness of these security policies in the context of different programs.