* 1464787
* Stereoselective Construction of Difficult Glycosidic Linkages
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Jianglong Zhu, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 06/30/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jianglong Zhu of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at University of Toledo and Professor Xiaohua Li of
the Department of Natural Sciences at University of Michigan-Dearborn are
collaborating to develop novel approaches for stereoselective construction of
difficult glycosidic linkages. This research has potential in the synthesis of
carbohydrates by investigating new approaches to the stereoselective synthesis
of structurally challenging and biologically valuable glycosidic linkages. By
carrying out this project, the PIs will provide education and training
opportunities for high school students, K-12 science teachers, undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as visiting assistant professors. The PIs are
recruiting women, groups underrepresented in the chemical sciences, and those
from financially disadvantaged families to participate in this research. In
addition, The PIs are participating in various outreach activities to promote
teaching, training, and learning in chemical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is targeting the construction of difficult glycosidic linkages such as
beta-mannopyranosides and alpha-thioglycosides. Specifically, stereoselective
synthesis of beta-mannopyranosides is targeted via anomeric O-alkylation under
dual control of kinetic anomeric and chelation effects. This umpolung-type beta-
mannosylation is being used to synthesize N-linked glycans. The stereoselective
synthesis of S-linked-thioglycosides uses umpolung S-glycosylation through
sulfenylation of the axial glycosyl lithium species. Collectively, these
synthetic approaches have the potential to add a significant new dimension to
the set of available methodologies to make glycosides.