* 1464306
* CRII: CHS: A Plug-and-Play Deformable Model Based on Extended Domain Decomposition
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Yin Yang, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2018
* USD 190,829.00

Advances in data acquisition tools have led to a dramatic increase in the
geometric complexity of 3D data. Efficiently modeling, simulating, and analyzing
these scanned large-scale real-world models become a serious challenge, because
the numerical integration of high dimensional partial differential equations
(over millions of degrees of freedom) is prohibitive for time-critical
applications such as surgical simulation, bio-medical imaging, virtual/augmented
reality, and physically-based animation. The problem becomes significantly more
acute in situations where the rest-shape geometries of the 3D models are
frequently altered and there is a need for collision detection/response coupled
with high fidelity visualization of heterogeneous material properties and
efficient transmission over the network to facilitate collaborative interaction.
In this project the PI will address this challenge by developing a research
program to create a modularized computational framework for efficient deformable
simulation by partitioning the deformable body into small-size domains and re-
connecting them back using weakened linkages. Domain-level computations are
independent and reusable; thus, the expensive deformable simulation is reframed
as a plug-and-play computational assemblage just like playing with LEGO blocks,
and orders of magnitude speedup can be obtained. The plug-and-play deformable
model that will be the primary project outcome will advance state-of-the-art
techniques in physical simulation, animation and visualization, and will also
profoundly benefit a broad range of interdisciplinary fields that directly
impact people in their daily lives, from the modeling and registration of
deformable human organs for surgical simulation, to the analysis of roadway
pavement stress, to silent speech recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's
approach pivots on the transformative concept of divide-and-conquer deformable
model. Unlike most state-of-the-art techniques that simulate a deformable object
in its entirely by means of a "one-stop" solver, the PI will develop innovative
algorithms that break a simulation into independent computational modules, with
the final result being obtained by incrementally assembling the local
computations. The PI will seek theoretical solutions to two general questions:
"how to smartly divide" and "how to effectively conquer" in the context of
deformable simulation. In particular, he will investigates a theoretically
grounded domain decomposition and coupling mechanism so that domain-level
computation is independent, reusable, modularized and also a good fit with
existing parallel computing architectures such as multi-core CPUs or GPUs. The
PI will develop a new theory for the real-time spectral deformation processing
that divides the simulation not only spatially but also spectrally, based on a
power iteration and inertia analysis. He will also explore possible solutions to
the problem of optimal domain partitioning, in which the simulation is
parameterized geometrically and the most effective partition is obtained by
solving a geometry optimization problem similar to the Voronoi diagram. As the
test-bed for the aforementioned theoretical and algorithmic advances, the PI
will develop a haptic-enabled collaborative digital fabrication system, which
will ultimately allow multiple users, from distant sites to smoothly interact to
design and craft physically simulated virtual objects, which can then be 3D
printed if desired.