* 1464276
* CRII: AF: The Geometry Behind Logistics - Approximation Algorithms for Real-Time Delivery
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Sharath Raghvendra, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2018
* USD 175,000.00

In the era of instant gratification, consumers expect to receive delivery of
goods and services on demand. In an effort to address consumer needs, vendors
have adopted routing algorithms with little or no provable guarantee. The
algorithms available today are often unreliable and yield higher costs than
desired. There are two major difficulties finding effective solutions. First, in
many cases, routing decisions need to be made with partial or no information on
future requests. The second challenge is related to processing speed. In current
solutions, even if all required information is available in advance, it could
take several hours to compute an efficient route making real-time routing almost
impossible. This project investigates a new approach for real-time algorithms
applicable in routing applications. The idea is to use "straight-line" distance
between locations as a proxy for the actual road travel distance to design
approximation algorithms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project considers algorithms
for certain geometric optimization problems that arise in logistics with a goal
of exploring the possibility of a future unified framework in the logistics
space. The PI will combine ideas from different research areas including
computational geometry, operations research, and online algorithms. In terms of
real-world impact, the public and private sectors can benefit from this
research. While private sector companies in package delivery and ground
transportation services have a vested interest in algorithms providing low-cost
routing solutions, real-time routing solutions could also be useful in various
humanitarian and military settings. The military, for example, can utilize such
algorithms to route supplies quickly. In the case of natural disasters like
floods, it is essential to provide timely access to food and aid for people who
may be trapped at various locations. Typically in such settings, information
about the places where relief is needed changes dynamically, requiring real-time
solutions under uncertainty. Further broader impacts include bringing together
young researchers with a computer science background and training them across
several mathematical topics in an interdisciplinary research plan. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will be the first to study the design of geometric
online algorithms that assist in making provably better decisions under
uncertainty. There is some empirical evidence to suggest that utilizing geometry
helps in arriving at better solutions. The PI will, however, build theoretical
foundations to justify the claim. Additionally, this project will initiate the
design of exact and approximation algorithms for a large class of practical
pick-up and delivery problems that commonly occur in logistics. While there are
approximation algorithms for certain routing problems in geometric settings,
these approaches do not typically extend to the pick-up and delivery problems.
The mathematical techniques designed here will advance our understanding of how
geometry can be utilized to optimize algorithms for a broader class of routing
problems.