* 1464696
* Modeling the Active Site and Reactivity of Cyt. P450 Enzymes: A New Beginning
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Abhishek Dey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2018
* USD 362,395.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Nicolai Lehnert of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Michigan will develop new classes of model
systems for the active site of the Cytochrome P450 enzyme family. These enzymes
play a key role in humans for the biosynthesis of steroids and the metabolism of
drugs via the activation of inert C-H bonds, and are therefore of general
interest for the pharmaceutical and chemical industry. The goal of this project
is to build model systems that incorporate second coordination sphere effects of
the protein matrix into the synthetic model systems. The new model systems will
then be used to (a) explore the molecular mechanism of O2 and NO activation by
Cytochrome P450s, and (b) develop Cytochrome P450 biomimics as catalysts for
industrial applications, in particular for O2 reduction in fuel cells, and C-H
bond activation of organic molecules. The project lies at the interface of
inorganic, biological, and organic chemistry, and is therefore well suited to
the education of scientists at all levels. This research group is also well-
positioned to provide summer research internships for underrepresented minority
high school students from the Detroit area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the
great potential of cytochrome P450 for practical applications, a number of model
systems have previously been created to mimic the heme-thiolate active sites of
cytochrome P450s. However, most of these biomimetic complexes degrade readily in
the presence of O2 or NO, even in the ferric (resting) state. This unexpected
lack of stability is due to a valence tautomerism, where the ferric thiolate
ground state of these complexes is in equilibrium with the ferrous thiyl state
at room temperature. Based on these findings, this research group plans to
investigate a new series of heme-thiolate model complexes that contain (a)
hydrogen-bond stabilized thiolate ligands, and (b) different types of picket
fence porphyrins, where 2nd coordination sphere effects are incorporated into
the distal pockets of the model systems. This new series of complexes will be
used to systematically investigate the reactivity of heme-thiolate active sites
with O2 and NO to obtain detailed insight into how Cytochrome P450s activate O2
and NO. These investigations will be complemented with studies under
heterogeneous conditions where the complexes will be immobilized on electrode
surfaces, and their ability to electrocatalytically reduce O2 (fuel cell
technology) and activate C-H bonds (synthesis) will be tested.