* 1464769
* Cholesterol-Phospholipid Interactions in Membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Antje Pokorny, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2019
* USD 240,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms program is
supporting fundamental research of Professor Paulo Almeida at the University of
North Carolina Wilmington (UNCW) to address the organization of biological
membranes from the point of view of the physical chemistry of interactions in
the lipid bilayer. Professor Almeida will employ a combination of computer
simulations, calorimetry, and fluorescence spectroscopy to investigate the
nature and the strength of those interactions. Professor Almeida will further
integrate the research and educational components of this project within a new
program designed to improve the quantitative skills of undergraduate students in
the STEM fields, especially chemistry, while fostering the connections between
biological and physical sciences, as a means of bridging the communication gap
between these disciplines. UNCW is a primarily undergraduate institution, where
participation of undergraduate students in research is a high priority. What is
distinctive in this project for undergraduate education is that it combines a
fundamental problem of active research in biophysical chemistry with extensive
use of quantitative methods. Undergraduates will be involved early on in their
studies, emphasizing learning by doing.

Lipid bilayers composed of sphingomyelin, unsaturated phospholipids, and
cholesterol are the simplest model for the lipid component of the outer leaflet
of eukaryotic plasma membranes. The interactions of cholesterol with the other
lipids are of particular importance,and they remain poorly understood. Membranes
of saturated phospholipids and cholesterol have been described as mixtures of
liquid ordered and liquid disordered phases. However, no phase separation has
been observed in binary mixtures. Alternatively, ordered phospholipids and
cholesterol have been proposed to form a "condensed complex." The liquid ordered
phase would then consist of these complexes. This research seeks to explore an
alternative in which the liquid ordered phase is a thermodynamic state of the
phospholipid, which is well populated in the presence of cholesterol but rare in
its absence. The project is designed to test these competing hypotheses through
computer simulations and experimental studies, and to determine the magnitudes
of the interactions in lipid mixtures that increasingly mimic the composition of
biological membranes.