* 1464603
* Collaborative Research:  Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Real-Time Intelligence for Smart Electric Grid Operations (RISE)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Ronald Harley, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 11,500.00

Clemson University and Georgia Institute of Technology collaboratively propose
to form a new Industry University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) for
"Real-Time Intelligence for Smart Electric Grid Operations (RISE). Scalable
real-time intelligence to dynamically plan and operate our national electricity
infrastructure, end-to-end, with more renewable energy sources effectively in
terms of cost, reliability, resiliency, and sustainability is a challenge today.
The RISE Center will develop new technologies to benefit society for many years
to come. Clemson University and Georgia Institute of Technology will involve
initiatives that will broaden representation of underrepresented groups in this
field. This award will support a planning meeting for the proposed center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of the proposed center are the
following: to develop new algorithms, architectures and methodologies to realize
a new operating system of systems paradigm in collaboration with RISE industry
members, academe, and government, and to educate and innovate the new generation
of engineers, professionals and educators who understand the interdisciplinary
(system of systems) nature of the new electric energy industry, where a talent
shortage is projected. The RISE concept brings about the integration of power
systems, communication and information systems, computational systems, cyber
systems, market designs and policy to address the challenge mentioned above. A
unique real-time control center test-bed will be developed for the RISE team and
industry members to pilot and perform investigations of new applications for
smart electric grid operations. The RISE faculty expertise and several centers
and laboratories at Clemson University and Georgia Institute of Technology
strategically position the two institutions to develop leading-edge industry
relevant research to provide the foundation for intelligent smart electric grid
operations.