* 1464273
* CRII: SaTC: Energy Efficient Participatory Data Collection Schemes and Context-Aware Incentives for Trustworthy Crowdsensing via Mobile Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Burak Kantarci, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2018
* USD 175,000.00

In a crowdsensing system, energy efficient data collection is a primary concern
for mobile sensing service providers (i.e., mobile users offering sensing as a
service via built-in sensors on their mobile devices) in order to maximize
battery life whereas trustworthiness is a primary concern for the end users. The
proposed research will simultaneously address energy-efficient data collection
and context-aware incentives to both minimize power consumption and maximize
data trustworthiness. Furthermore, this research will propose new user-driven
crowdsensing business models where smart phone users compete with each other for
compensation based on the usefulness and trustworthiness of their sensing data.
The ultimate societal impacts of the research are new crowdsensing applications
in the areas of public safety, disaster management and community engagement that
will be enabled by improved energy-efficient data collection, increased
crowdsending trustworthiness through context aware sensing, and new crowdsensing
business models that will incentivize more users to offer their mobile device
built-in sensors as a service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
extend the ongoing efforts on trustworthy crowdsensing to address energy
efficient data collection and new context-aware user incentive strategies to
improve data trustworthiness. In order to address energy efficient data
collection, coalitional game theory-based algorithms will be proposed while
trustworthiness of the aggregated system will be addressed by defining new
trustworthiness functions and context analysis of mobile social networks of the
sensing data providers. These methodologies will be validated through comparison
to benchmark optimization models. Statistical and collaborative trust scores
will be used to introduce new trustworthiness and reputation functions for
sensing service providers. The new trustworthiness and reputation functions will
mitigate the impact of adversaries including the Sybils who aim at
misinformation and manipulation. An emphasis will be placed on compatibility
with emerging mobile social network (MSN) models and their associated spatio-
temporal context analyses. The research will be completed by building a
framework which combines the merits of energy efficient data collection and
context-aware user incentives.