* 1464536
* Multi-Configuration Pair-Density Functional Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Laura Gagliardi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2018
* USD 555,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program
in the Chemistry Division is supporting Professors Laura Gagliardi and Donald G.
Truhlar of the University of Minnesota to develop theoretical methods and tools
to describe the electronic structure of very important classes of molecules that
are difficult to study by most widely used, established approaches. In
particular, density functional theory (DFT) methods have become the "workhorse"
of modern quantum mechanical methods for large and complex molecular systems.
The planned research combines the particular expertise of the Gagliardi and
Truhlar research gruops to develop a method that draws on aspects of each of
their individual research. The techniques developed as part of this research
will be applicable to molecular systems that are expected to have broad impacts
in, among others, the following application areas: chemical dynamics,
thermochemistry, environmental chemistry, including atmospheric chemistry and
aqueous environments, electrochemistry, catalysis, materials, supramolecular
chemistry, biochemistry, and nanotechnology. Thus the work is poised to have
long-term implications for health, materials, environmental, and industrial
applications. Undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will be
trained in modern computational chemistry methods as an integral part of this
research. Software developed in the project is distributed free to the community
in portable well-documented code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this
award, the Gagliardi and Truhlar research groups are developing and implementing
a new quantum chemical theory, called multiconfiguration pair-density functional
theory (MC-PDFT). The project will explore new ways to combine density
functional theory with multiconfiguration wave functions for multireference
systems. MC-PDFT maintains the correct spin and spatial symmetry of the systems
under consideration and, at the same time, avoids any possibility of double
counting the electron correlation energy. The scaling of the computational costs
of MC-PDFT is seen to hold promise. The method is employed for the determination
of chemical properties such as bond energies and electronic excitation energies
and for the generation of potential energy surfaces to be used in photochemical
applications.