* 1464396
* Collaborative Research:   Calibration and application of vascular plant and aqueous microbial biomarkers to examine transformations of dissolved organic matter
* GEO,OCE
* 09/04/2014,09/30/2017
* Robert Spencer, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2017
* USD 163,684.00

Organic matter (OM) fluxes between and within terrestrial and oceanic reservoirs
play an important role in the global carbon cycle. A clearer understanding of OM
dynamics is critical for understanding fundamental processes and effects on
greenhouse gases and climate. At present, researchers have an abundance of
analytical methods and tools for investigating dissolved organic matter (DOM)
cycling, but the field struggles to move past a qualitative understanding of
sources, processing, and fates toward a quantitative understanding. Researchers
from University of California-Davis, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, and
Texas A&amp;M University will develop biomarker tools to advance quantitative
understanding of DOM cycling in riverine and estuarine environments in
California, specifically targeting vascular plant and microbial markers. Results
from this study will allow for future biomarker studies to quantitatively
address DOM source and processing in aquatic environments and improve the
limited understanding of the fate of terrestrial DOM in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study will provide
interdisciplinary scientific training and development for undergraduate and
graduate students, including individuals from underrepresented groups. Results
from the study will be disseminated to the public, California stakeholders, and
college students to educate them about the carbon cycle.