* 1464156
* Summer Topology Conference 2015 and Galway Topology Colloquium
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2015,11/30/2015
* Paul Gartside, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 11/30/2015
* USD 29,900.00

The 18th Galway Topology Colloquium and 30th Summer Conference on Topology and
Its Applications will be held, respectively, June 22 and June 23-26, 2015 at the
National University of Ireland, Galway. Motivated by many examples from the real
world, topology is a mathematical field that aims to study the shape of a space.
It often requires the use of tools from other mathematical fields, giving rise
to various subfields in topology. The main goal of the conference is to bring
together a group of the world's leading researchers in these subfields and to
build connections between subfields, between topology and other areas of math,
and between PhD students, junior faculty and the most distinguished stars of the
field. The aim of the Colloquium is to provide a supportive environment for PhD
students and early career faculty to connect, and prepare for the main
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invited contributed talks will be presented in
the four special sessions: (1) Topology+Foundations, (2) Topology+Analysis, (3)
Topology+Dynamical Systems, (4) Topology+Geometry. Each special session features
one plenary speaker, two invited speakers and 30 to 40 other contributed
presentations. Each special session will host a workshop for graduate students
and other interested participants. Participation by women and members of other
underrepresented groups is encouraged and supported. Graduate students and young
topologists will receive substantial financial support to attend the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web site:
http://www.conference.ie/Conferences/index.asp?Conference=393