* 1464428
* Planning Grant (Site Addition): Center for Health Organization Transformation
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2016
* Christopher Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 03/31/2016
* USD 13,884.00

The Center for Health Organization Transformation (CHOT) seeks to conduct
leading-edge research on the organization, integration, management, payment,
technology, and systems engineering challenges confronting health care. This is
important work as the management and transformation of health services has
become one of the foremost domestic issues in the U.S. With health spending
representing roughly 18 percent of the Gross Domestic Product, there are growing
concerns about a range of health care issues related to the organization and
payment for health care services. CHOT projects address these complex challenges
as well as identify and exploit opportunities for innovation to improve the
delivery of health care. The University of Washington CHOT site (CHOT -UW)
expands the current CHOT site network by adding research expertise in areas not
currently represented in the existing CHOT talent pool as well as increasing
CHOT's presence in the west, particularly the Pacific Northwest. This expansion
is important. Although, health care issues are national, there are nuances in
geography, culture, state laws, and health concerns that affect the delivery of
care. There is much to learn and share, particularly in an industry environment
where the nature of health systems and alliances among providers are changing in
response to economic pressures and recent legislation. Health care organizations
in the Pacific Northwest have a long history of collaboration and willingness to
learn from each other that falls right in line with the overall philosophy
behind NSF's Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) program.

The purpose of the proposed CHOT-UW site is to use an interdisciplinary approach
to enhance CHOT's capabilities in (1) health economics and financing (including
payment reform, insurance benefits, cost transparency, vertical integration, and
cost effectiveness, alternative payment incentive models, and integrated payment
system models); (2) health systems engineering (including decision modeling,
simulation modeling, continuous process improvement, Toyota LEAN, scheduling,
and resource allocation); (3) organization and integration of health systems
(including physician integration, accountable care organization and medical home
design, and integrated delivery systems), (4) and health technology adoption and
diffusion (including telehealth, health information exchange and consumer health
informatics). These areas were identified by the CHOT- UW's site's potential
industry partners as crucial to the success of their organizations as they
grapple with extensive changes in the access, cost, and quality of health care
delivery. Each of the CHOT- UW's site research areas is populated with UW
experts with extensive experience in doing applied research within health
systems. Collectively, the team of experts provide breath not only in terms of
subject matter expertise, but also in research methodologies. Strong graduate
and undergraduate will support the faculty in this endeavor. There is
significant minority and gender diversity among the potential research faculty
and students that will be active participants in the new UW CHOT site. This new
activity will greatly enhance UW's masters and doctoral level education,
research, and links to the practice community.