* 1464955
* Light-Induced Magnetic Switching as a Trigger for Phase Transitions in Molecular Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Nar Dalal, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 04/30/2019
* USD 477,169.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B Program of
the Chemistry Division is funding a collaborative research team led by
Professors Mykhailo Shatruk and Nar S. Dalal of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at Florida State University to investigate photoresponsive
molecules that can translate the action of heat, pressure, or light irradiation
into substantial changes into changes in the magnetic and structural properties
of materials. The successful implementation of this design principle could
potentially lead to new ferroelectrics and conductors that could be actuated by
the action of light. Leveraging the expertise of the Shatruk and Dalal groups in
the synthesis and characterization of magnetic and photomagnetic materials,
ferroelectric materials, and organic conductors, the team aims to create novel
multifunctional materials that can be employed in electronic devices or light-
activated switches. The project will actively involve graduate and undergraduate
students in laboratory research, including students from groups underrepresented
in physical sciences. The research team plans to continue their Undergraduate
Summer Schools on Magnetism, first organized in Summers of 2012 and 2014, with
the next school scheduled for Summer 2016.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
targets the synthesis and characterization of photoresponsive molecules capable
of translating temperature-, pressure-, or light-induced changes in the magnetic
state of the system into substantial structural changes, which consequently
would trigger another type of phase transition in the material. The
Shatruk/Dalal team will explore approaches to couple the photoinduced magnetic
bistability at the molecular level to long-range metal-insulator transitions and
ferroic orderings (magnetic or electric) in molecule-based materials. In
particular, the team will study Fe(II) complexes with spin crossover (SCO)
behavior, which stems from the temperature or light-induced transition between
diamagnetic low-spin (LS) and paramagnetic high-spin (HS) states of the Fe(II)
ion. The photoinduced LS to HS transitions will be invoked in order to achieve
properties such as ferroelectricity and conductivity via photoexcitation.
Materials in which SCO coexists with conductivity will provide a platform to
test the effects of concerted atomic displacements associated with SCO on the
conductivity of the organic substructure, with the potential to achieve
photoinduced superconductivity via chemical compression. Another thrust aims to
explore photoinduced magnetic switching, akin to SCO, in metal-free organic
systems, where the change in the magnetic state is due to interconversions
between paramagnetic radicals and diamagnetic dimers of radicals. The study of
such metal-free systems could open up a new area in the molecular magnetism
field that would parallel the studies currently performed on transition metal
complexes.