* 1464627
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Center For Advanced Research in Forensic Science
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Keith Morris, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2016
* USD 11,500.00

Center for Advanced Research in Forensic Science
(CARFS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the proposed Center is to provide a
multidisciplinary forum for advancing research and innovation in forensic
sciences, enhancing education in relevant scientific disciplines, and improving
the interpretation and ethical communication of forensic practitioner findings.
The establishment of the proposed center will address two main areas. The
development of new research which will develop a better understanding of methods
currently used in forensic science laboratories in terms of their reliability
and accuracy. Furthermore, new ideas will be pursued to improve and develop such
methods. Secondly, the partnerships with industry will help to develop solutions
to address improvements required in such areas. A fundamental requirement of
forensic evidence, irrespective of its type or nature, is a robust method for
its interpretation. Additional research will be directed to developing new
methods of interpretation. All of these areas (including specific evidence
types) are noted in the NAS report on Forensic Science (2009). The impact in the
judicial process will ensure that evidence is correctly weighted, and will not
support a specific proposition in an unbalanced
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of the research are to
evaluate the extent of problems encountered in certain areas and to develop
solutions. The evaluation of wrongful convictions in West Virginia through hair
microscopy in cold cases will allow for the analyses of the specific issues
related to the cases and for the designation of more appropriate techniques of
analysis. Technical evaluation of new methodologies and the interpretative
nature of the evidence will be performed in projects such as the
characterization and discrimination of inkjet printer inks using micro Raman
spectroscopy, the unsupervised deep machine learning algorithms to predict
forensic meta-information (finger position, gender, race, and age from a latent
fingerprint), and the evaluation of a portable lab for body fluid identification
to ensure higher precision and accuracy of results. A significant evaluation of
forensic mass spectrometry (one of the most widely used analytical techniques in
forensic laboratories) to develop new types of miniature, portable mass
spectrometers will also be undertaken. Statistical analysis of firearm
identification using IBIS will be interpreted using Bayesian networks to provide
a solid basis for firearms evidence interpretation. From a social perspective
and other issues rasied through the NAS report (2009), a determination of the
efficacy of backlog reduction programs, assessment of the jurisdictional
independence of forensic laboratories for quality assurance and cost
effectiveness, and the process of attracting more women to STEM related
occupations using forensic science as a model will also be
undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant is jointly supported by NSF
and the National Institute of Justice.