* 1464214
* CRII: CHS: SCH: Novel User Interfaces for Reporting Personal Health Data to Lay Individuals
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Lauren Wilcox, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2017
* USD 174,766.00

CRII: Novel User Interfaces for Reporting Personal Health Data to Lay
Individuals &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in computing technology now offer
individuals unprecedented ways to access personal health data. Such data will
reach people in fluctuating emotional states and might deliver information that
has life-altering implications. Significant gaps exist in our understanding of
how computing systems can expertly report these data to laypeople. This CRII
project will align the design of electronic data reporting tools with expert
communication strategies and the needs of lay individuals, in the context of
oncology care. These tools will be designed to supplement, not replace,
individuals' communication with their caregivers. The project will enable the
construction of a rich set of data related to communicating personal health
information throughout oncological care. After encoding and analyzing the data
collected, results of the analysis will be used to formulate design guidelines
for interaction techniques and graphical techniques to convey personal health
data in a user interface. We expect that the resulting tools will aid cancer
patients in managing and acting on personal health data related to cancer
diagnosis, treatment and prolonged remission. In addition to the oncology
setting, results of the proposed studies should prove beneficial in chronic
illness management, particularly for illnesses in which patient engagement with
their health data is critical in achieving positive health outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on assembling a rich set of
quantitative and qualitative data to formally characterize both the technical
complexity and emotional sensitivity of clinical data types common to oncology
care. These data will be used to define, in subsequent research, the sets of
variables, dependencies and structural features of computational models to make
possible the development of automated approaches to conveying clinically-
relevant health data to lay end users. Studies will be conducted in clinical
field sites with oncologists and their patients, using a combination of
ethnographic methods and surveys. Data collected through these methods will be
iteratively coded and analyzed using descriptive, thematic analyses employing a
combination of inductive and deductive approaches. Analyses of these data will
uncover specific design guidelines for computing tools that convey personal
health data to lay individuals in oncology care. A preliminary design based on
these guidelines will be developed and iteratively refined based on input from
oncology patients, oncologists, and patient-clinician communication researchers.
The resulting design will be embodied in a prototype containing interaction
techniques and graphical and linguistic framing techniques that demonstrate
expert capability in the presentation of clinically-relevant health data. The
prototype system will select framings of example data and demonstrate the
interaction and presentation techniques designed. Pilot tests of the prototype
will be conducted with a subset of the clinicians recruited in earlier phases of
the project as well as individuals with prior experience managing chronic
illness, recruited at the study site.