* 1464997
* Cold Controlled Reactions between Molecular Ions and Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Heather Lewandowski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 390,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Heather Lewandowski of
the University of Colorado and her graduate and undergraduate student colleagues
are studying the collisions of stable and reactive radical molecules with ions.
The unique aspect of this project is that the ions (and sometimes the molecules)
have been slowed down to incredibly low velocities. These laboratory conditions
mimic the environment in the interstellar medium (ISM). The difficulty of
preparing isolated ions and/or molecules with these low energies has precluded
any significant experimental work being done to study the chemistry in the ISM;
this area of investigation is a virtually uncharted frontier. Studies like this
could lead the way to understand what kinds of chemical reactions can take place
in the ISM, and serve as extraordinarily sensitive checks of computational
models of low energy collisional processes. Students working in the Lewandowski
group receive training in a large number of laboratory methods, including vacuum
science, electronics, and instrument design and construction. Prof. Lewandowski
and her group are also involved in a program with the Advanced Lab Physics
Association (ALPhA) to run an ALPhA Immersion course at University of Colorado
to assist higher-education instructors in developing a modeling-based approach
into existing experiments from the instructors'
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Heather Lewandowski and her research
group conduct low-energy ion-radical molecule collision dynamics experiments to
probe the reactivity of these species. These experiments mimic the conditions in
the low-temperature environment of the interstellar medium. Preliminary
experiments investigate the reactions of hydrogen and nitric oxide with
calcium(+) ions (in a variety of electronic states) cooled in an ion trap. In
the most ambitious experiments, the reactions between very slow radical
molecules and cooled and trapped molecular ions are studied. The radicals (OH,
CH, NH) are created in a molecular beam by laser-photolysis or via pulsed
discharge. These radicals are slowed with a series of decelerator electrodes
using a new type of continuous-wave decelerator developed in the Lewandowski
laboratory. The slowed molecules enter an ion trap (e.g. a linear Paul trap),
where they interact with a population of cooled ions. Diagnostics are performed
(optical imaging of the ions, destructive time-of-flight mass spectrometry of
products, etc.) Ions to be studied include the following: singly-ionized
species: acetylene, ammonia, methane, hydroxyl (OH+), and methylidyne (CH+). The
Lewandowski research group includes active involvement by undergraduates in
authentic research. In addition to her experimental work, Prof. Lewandowski
works with ALPhA and postdoctoral fellows from the Physics Education group at
University of Colorado to develop and run a workshop to assist significant
numbers of higher-education faculty members in incorporating modeling into the
educators' own laboratory curriculum.