* 1464765
* Oxidation Chemistry on Transition-Metal Doped Rare Earth Oxide Surfaces: Factors Determining Selectivity for the Oxidative Coupling of Methane
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Jason Weaver, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 510,000.00

Oxidation Chemistry on Transition-Metal Doped Rare Earth Oxide Surfaces -
Factors Determining Selectivity for the Oxidative Coupling of
Methane&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Drs. Jason Weaver and Helena
Hagelin-Weaver at the University of Florida are investigating how transition-
metal dopants modify the oxidation chemistry catalyzed by rare earth oxides
(REOs), focusing particularly on the oxidation of hydrocarbons. Of particular
interest is the use of metal-doped REOs as catalysts to efficiently promote the
oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) to valuable two carbon (C2) products, while
avoiding the complete oxidation of methane to carbon dioxide (CO2) and water
(H2O). Developing a commercially viable OCM catalyst may enable the more
effective utilization of natural gas resources, and thus have significant
economic and environmental impacts. The project aims to advance the basic
understanding of the selectivity of REO catalysts toward partial vs. complete
oxidation reactions, and to enable rational approaches for designing metal-doped
REO catalysts with desirable and adjustable properties. The ability to
predictably modify the catalytic properties of an oxide by doping with different
types of transition metals could afford significant flexibility in engineering
catalysts for a wide-range of applications, including chemical synthesis,
pollution control, and energy technologies. The project includes collaboration
with researchers in Germany and Sweden that provide opportunities for graduate
students to train in foreign laboratories and perform experiments at synchrotron
facilities. Undergraduate students are also involved in this research, and
underrepresented minorities are recruited through the investigators'
participation in the University Minority Mentoring Program and in the Society of
Women Engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Chemical
Catalysis Program, Drs. Jason Weaver and Helena Hagelin-Weaver at the University
of Florida are investigating the properties of model rare earth oxide (REO) thin
films and high surface-area catalysts, focusing particularly on systematically
characterizing the effects that transition-metal doping have on the oxidation
chemistry promoted by REO surfaces. REOs exhibit favorable catalytic performance
for a diverse set of chemical transformations, including both partial and
complete oxidation reactions. However, with ceria as a general exception,
mechanistic details of REO surface chemistry and the factors determining
catalytic selectivity are understood only to a limited extent. The project
focuses on samaria and terbia as representative examples of effectively
irreducible and reducible REOs, respectively, and on clarifying factors that
promote the oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) to C2 products rather than
complete oxidation. A combined approach is employed that involves model studies
of transition-metal doped REO thin films in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) and
characterization of nano-crystalline REO catalysts under more realistic reactive
conditions, with the aim to establish clear bridges in understanding across the
materials and pressure divides. Key goals of the project are to develop new
understanding of the relations between structural/electronic properties and the
chemical selectivity of REO surfaces doped with different metals and to
illuminate mechanistic aspects of the surface chemistry under realistic
conditions. The project involves collaboration with researchers in Germany and
Sweden and provides opportunities for students to train in the foreign
laboratories and perform experiments at synchrotron facilities. Undergraduate
students are also involved in this research, and underrepresented minorities are
recruited through the PI's and co-PI's participation in the University Minority
Mentoring Program and in the Society of Women Engineers.