* 1464632
* Collaborative Research:  Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Advanced Electronics through Machine Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2016
* Paul Franzon, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 03/31/2016
* USD 11,499.00

The accepted engineering design methodology requires that mass scale
manufacturing of a new product not commence until a prototype of the product is
tested and found to meet its performance specifications. It is not unusual for a
product to go through multiple design iterations before it can satisfy all the
design requirements. Modern electronic products, which range from a single
integrated circuit to a smart phone to an aircraft instrumentation system, are
so complex and contain so many components - billions in the case of an
integrated circuit - that it is infeasible to construct hardware prototypes for
each design iteration, from the points of view of both cost and time. Instead, a
mathematical representation of the product must be developed, i.e. a virtual
prototype, and its behavior then simulated. Each of the components that
constitute the product would be represented by a model. Behavioral models of the
components are most desirable; a behavioral model represents the terminal
response of a component in response to an outside stimulus or signal, without
concern to the inner workings of the component. Behavioral models are
computationally efficient and have the benefit of obscuring intellectual
property. However, despite many years of significant effort by the electronic
design automation community, there is not a general, systematic method to
generate accurate and comprehensive behavioral models, in part because of the
non-linear, complex and multi-port nature of the components being modeled. The
proposing team will utilize the planning grant to establish a research center
that will overcome these modeling challenges through the development and
application of novel machine-learning methods and algorithms.

Machine-learning algorithms are used to extract a model of a component or system
from input-output data, despite the presence of uncertainty and noise. In this
center, the input-output data are obtained either from measurements of a
component or by running detailed simulations of a component. The emphasis is on
models that balance good predictive ability against computational complexity.
The center will pioneer the application of machine learning to electronics
modeling. It will develop a methodology to use prior knowledge, i.e., physical
constraints and domain knowledge provided by designers, to speed up the learning
process. Novel methods of incorporating component variability, including that
due to semiconductor process variations, will be developed.