* 1464182
* Workshop on Multilevel Theory and Research: The Future of Multilevel Scholarship-May 16-17,2015; Pennsylvania State University
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Stephen Humphrey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 12/31/2016
* USD 49,656.00

This workshop builds upon the expertise and experience of a diverse set of
scholars who are experts on multilevel phenomena in an effort to solve relevant
problems within the organizational sciences (which naturally require a
multilevel perspective, as organizationally-relevant phenomena are nested within
levels across time). These scholars will present novel developments in the
field, as well discuss and develop new paths for solving complex organizational
problems.

The intellectual merit of the project is associated with its attention to the
inherently nested nature of organizational phenomena. Scholars within the
organizational sciences are increasingly aware of the complex, multilevel, and
dynamic nature of applied problems within and between organizations. By
including as the two keynote speakers the specific scholars whose book (Klein &
Kozlowski, 2000) serves as the seminal work for modern multilevel research in
the organizational sciences, the workshop will have the opportunity to look
backwards and forwards in making sense of this issue. Moreover, the mixture of
panel discussions, individual presentations, and group conversations will serve
as a fertile context for advancing and refining new processes, models, and
thoughts on multilevel theory and research.

The workshop's broader impacts are connected with its goal of developing
recommendations and guidance for researchers in organizational sciences. Through
the work of the experts participating in the workshop, the workshop may produce
an edited volume, a special issue at a leading journal, and/or a special
research forum at a top journal in an effort to disseminate cutting-edge
guidance on the development and application of multilevel research in the field.