* 1464468
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Center for Interdisciplinary Forensic Science Research
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Frank Gomez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2017
* USD 11,500.00

Center for Interdisciplinary Forensic Science
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological advances in the forensic sciences
have made it possible to provide probative information in the investigation and
adjudication of criminal activity. With the growing influence of science-based
evidence comes the responsibility to provide objective, well researched, and
defensible scientific data. The increasing reliance on forensic science by the
justice system has also intensified the scrutiny of laboratory examination
procedures and technology; the ethical standards of practitioners; and the
technical accuracy of scientific testimony. The popular media and scientific
experts have documented the issues and limitations confronting forensic
laboratories. A coordinated industry-university research effort is essential to
identify and implement improvements needed to strengthen the application of
science to legal proceedings in order to address these challenges. With respect
to the broader impacts of the proposed research, this group of researchers
envisions serving as a primary source for applied forensic science research that
will benefit society by providing the justice system with more definitive
answers to legal questions. The interdisciplinary nature of their partnerships
has the potential to address current limitations in forensic science
methodologies, which may have impeded or prevented the administration of
justice. In a broad sense, the group seeks to improve crime-solving tools
through the increases the accuracy and reliability of the justice system and
stop criminals before they re-offend, thereby saving society the costs of
increased crime. Improvements in forensic science efficiencies reduce costs to
governments to provide the service. For example, efficiency improvements occur
through greater use of automation, which private enterprise may develop into a
commercial product based on university-based research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several initial projects are proposed for the Center for
Interdisciplinary Forensic Science Research. These projects focus on chemistry,
biology, and biomechanical engineering methods as well as on approaches to
address forensic science related problems. With respect to forensic biology
applications, the researchers will develop a method that will assist in
characterizing bloodstain patterns to a specific type of injury or event. The
identification of particular wound cells in an otherwise non-specific bloodstain
pattern can reveal the one true cause or source of the bloodshed from many
possible mechanisms or wound sites. The researchers also propose to develop of a
digestible swab to optimize the collection of biological evidence. While cotton
swabs are effective in capturing biological material from solubilized stains,
they are problematic in that significant amounts of sample can be retained on
the swab following standard extraction procedures. Importantly, the amount of
recovered sample has direct impact on testing. With respect to forensic
chemistry applications, the researchers will conduct studies that focus on
surface modification treatments associated with trace evidence samples. Current
instrumentation methods lack the sensitivity to detect ultra-thin layers.
However, newer technology methods have the potential to significantly improve
the forensic analysis of various trace evidence materials, including fibers,
paint, explosive residues, and surface modified glass. In addition, a
comprehensive study on UV absorbers in clearcoat paint samples and UV micro-
spectra of undyed fibers will be conducted in order to catalog the UV
characteristics of these commonly encountered materials. Further, the tampering
of pharmaceuticals by healthcare professionals, particularly paramedics, is a
serious and growing problem. The researchers will explore methods to provide an
affordable, portable, robust, reliable, and in situ screening test to detect
tampered drugs. Another issue encountered by forensic drug analysts is the
identity of the various isomeric forms of drugs. The researchers will explore
methods to provide confirmatory data on the specific identity and
characterization of particular isomers when coupled to a searchable database.
The proposed methods will be designed to distinguish natural vs. synthetic
source, route of synthesis, and illicit vs. legal source to controlled substance
samples. The researchers will develop analytical devices to extract drugs of
abuse from dried urine. With respect to forensic biomechanical engineering
applications, they will design studies to advance fundamental understanding of
the analysis of fracture patterns in order to provide further insight into the
mechanism of an injury, such as bending, compression or torsion, and the
direction of applied force and location of applied load on the body part. Models
will be developed that are capable of controlling specimen-to-specimen
variation. These models will be used to construct fracture pattern "maps" linked
with external loading conditions and subject-specific biological factors. An
additional biomechanical engineering project proposes to investigate blood stain
pattern analysis and interpretation in order to improve the accuracy of blood
stain pattern analysis (area of origin, for example), reduce the analysis time,
and to have a non-contact method of evidence documentation for analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant is jointly supported by NSF and the
National Institute of Justice.