* 1464800
* SaTC-EDU: EAGER: Development and Evaluation of Privacy Education Tools via Open Collaboration
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Yasuaki Sakamoto, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2019
* USD 289,590.00

As the Internet grows in importance, it is vital to develop methods and
techniques for educating end-users to improve their awareness of online privacy.
However, the development of Web-based education tools for online privacy is
still in the early stage. Traditional solutions involving professionals can make
the tool development costly. It is also not clear how motivating, inspiring,
and/or effective these education tools are to general users, especially novice
users who have rarely dealt with privacy issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
interdisciplinary research between a computer scientist and two social
scientists, this project aims to exploit both group-sourcing and crowdsourcing
approaches to develop effective education tools for online privacy. Research
activities include: (1) designing novel methods to generate collective wisdom
from non-expert user groups for the development of innovative ideas of privacy
education tools; (2) investigating the main characteristics of a wise group that
is capable of developing creative and high-quality ideas for privacy training;
(3) developing methods to enhance the originality and practicality of the ideas
generated by the non-expert groups; and (4) integrating group-sourcing,
crowdsourcing, and experts' opinions to evaluate the effectiveness of the
developed privacy training tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary,
high-risk, high-payoff project will dramatically advance research in
security/privacy and social science. The research results will be disseminated
broadly through curricular materials appropriate for computer science, College
of Arts and Letters, and MBA students.