* 1464530
* New Solution-Processable Phthalocyanine Derivatives with Near-Infrared Absorbing Condensed Phase Morphologies: Application to Organic Solar Cells
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Dominic McGrath, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2019
* USD 325,508.00

In this project jointly funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp;
Mechanism B Program of the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Electronic and
Photonic Materials program of the Division of Materials Research (DMR),
Professor Dominic McGrath of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Arizona will develop new classes of phthalocyanine dyes with interesting
optoelectronic properties. The goal of this research is to exploit the
properties of these dyes in new optoelectronic devices, particularly solution
processable solar energy technologies, which may ultimately be produced in a
fashion that is low cost, and with a scalability that meaningfully contributes
to the sustainability of our planet. This research program has elements of
molecular design, synthesis, characterization, and investigation of condensed
phased materials properties, and as such will provide a multidimensional vehicle
for training of scientists from all levels, including those from students
underrepresented in the STEM fields. Outreach activities to K-12 and community
college students are also planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phthalocyanine
chromophores display a combination of long wavelength absorbance, photochemical
stability, and photoconductivity, making them useful for solar transduction
technologies such as organic solar cells. The proposed synthesis develops a new
class of phthalocyanines intended to develop a fundamental understanding between
molecular structure and condensed phase (i.e. thin film) properties such as
charge mobility and light absorption. In this project, four classes of new
phthalocyanine chromophores will be prepared to answer the following questions:
1) Can a C2-symmetrical phthalocyanine molecular structure provide solution
processibility while maintaining condensed phase close molecular overlap known
to be critical to near-infrared spectral response and high charge mobility? 2)
Can the material energetics, critical for maintaining vectorial charge transport
and high open-circuit photovoltages, be predictably modulated based on
structural elements? 3) Will the condensed phase properties of these materials,
when appropriately optimized, translate to viability as materials for solar-
electric conversion in device platforms with appropriate acceptor molecules?