* 1464804
* Tools for Accurate Photoelectrochemistry in Complex Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Troy Van Voorhis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2018
* USD 465,000.00

Troy Van Voorhis of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry division to develop theoretical methods and tools to reveal how
complex chemical transformations can better be accomplished using renewable
energy sources such as sunlight and electricity derived from sustainable
sources. The microscopic structure of such systems is very complex and the
nature of structure-function relationships in these devices is as yet not well
understood. Simulation and modeling play a crucial role in uncovering design
principles that can be exploited to optimize device performance or to propose
entirely new architectures for specific applications. The techniques developed
in the course of this research will be applicable to molecules that play key
functional roles in many important technological applications such as artificial
photosynthesis, organic LEDs, catalysis and chemical sensing. In terms of
broader impact, the investigators are actively involved in expanding the base of
chemistry-related problem types that can be offered through the edX platform.

Under this award, the Van Voorhis research group plans to develop and implement
computational tools that that focus on extending the techniques of ground state
electronic structure theory to the accurate treatment of electronic excited
states. In order to improve the description of electronic excited states, the
investigators will design electronic embedding schemes that offer controllable
accuracy for the local electronic structure even of highly delocalized systems.
These methods are to be complemented with a set of nonlocal density functional
tools for including long-ranged interactions such as screening. Contemporary
with this electronic structure work, the team seeks to develop molecular
dynamics techniques capable of extracting long time kinetic data from short time
ab initio simulations. These techniques are designed to understand two key
electronic processes: charge carrier delocalization in conjugated polymers and
the band gaps of inorganic semiconductors. Beyond these case studies, the work
also aims to create a palette of general techniques for the accurate description
of photochemistry in solution and electrochemistry at surfaces.