* 1464425
* CRII: SHF: Automatic Building of Software Projects to Support Analysis of Open Software Repositories
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Xiaoyin Wang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2018
* USD 174,840.00

As more and more software developers choose to host their projects at open
software repositories such as Sourceforge and Github, these large repositories
have become valuable resources for the development of novel software engineering
techniques. They can serve as either data sets for the emerging mining-based
software-engineering techniques or subjects for experimental evaluations and
empirical studies. However, a major obstacle preventing full utilization of open
software repositories is that, while many existing program analysis tools
require successfully built projects as their input, software projects typically
have only their source code stored in the repositories, and the source code
often cannot be built automatically. Therefore, it is often difficult to apply
existing program analysis tools to a large number of software projects, which
limits the benefit provided by large open software repositories.

This research project aims to overcome the above obstacle by providing technique
for automatic building of software projects in open software repositories.
Specifically, the project mainly explores the following directions: (1)
analyzing path expressions and file flows in build configuration files to
provide proper parameters and environment variables for build configuration
tools (2) resolving missing software dependencies by searching online dependency
repositories, and identifying the compatible software dependency files among the
search results; and (3) assigning a software project to an appropriate building
platform according to its features. The project helps to discover knowledge on
the feasibility and effectiveness of automatic software building, and may
benefit a large variety of software engineering techniques that take advantage
of open software repositories.