* 1465173
* RUI: Chemical Methods for Isolating Metal Clusters Inside Large Fullerene Cages (C82-C140)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Steven Stevenson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2019
* USD 288,168.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Steven Stevenson of the Department of
Chemistry at Indiana University-Purdue University Fort Wayne (IPFW) will study
the preparation of metallic nitride clusters entrapped within larger, higher
fullerene cages (HMNFs). These unique molecules have significant potential
applications in energy (e.g., photovoltaics), medicine (e.g., pharmaceuticals,
MRI contrast agents), and optoelectronics. However, they are difficult to obtain
in large quantity. Professor Stevenson aims to improve the preparation of these
molecules by improving the reaction yield and by simplifying the product
isolation procedure. His product isolation procedure will also reduce
significantly the amount of waste solvents generated. The project promotes the
inclusion of underrepresented groups of students, high school students and early
undergraduate (e.g., freshman, sophomore) students in research. Efforts will
also be made to attract non-chemistry major students, as they have few
opportunities for chemical research.

This project has three specific objectives. In the 1st objective, new molecules
will be selectively created inside a plasma reactor. The interior of the reactor
will possess a chemically harsh environment by incorporating oxidizing agents
into the plasma zone, in order to suppress the formation of contaminant species.
The 2nd objective is the integrated SAFA (the Stir and Filter Approach)-Lewis
acid approach for the efficient non-chromatographic purification of HMNFs. In
the 3rd objective, collaborative activities with four Ph.D.-granting
institutions will serve to evaluate the properties of HMNFs prepared.