* 1465125
* Structure and Electronic Anomalies of Amorphous Chalcogenides
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Vassiliy Lubchenko, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 03/31/2020
* USD 432,001.00

Vassiliy Lubchenko of the University of Houston is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
division to develop a theoretical and computational approach to studying an
important class of inorganic solids, called the "chalcogenides," that contain
elements from groups XVI (sulfur, selenium, tellurium), XV (phosphorus, arsenic,
antimony, bismuth), and XIV (germanium). The ability of these solids to switch
readily between ordered crystalline and amorphous ("glassy") forms allows one to
tune the optical and electronic properties of these materials in an efficient
way. This property makes the chalcogenides prime candidates for applications in
optical drives, next generation computer memory and displays, smart optics, and
novel computer architectures Amorphous chalcogenides are a special type of
disordered solids called "glasses," which are ordinarily made by rapidly cooling
a liquid, usually below its melting point One can convert a chalcogenide alloy
between the glass and ordered crystalline form by first melting the material
and, then, cooling the melt at a specified rate. Slow cooling yields the
crystal, fast cooling yields the glass. The present study is establishing
detailed connections between the molecular motions underlying the glass
transition and quantum-chemical interactions in the chalcogenide alloys. Direct
molecular modeling of the glass transition is difficult and is part of the
greater challenge of predicting the structure of complex inorganic solids and
designing materials with tailored properties. The study is exploiting the
similarity of the interplay between distinct chemical interactions in the
chalcogenides and the behavior of a well-defined model of mathematical physics
to make the problem tractable. At the center of the broader impact activities is
training of graduate, undergraduate, and, in particular, high school students. A
strategy is in place to ensure the participating high school and undergraduate
students complete meaningful subprojects that will contribute to peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microscopic hypothesis of the
proposed work is that the glass-forming ability of the chalcogenide alloys stems
from a competition between distinct types of chemical bonding: covalent,
multicenter, and secondary. The resulting complex interplay of interactions is
captured by a classic model of statistical physics, viz., the 64-vertex model,
which is being implemented. The most important outputs of the calculation are
the structure and the configurational entropy of amorphous chalcogenides. The
configurational entropy determines the complexity of the free energy landscape
of the alloys and their glass-forming ability. To back up these calculations, a
novel procedure is being implemented for generating dense glassy structures for
particles with distorted-octahedral bonding typical of the chalcogenides. An
additional coarse-graining description is being implemented with the help of a
recently developed 6-component spin model based on the theory of elasticity of
structurally-degenerate solids.