* 1465028
* Single conformation spectroscopy and dynamics of multichromophore networks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Timothy Zwier, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 490,400.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Timothy Zwier of
Purdue University and his collaborators to investigate the subtle intermolecular
interactions that influence the ways in which large molecules fold up on
themselves. Using sophisticated techniques to get these molecules into the gas
phase, combined with exquisitely-sensitive spectroscopic methods, Professor
Zwier and his group are doing experiments that will unravel the delicate forces
that hold single conformations of these molecules in their specific geometries.
Molecules to be studied include peptides as well as molecules that may find use
in electronic materials. The knowledge obtained from these studies will provide
theoretical and computational chemists with benchmarks for testing the ability
of new computational methods to accurately predict the subtle intermolecular
forces that give rise to particular conformations. A unique element in this
project is the collaboration with a number of synthetic and theoretical chemists
as well as with faculty and students at primarily undergraduate institutions in
the Midwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Zwier and his research group make
low-temperature samples of neutral and charged forms of large, conformationally-
flexible molecules in the gas-phase using a variety of methods including laser-
desorption (neutrals) and electro-spray ionization (ions). The species' spectra
are interrogated using a variety of laser spectroscopic methods that are capable
of separating the spectra of individual conformers. Specific species that are
being examined include: peptides that form helices, peptides that form parallel
and anti-parallel beta-sheets, glutamine- or asparagine-rich peptides that are
involved in the formation of tangled networks, and specific hexapeptides that
are believed to play a role in the formation of amyloid fibrils. In addition to
the peptides, Zwier and his group are studying the spectra of isolated
cycloparaphenylenes (nano-hoops) that are predicted to have interesting vibronic
coupling. The Zwier research group is collaborating with a wide variety of
researchers from synthetic chemists to theoretical and computational chemists.
The impact of this research is significantly broadened through the collaboration
with a number of faculty and undergraduate students from small liberal arts
colleges, including Hope College, Kalamazoo College and the University of
Wisconsin - Eau Claire.