* 1465133
* Advancing the Synthesis and Applications of Pyrrole-Modified Porphyrins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Christian Brueckner, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2019
* USD 460,355.00

Funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B Program of the
Chemistry Division, the research group led by Professor Christian Brueckner of
the Department of Chemistry at the University of Connecticut will develop a
number of dyes derived from the naturally occurring molecule class called
porphyrins. This compound class gives blood (hemoglobin) its deep red color.
Altering the molecular structure of the porphyrin slightly by insertion,
replacement, or deletion of atoms at defined positions varies their optical
properties. Thus, for example, dyes are derived that absorb a large portion of
sunlight, making them attractive options for light-harvesting applications.
Other dyes possess properties that may make them useful as contrast agents for
optical imaging in medicine, a potentially notable broader scientific impact.
The work begins with the development of the synthetic strategies to generate the
novel dyes. Once prepared, their physical properties are evaluated. The strong
interdisciplinary nature of the work provides excellent training for graduate
and undergraduate students for a modern and inclusive
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this grant is the
development of strategies to convert porphyrins into pyrrole-modified porphyrins
(PMPs), macrocycles derived from porphyrins by formally replacing at least one
pyrrolic building block with a different heterocycle. Starting from meso-
arylporphyrins or octaethylporphyrin, a little explored but versatile strategy
will be pursued: activation of the beta position of porphyrins, followed by ring
cleavage and subsequent ring-fusion. This generates PMPs containing one or two
five, six, and seven-membered non-pyrrolic heterocycles and that may also
incorporate extended pi-systems through beta-to-meso-phenyl linkages. The
guiding hypothesis of the work is that these modifications result in drastically
altered electronic properties when compared to their parent porphyrins or
chlorins. Particularly with respect to their longest wavelength of absorbance
and fluorescence, their hyperchromic and, in some cases, panchromic spectra, and
in their efficient non-radiative relaxation processes, many PMPs possess
remarkable photophysical properties of potential utility. In collaboration with
specialty groups, their application in select fields will be tested. Structure-
physical properties relationships will also be developed.