* 1465017
* SusCHEM: Catalytic Alkene Transformations Using High-Spin Cobalt Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Patrick L. Holland, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor Patrick Holland of Yale University to study new catalysts for
the transformation of hydrocarbons to more complex chemicals. Efficient
catalytic reactions are a key part of sustainable chemistry, and the most
desirable catalytic reactions utilize metals that are both abundant and
inexpensive. Inexpensive "base metals," such as cobalt, are more sustainable
than precious metals, such as platinum, because of cost, geographic
availability, and environmental friendliness. The last decade has seen the
discovery of selective base metal catalysts, but their reactivity has less
conceptual underpinning. This project endeavors to develop cobalt-containing
catalysts that are cheaper than existing catalysts and that give new products
that can be applied to fine chemical production. A fundamental understanding of
the bond-forming and bond-breaking reactions performed by the catalyst is being
developed, which informs a broader range of chemists interested in the
underlying chemical principles. The project participants are also involved in
the development and implementation of new teaching modules on sustainability for
high-school chemistry students in New Haven, Connecticut. These modules are
unlocking the students' curiosity about Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) fields in the context of the environment and improving the
public perception of chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Holland is
studying catalytic systems that perform alkene transformations using high-spin
organometallic complexes of cobalt. These inexpensive cobalt catalysts have
kinetic selectivities that differ from traditional precious metal catalysts and
demonstrate the opportunities that arise from new base metal-catalyzed
reactions. The practical developments in catalysis are being complemented by
mechanistic studies and DFT computations that elucidate the roles of spin-state
crossover during the reactions. Mechanistic and computational studies are
providing a fundamental basis for the rational design of high-spin, first-row
catalysts. These research strategies are being applied primarily to two specific
targets, alkene isomerization and alkene hydrosilylation. Studies on alkene
isomerization are focusing on cobalt catalysts for the conversion of terminal
alkenes to Z-2-alkenes with high regioselectivity and stereoselectivity. Studies
on alkene hydrosilylation are focusing on developing cobalt catalysts for the
robust and rapid anti-Markovnikov hydrosilylation of alkenes. The two reactions
are also being combined in tandem isomerization-hydrosilylation reactions that
convert mixtures of alkenes into a single desired product.