* 1465014
* RUI: Beyond Electrostatics: Investigating the Contributions of Dispersion and Electron Transfer in Intermolecular Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Helen Leung, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2019
* USD 268,029.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professors Helen O. Leung and
Mark D. Marshall of Amherst College and their undergraduate student researchers
to investigate the fundamental nature of the forces between molecules. The
ultimate goal of this research is to develop more fully the understanding of
intermolecular interactions, how they are affected by, and in turn how they
affect the first encounters between molecules. The undergraduate researchers
working on this project receive significant research experiences in an active
physical chemistry laboratory as part of a their liberal arts and sciences
education and are given the opportunity to present their work at scientific
conferences. This raises the scientific literacy and sharpens the thoughts of
student participants, preparing them as future
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intermolecular interactions are investigated
through the analysis of rotational spectra obtained using Fourier transform
microwave (FTMW) techniques. The availability of two types of FTMW spectrometers
(chirped pulse and Balle-Flygare) provides key research and pedagogic advantages
as well as enhancing undergraduate participation in scientific research. The
determination of the structures of a series of gas-phase dimeric complexes, in
combination with ab initio quantum chemistry calculations, provides information
regarding the nature of the forces responsible. Specifically, complexes formed
between protic acids and haloethylenes reveal the effects of dispersion
interactions on intermolecular association. The laser ablation technique is used
to generate metal containing complexes in which electron transfer is expected to
play a role, and effects of intermolecular interactions on the electron density
of the hydroxyl (OH) radical are studied using complexes involving this open-
shell species.