* 1465032
* A Dehydro-Diels-Alder Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Kay Brummond, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 05/31/2019
* USD 435,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis program is supporting Professor Kay M.
Brummond at the University of Pittsburgh to develop the intramolecular
didehydrogenative-Diels-Alder (IMDDA) reaction to prepare naphthalene
derivatives and benzo-fused heterocycles. These substances are valuable building
blocks for a variety of applications but are not readily available through known
synthetic methods. The operational simplicity and scalability of the IMDDA has
the potential to facilitate preparation of previously inaccessible aromatic
compounds with the potential for application to organic light emitting diodes,
liquid crystals, imaging agents, chiral ligands, and pharmaceuticals.
Sustainable and green alternatives for the preparation of styrenyl compounds as
IMDDA precursors will be explored. The thermal removal of hydrogen gas from
IMDDA adducts to form aromatic compounds offers an environmentally benign
alternative to reagent-based oxidation protocols. This research will provide
state of the art training in synthetic organic chemistry for graduate students
on a project with significant potential scientific broader impacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the IMDDA, [2+4] cycloaddition of tethered styrenyl and
alkynyl groups is followed by thermal loss of molecular hydrogen to provide a
naphthalene derivative. This research is expected to significantly expand the
scope and utility of the IMDDA, making this reaction a viable avenue for the
preparation of functionalized naphthalenes, dihydronaphthalenes and benzofused
heterocycles. In addition, IMDDA reaction conditions will be developed to
control the diverging reaction pathways for the selective and predictable
formation of either an aromatic or a dihydroaromatic product. Through
mechanistic studies, a better understanding of the acceptorless dehydrogenation
reaction will be developed, and computational insight will be applied to guide
the selection of reaction conditions, substrates and targets. Finally, it is
expected that these thermal reaction conditions will be compatible with a
variety of functionality, and thus amenable to the preparation of highly
substituted and diversely functionalized naphthalenes and other valuable
aromatic compounds.