* 1465149
* Advanced Quantum Mechanical Methods for the Chiroptical Properties of Molecules in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Thomas Crawford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

T. Daniel Crawford of Virginia Tech University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory; Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop theoretical and computational methods for the accurate
prediction of the optical properties of chiral molecules in solution remains a
challenging task for computational chemistry. A chiral molecule is one in which
there are two different versions that are identical in composition but which
cannot be superimposed, much like human hands. The "left-handed" and "right-
handed" molecules are mirror images of one another. Such molecules are optically
active, they can rotate plane-polarized light either clockwise or counter-
clockwise. Chiral molecules play an important role in many branches of
chemistry, including the chemistry that governs the functioning of living
beings. Crawford and his research group focus on the development of robust and
efficient methods for computing the special "chiroptical" properties of these
molecules, with the overarching goal of providing practical and reliable tools
for assigning absolute stereochemical configurations of chiral compounds. These
studies are invaluable in the elucidating the intimate relationship between
molecular structure and chiroptical response and thus may provide the chemical
community with a deeper understanding of the nature of optical activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The best approach for modeling the intimidating complexity
of solvent effects on molecular properties remains elusive, especially for
chiroptical properties such as optical rotation (OR), circular dichroism (CD),
vibrational Raman optical activity (ROA), and circularly polarized luminescence
(CPL), which exhibit an exquisite sensitivity to environmental effects. This
project focuses on the development of robust and efficient tools for the high
accuracy modeling of chiroptical properties in the liquid phase, including
implicit, explicit, and hybrid approaches. Implicit models will be developed to
approximate the bulk solute-solvent interaction using both shape- and density-
based cavities coupled with potentials derived self-consistently. Explicit
solvation effects will be accounted for using a new hybrid QM/MM scheme,
including a novel wave-function-embedded periodic approach. Efficient
implementation of these models will rely heavily on emerging reduced-scaling
methods, particularly within the coupled cluster linear-response approach for
non-resonant optical activity.