* 1465071
* Lanthanide-based ionic liquids: Novel soft materials with luminescent and magnetic properties
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Anja Mudring, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 08/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Anja-Verena Mudring of Iowa State University aims to enhance
optical and magnetic properties of rare earths to reduce the level of
lanthanides required to obtain these functional materials. Rare earths belong to
the group of critical elements that are vital for many every day electronics,
such as cell phones; green energy technologies, including wind turbines and
hybrid cars. Therefore, the use of rare earth compounds constitutes an important
strategic and dynamic segment of the electronic, chemical, and energy
industries. However, reduced efforts to explore and mine rare earths in the
western world in recent years has led to a dependency on international sources,
and availability of a number of these elements is limited, in general. Thus,
there is a need for new scientific understanding and expanded research
capabilities on rare earth chemistry. Divalent and trivalent rare earth elements
are incorporated in the cation or anion of ionic liquids (ILs). The product
purity and identity are determined by a variety of spectroscopic, chemical, and
crystallographic techniques. The purpose is to explore the chemistry of rare
earth elements in ILs with the goal of using ILs to enhance and control the
luminescent and magnetic properties of the rare earth ions and to stabilize rare
earths in uncommon oxidation states. The research program aims to develop the
chemistry (and physics) of rare earths in totally ionic media, at room
temperature and below, which is otherwise not available in conventional
solvents. The ILs are used as low-phonon environments and light harvesters to
improve the luminescent properties of the rare earth, develop new
magnetorheological fluids based on complex rare earth ions with high magnetic
moments, and stabilize unusual oxidation states of the rare earths. This project
involves a team oriented approach which will provide a fundamental research
experience to undergraduates, graduates, and postdoctoral students. These
students have the opportunity to work directly with academic and industrial
partners and with business students. A special effort will be made to include
women and members of traditionally underrepresented groups in this research.