* 1465060
* Molecular Photonic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Gerald Meyer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2018
* USD 480,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Gerald Meyer of the Department of
Chemistry at The University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill will develop new
classes of molecular materials with interesting optoelectronic properties. The
goal of this research is to understand the fundamental nature of interactions
between light-absorbing, redox-active molecules anchored to metal oxide
surfaces. Optimization of desired interactions will enable applications for the
conversion of sunlight to electrical power. The project required inorganic and
materials synthesis as well as solar cell fabrication that is well suited to the
education of scientists at all levels. This group is also well-positioned to
provide the highest level of education and training for students
underrepresented in science. Outreach activities for K-12 students involving
presentations at the local library and Science Center will also be part of the
funded project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transition metal polypyridyl complexes
display a rich array of photophysical and electron transfer properties when
anchored to oxide surfaces. The proposed studies focus on lateral intermolecular
electron- and energy-transfer self-exchange reactions that provide a molecular
basis for the transport of charge or energy across the oxide surface. The redox
activity will be exploited as a new class of 'hole-transport' materials for
application in solar cells. A newly developed time-resolved polarization
anisotropy technique will be exploited to characterize lateral charge transfer
reactions that may occur after excited state injection into wide band gap
semiconducting oxides such as TiO2. These studies will be complimented by
thermal electron transfer studies and modelling through Monte Carlo simulations.
A fundamental goal is to establish how molecular structure influences the
lateral self-exchange rate constants. Particular attention will be placed on
Cu(II/I) and Co(II/I) self-exchange reactions that involve transfer of an
electron and a ligand, behavior that may result in what has been termed
structurally 'gated' electron transfer. The Marcus cross-relation will be tested
to elucidate whether lateral electron transfer reactions that involve chemical
change can be accurately predicted with the measured self-exchange rate
constants.