* 1465051
* RUI: Novel Fe Catalysts for Alcohol Amine Coupling Reaction to Imine
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Keying Ding, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2021
* USD 143,175.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor Keying Ding from Middle Tennessee State University to develop
a novel types of earth-abundant catalysts for a useful coupling reaction. The
target chemical structures, imines, represent a very important class of
compounds with applications in the chemical, pharmaceutical and biological
sectors. Currently, such coupling reactions employ precious metal catalysts that
are expensive,sometimes toxic, and limited in supply. Thus, the most common
approaches today pose economic and often environmental challenges. Developing
catalytic processes for such reactions with earth-abundant metal systems is
compatible with sustainable chemistry goals. Success here would also likely
capture the attention of pharmaceutical process groups and industrial chemists.
The broader impacts of the research include training opportunities and hands-on
research experiences for undergraduate students, master-level researchers and
high school students, including those from underrepresented groups and low-
income backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Keying Ding
is designing, synthesizing and characterizing new types of ligands and their
respective defined iron complexes featuring "metal-ligand cooperativities."
Professor Ding is studying their catalytic reactivity toward alcohol-amine
couplings under mild conditions. In the currently studied system, the ligands
not only serve as metal binding sites, but also directly participate in chemical
bond activations. The project is exploring the optimal reaction conditions and
the substrate scope for alcohols and amines. Important reaction intermediates
and catalytic mechanisms are being investigated by combined experimental and
theoretical studies, which will enrich fundamental understanding of non-precious
metal catalysis for such transformations and will provide new insights into the
design of highly selective catalysts.