* 1465100
* Structural characterization of organometallic reaction intermediates and vibrational mechanics of water cages with temperature-controlled cryogenic ion spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Mark Johnson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2019
* USD 520,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms program is
supporting fundamental research of Professor Mark A. Johnson at Yale University.
Johnson is developing a new type of scientific instrument that yields precise
structural information on complex molecular architectures extracted from
solution. Under this grant, he will expand the scope of the method to enable the
capture and structural characterization of key reaction intermediates that
underlie the mechanisms of small molecule (e.g., alkenes, H2O, H2) activation by
contemporary homogeneous organometallic catalysts. The motivation to identify
these transient species is that, at present, much of the effort in catalyst
design involves extensive trial and error based on overall yield, while little
is often known about exactly what aspects of the chemical transformation are
being affected by the various modifications. Students and visiting faculty
involved in this endeavor integrate elements of bioanalytical chemistry with
atomic, molecular and optical (AMO) physics to create a new platform for
chemical analysis. As such, this program directly interfaces physical chemistry
students with immediate challenges addressed by synthetic colleagues, and
consequently prepares a new generation of scientists with a versatile skill set,
well centered in the chemical sciences. An ongoing and extensive collaboration
with theoretical colleague Prof. Anne McCoy at Ohio State further broadens the
impact of the work by creating an interactive venue for young theorists to
sharpen their skills on emergent scientific themes. Graduate students and
postdocs directly involved in the project also work in close collaborations with
laboratories in Germany. This also contributes to their preparedness to perform
at an increasingly competitive international level in the elite arena of basic
science. Closer to home, this program integrates faculty from undergraduate
institutions through summer research opportunities, and students from nearby
universities without graduate programs are incorporated into ongoing work by
carrying out senior research projects at Yale. Finally, this program has a
longstanding tradition of opening its doors to students in the New Haven schools
to illustrate how the basic science principles they are learning are in play at
the foundation of the new methods under development. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Cryogenic Ion Vibrational Predissociation Spectroscopy (CVIP) is a
new instrumental technique which integrates mass spectrometry with high
resolution infrared spectroscopy. One key feature of the approach is the
implementation of cryogenic processing of the gas phase ions to effectively
quench the reactive species into well-defined structures that yield sufficiently
sharp features in their vibrational spectra to allow structure determination.
This is carried out using vibrational predissociation spectroscopy of very
weakly bound adducts attached to target ions in a custom built, radio frequency
ion trap held at 5K. In addition to its application to catalysis, the proposed
work also addresses key unanswered questions regarding the critical local
interactions that underlie bulk behavior of pure water as well as the layer of
water molecules in direct contact with charged solutes. Because the microscopic
behavior of water is central to so many fields of science, this aspect of the
work is ongoing, and has impacted efforts ranging from the mechanism of vision
to the remediation of heavy metals in contaminated environments.