* 1465137
* SusChEM: Mechanistic Studies of Photocatalytic Water-Splitting and CO2Reduction: The control of surface chemical reactivity and its effect on product distribution
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Siris Laursen, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2018
* USD 305,776.00

SusChEM: Mechanistic Studies of Photocatalytic Water-Splitting and CO2
Reduction: The control of surface chemical reactivity and its effect on product
distribution

Developing inexpensive catalytic materials that efficiently use solar energy to
transform simple, readily-available substances into sustainably-produced fuels
and chemicals is one of the grand challenges of the 21st century. This
photocatalytic process is called "Artificial Photosynthesis" and is pursued for
its promise of supplying cheap, clean energy and chemicals from carbon dioxide
(CO2) and water (H2O). Currently, scientists do not completely understand how
photocatalytic reactions can be controlled to produce the most desirable
chemicals out of a large number of potential products. In this project, Dr.
Laursen is developing an understanding of exactly how to control the surface
chemical reactivity of Artificial Photosynthesis. A high level of control is
critical if we are to produce the fuel or building-block chemicals selectively
in an environmentally responsible fashion, as needed by our society. Dr. Laursen
is actively engaged in outreach activities that build upon his research to
promote engagement of students in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These activities, which include summer research
internships in Dr. Laursen's laboratory, are directed at improving the education
of promising high school seniors and women students and encouraging their
interest in STEM careers.

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr.
Siris Laursen of the University of Tennessee - Knoxville is developing a
fundamental understanding of how the surface properties of Bi2S3, GaP, and CdS
semiconductor photocatalysts dictate their catalytic activity and product
selectivity in the reduction of CO2 and H2O to hydrogen, methane and simple
oxygenated hydrocarbons. The surface-bound intermediates important in the
mechanisms that determine catalyst efficacy are followed with in situ Diffuse
Reflectance Infrared Fourier Transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) to correlate the
thermochemical stability of the various intermediate species with reaction rate
and product selectivity. Also under investigation is how the chemical nature of
surface bound hydrogen can be controlled to produce reduced organic molecules
preferentially over molecular hydrogen or carbon monoxide. Density functional
theory (DFT) calculations are carried out in parallel to the experimental work,
and are used in support of structure-activity and composition-activity property
determination. Dr. Laursen is actively engaged in STEM outreach programs focused
on female student recruitment into the STEM fields and in high school student
research internships, in support of the broader impacts of the project.