* 1465209
* Mechanistic studies relevant to gold pi-activation catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ross Widenhoefer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
funding Professor Ross Widenhoefer in the Department of Chemistry at Duke
University for fundamental studies of catalytic reactions based upon the
element, gold, that enable the efficient transformation of simple organic
molecules into more complex ones. New catalytic methods that efficiently and
selectively transform organic compounds into higher value products have the
potential to transform various classes of chemical production. Within this
project, the mechanisms of specific reaction steps involved in gold-catalyzed
reactions are being carefully investigated for their optimal application in
chemical transformations. The proposed research activities are being integrated
into the scientific education and training of the graduate and undergraduate
student researchers, including students from groups traditionally
underrepresented in the sciences. Graduate students are participating in
educational activities offered through the Duke University Graduate School.
Graduate students and undergraduate students are also performing community
outreach activities and developing demonstrations related to catalysis and
coordination chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Widenhoefer is
investigating the mechanisms of gold(I) pi-activation catalysis, including the
hydrofunctionalization of carbon-carbon multiple bonds and the cycloaddition of
enynes and related substrates. Despite a growing body of work in this area,
limited experimental information is available regarding the mechanisms of the
gold(I)-catalyzed hydrofunctionalization of carbon-carbon multiple bonds and,
likewise, little direct experimental information is available regarding the
structure and reactivity of cationic gold carbene complexes and cationic
intermediates germane to gold-catalyzed enyne cycloaddition. Research activities
are being pursued to fill these gaps and to develop an experimentally-grounded
understanding of the mechanisms of gold pi-activation catalysis. The research is
addressing four areas of inquiry: (1) the mechanisms of gold-catalyzed
intermolecular hydrofunctionalization of carbon-carbon double bonds with strong
and weak donor nucleophiles, (2) the extent of gold-carbon electron donation and
d-to-pi backbonding in gold carbene complexes, (3) the structure and reactivity
of cationic gold cyclopropyl carbene complexes lacking heteroatom stabilization,
and (4) the mechanisms of silver-catalyzed hydroarylation and skeletal
rearrangement of bicyclo-[3.2.0]-heptenes formed in gold-catalyzed enyne
cycloaddition. Realization of the activities outlined in this proposal is
expected to contribute in a meaningful way to the understanding of the
mechanisms of gold(I)-catalyzed hydrofunctionalization and the structure and
reactivity of gold carbene complexes.