* 1465172
* Catalytic Synthesis via C-C Cleavage
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Jon Tunge, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2018
* USD 435,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor Jon A. Tunge of the University of Kansas to develop strategies
to access reactive intermediates from common carbon-carbon bonds and utilize
those reactive intermediates to address challenges in synthesis. The broader
impacts of the work include developing environmentally friendly catalytic
synthesis. Outreach programs include providing organic chemistry flash cards on
Instagram and recruiting underrepresented students through a visitation weekend.
The visitation weekend educates prospective students on ongoing chemistry at the
University of Kansas and trains the students on best practices for applying to
graduate schools.

One research focus is on catalytically accessing reactive nucleophiles and
organometallics from inexpensive carboxylic acids via decarboxylation. Current
methods typically access related reactive intermediates through formation of
stoichiometric organometallics under highly basic conditions or using high
energy reduced metals. The decarboxylative couplings developed are more
environmentally benign than classic methods and are more applicable in synthesis
due to the mild reaction conditions. Professor Tunge is also developing
deacylative couplings that directly employ ketones in cross-coupling reactions.