* 1465254
* SusChEM: Nanoscale Insight into Electric Fatigue of Lead-Free Piezoelectric Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Xiaoli Tan, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 586,771.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Lead interferes with many body processes, including
the development of the nervous system, and therefore is particularly toxic to
children, and can cause permanent learning and behavior disorders. Regulations
restricting lead use, such as enforced recycling of lead-acid batteries of
automobiles and the ban of leaded gasoline and lead paint, have greatly reduced
lead exposure in the developed world since the 1970s. However, lead is one of
the most produced metals in the world and is still widely used in various
products. Even today, lead poisoning remains one of the largest environmental
medicine problems in terms of numbers of people exposed and the public health
toll it takes. In electronic devices and medical instruments, lead is primarily
used in piezoelectric elements. These elements convert electrical signals into
acoustic signals and are critical for underwater communications and ultrasound
medical imaging. To further reduce lead contamination and create a sustainable
environment for future generations, currently used lead-containing piezoelectric
materials must be replaced by lead-free ones. This project on fundamental
research aims to identify environmentally-friendly compositions for the multi-
billion dollar piezoelectrics industry. The outcome has the potential to greatly
benefit both human health and the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The core elements in piezoelectric devices are made of lead zirconate
titanate ceramics, which contain more than 60 wt.% of lead. The toxicity of lead
has raised serious environmental concerns and legislations on restriction of its
use have driven extensive worldwide research on the development of lead-free
piezoelectric materials. Significant progress has been made in the past decade
in composition design and processing control and the research community is now
being prompted to move these scientific achievements into fruitful
environmentally safe products. As such, fundamental issues related to
performance stability and device reliability need to be addressed thoroughly and
immediately. In real devices during service, these ceramics are almost
invariably driven by cyclic electric or mechanical forces, and eventually their
performances deteriorate due to fatigue. Electric fatigue degradation is the
major concern for stability and reliability of piezoelectric devices utilizing
lead-free ceramics. In this project, the researchers at Iowa State are
investigating the microstructural mechanisms of electric fatigue through
electrically cycling lead-free ceramic specimens inside the transmission
electron microscope for the first time. Such innovative in situ studies can
identify the primary microstructural feature that leads to fast fatigue
degradation and therefore, will help find ways to alleviate the property
degradation. Lead-free compositions can then replace lead zirconate titanate in
a wide range of engineering and medical technologies, which greatly help to
create a sustainable future for children. This project is also designed to have
a broad impact on graduate and undergraduate education by training students in
cutting-edge materials research techniques. Furthermore, an App for iPads on the
toxicity of lead is under development for demonstrations to high school students
and undergraduate students.