* 1465277
* Dynamics of Excited Electronic States in DNA Strands
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Bern Kohler, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2018
* USD 483,926.00

With this awwrd, the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Bern Kohler of Montana
State University to investigate the photophysics of double-stranded DNA. Double-
stranded DNA appears to have enhanced stability against photo-degradation, and
the Kohler group is undertaking a detailed investigation to better understand
the mechanistic underpinnings of this photochemical stability. In additional
experiments, Prof. Kohler and his research students will investigate how the
photochemistry of DNA differs in so-called deep eutectic solvents (DES). Prof.
Kohler's research has important implications in biology and medicine, in that
understanding the way DNA interacts with light has direct bearing on
understanding the ways that ultraviolet light from the sun can damage skin.
Students working in the Kohler laboratory receive training at the interface of
physical chemistry and biology, as preparation for careers in the acedemic or
biotechnology sectors.The Kohler research group includes active participation of
undergraduate students in authentic research. In addition, Prof. Kohler and his
group members are engaged in outreach to K-12 students and teachers in the state
of Montana, through a variety of established programs, such as Montana State
University's Science Math Resource Center and the Montana Space Grant
Consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Bern Kohler and his research group
will conduct detailed photochemistry experiments using ultrafast laser methods
to investigate the interesting photophysics of double-stranded DNA. Questions
remain as to how exactly double-stranded DNA photochemically decays after
electronic excitation. In the present award, Professor Kohler and his group will
conduct a number of experiments to develop a better understanding of the
photochemical details. Experiments to be conducted include: (1) a study of
concerted proton-electron transfer (CPET) in AT and GC DNA using time-resolved
infrared (TRIR) spectroscopy; (2) a collaborative study with Dr. Kimberly de La
Harpe of the USAF Academy on the photochemistry of an oligonucleotide with TRIR
spectroscopy that has been studied previously with UV/Visible transient
absorbance (TA) spectroscopy; (3) a TRIR and TA study of miniduplexes
synthesized for the Kohler group in a collaboration with Prof. Cynthia Burrows
of the University of Utah; and (4) a new thrust investigating the photochemistry
of DNA in DES's. Experimental work will benefit from insight provided by the
theoretical group of Professor Roberto Improta of the National Research Council
of Italy's Institute of Biostructures and Bioimaging.