* 1465161
* RUI: Exploring Differences between Condensed Phase Photolysis and Radiolysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Christopher Arumainayagam, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2018
* USD 301,773.00

With with award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Christopher
Arumainayagam at Wellesley College to study chemical reactions that are driven
by interactions with light and/or electrons. Dr. Arumainayagam has devised
probes to study the composition of nanoscale thin films under ultrahigh vacuum
conditions before and after irradiation by low-energy electrons or photons.
These probes enable his team to observe and characterize the subtle but
important chemical changes induced by irradiation. This important category of
chemical reactions impacts low-temperature plasmas used in industrially
important processes such as plasma etching; use of low-energy electrons instead
of photons for highly selective bond dissociations; identification of tracer
molecules associated with specific pathways for interstellar synthesis of
complex organic molecules (COM); and the relative roles of electrons and photons
in atmospheric processes. Involvement of women and minority undergraduate
students in this research is planned to promote diversification of the STEM
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work specifically seeks to assess the
differences and similarities between reactions initiated by low-energy (&lt; 8
eV) electrons and photons. Target systems include condensed-phase ammonia, water
and methanol, each of which is investigated using post-irradiation temperature
programmed desorption, post-irradiation infrared reflection absorption
spectroscopy, and isothermal electron/photon-stimulated desorption.
Electrons/photons with sub-ionization energies are used to avoid production of
low-energy secondary electrons, thereby ensuring that fundamental differences
between electron and photon irradiation are probed. Among the objectives of the
research are: (i) to measure the effective cross-section for electron/photon-
induced reaction and desorption, and to identify all of the electron/photon-
induced reaction products; (ii) to study the dependence of the reaction cross-
sections and yields on electron/photon fluence, incident electron/photon energy,
and film thickness; and (iii) to determine if the products identified by post-
irradiation temperature-programmed desorption are nascent radiolysis products.
The studies are designed to establish whether electron-induced condensed phase
reactions generate unique molecular species; and whether electrons are more
effective than photons for initiating specific condensed phase reactions.