* 1465096
* Nonlinear Light Scattering Spectroscopy and Microscopy of Molecular Interactions at Biological Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Hai-Lung Dai, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2019
* USD 510,304.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Hai-Lung Dai of Temple
University to use a newly developed, laser-based technique to measure how drug-
like molecules adsorb and transport through biological cell membranes. The
knowledge gained here is important for the advancement of fundamental research
in life sciences. It is also highly beneficial to chemical biology and
pharmaceutical sciences research by providing a method to determine the rates of
drug transport through cell membranes. Students participating in this research
are prepared with a wide range of expertise in interdisciplinary areas involving
biology, chemistry, medicine and physics, and as such, for careers in
fundamental biomedically related research in academia and industry. Professor
Dai's laboratory will continue to provide research opportunities for
undergraduate students and high/middle school science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed studies, nonlinear light
scattering methods with their intrinsic surface sensitivity, and time-,
frequency-, and spatial-resolution, are used to provide a molecular level
description of how molecules interact with biological surfaces. This newly
developed method will be applied in several areas including determining: 1) how
molecular and membrane structures affect molecular transport though cell
membranes; 2) how membrane permeabilizers and cell-penetrating peptides work;
and 3) what are the underlying energetic factors and forces that are behind the
Hofmeister series. In addition, second harmonic microscopy for time-resolved
imaging of molecular transport through membranes and molecular intake into cells
is to be developed. This project aims to provide enhanced understanding of a
range of problems related to life processes. For example, though much is known
about how atomic cations transport through cell membranes, little is known about
how molecular or membrane structure affects transport of small or medium size
molecules. Moreover, the mechanism of action of membrane permeabilizers is
unknown. In addition, the driving forces behind the century old Hofmeister
effect are poorly understood. The proposed research seeks to make advances that
impact a range of scientific areas including nonlinear optics, colloidal
science, protein function, and cell membrane transport mechanism.