* 1465142
* Combining stereoelectronics, traceless directing groups and dynamic covalent chemistry for the design of alkyne cascades: towards carbon-rich molecules and materials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Igor Alabugin, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2019
* USD 480,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B and
the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Programs of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Igor Alabugin of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at Florida State University will develop new routes to conjugated
carbon nanostructures with predesigned shape and functionality based on atom-
economical transformations of high-energy alkyne precursors into conjugated
cyclic structures. Such transformations will be useful in organic synthesis and
materials science. In particular, this work will pave the way to carbon-rich
conjugated molecules that can serve as unique components in the design of
optoelectronic materials, energy storage devices, sensors, transistors, solar
cells, and polymer composites. This research will also broaden the mechanistic,
structural, and kinetic foundations for design of new organic reactions. The
theoretical and experimental components of this work will allow training of
specialists in each area and will provide researchers at the undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral levels with an opportunity to integrate learning and
discovery. The results will be disseminated in peer-reviewed publications and
outreach activities, including participation in symposia and lecturing at
undergraduate and graduate institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
ortho polyyne chains of varying sizes, equipped with different functionalities,
are built in a modular fashion using well-characterized and reliable cross-
coupling chemistry. In the key step, these systems are then "zipped" up via a
cascade of fast and selective radical cyclizations. Selectivity of initial
radical attack on the multifunctional substrates is controlled by the presence
of "traceless directing groups" that are removed in the course of the one-pot
process. In parallel, self-terminating reactions of enynes overcome
stereoelectronic restrictions on the 6-endo-dig cyclizations by utilizing
alkenes as synthetic equivalents of alkynes with the final "oxidation"
accomplished in the cascade termination step as an aromatizing C-C bond
scission.