* 1465158
* Collaborative Research:  Deformation Phenomena in Surface Texturing by Machining-Based Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/11/2014,08/31/2015
* Christopher Saldana, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2015
* USD 62,150.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to establish the
fundamental principles that relate microstructure and micro-scale mechanical
properties of textured surfaces created by machining-based processes to the
controllable process variables. To accomplish this, an experimental study will
characterize thermo-mechanical deformation conditions of strain, strain rate,
temperature, that prevail during material removal in texturing and their effects
on surface integrity. Techniques such as high-speed imaging and image
correlation for deformation analysis, and advanced electron microscopy methods
and nano-indentation for microstructure analysis, will be used. The experiments
will be complemented by modeling of mechanics of material removal to estimate
the transient plastic deformation that occurs in texturing by machining. By
integrating these results, the nature of the deformation can eventually be
predicted, complementing the much better understood geometric-topographic
aspects of surface texture.

If successful, the broader impact of the results will be improved performance
and life of structural components through design and creation of novel surface
textures. Based on the principles established herein, this design will
incorporate both topography and surface integrity attributes, such as
deformation and microstructure. The research will provide experimental and
analytical tools for characterizing deformation and microstructure at multiple
length scales, enabling among other things, understanding of the interplay
between mechanics of surface texturing and surface integrity. Such an
understanding is essential for characterizing the effects of texture on
performance of structural components such as bearings, pumps, and diesel fuel
sub-systems. Phenomenological insights will be obtained into transient
deformation phenomena underlying material removal in machining and wear
processes. Opportunities will likely emerge for exploiting the transient
deformation phenomena as a means for reducing energy dissipation in machining
processes.