* 1465230
* SusChEM: Chemical Dynamics of Polyatomic Molecules at Surfaces: New Insights from State-Selected Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Arthur Utz, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2018
* USD 555,797.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Arthur Utz of Tufts
University and his graduate and undergraduate student colleagues are studying
the reactivity of molecules with vibrational excitation on catalytically-active
metal surfaces. Scientists believe that metal-atom vibrations on some surfaces
may significantly enhance the reactivity of molecules on the surface. Prof.
Utz's research uses molecules with vibrational excitation to probe this effect
on a variety of metal surfaces. The goal of research like this is to learn more
about the way that gas-surface reactivity can be enhanced with catalytic metal
surfaces. Studies like this could lead the way to improved catalysts for
industrial processes. Students working in the Utz group receive training in
ultrahigh vacuum methods as well as in the use of lasers and sophisticated
optical systems. Prof. Utz and his group are also involved in educational
outreach to underserved schools in Boston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Arthur Utz
and his research group conduct detailed surface-molecule scattering experiments
to probe the ways in which surface metal vibrations modulate catalytic
reactivity on a variety of transition metal surfaces. Lasers are used to excite
vibrations in molecules entrained in a molecular beam incident upon a variety of
transition metal surfaces. Differences in reactivity are probed by monitoring
the production of different products as a function of surface temperature and
corrugation. Specific reactant gases to be studied include: water, ammonia,
methanol, carbon dioxide, ethane and methane. Metals to be studied include: Ni,
Pt, Cu and Ru. Questions to be asked include: (1) What are the factors (e.g.
identity of dissociation fragments and/or metal surface, local surface
structure, etc.) that result in significant modulation of reactivity, and how
general is this effect? (2) Is the modulation of reactivity greater at under-
coordinated atoms that may undergo larger amplitude motion at a given level of
vibrational excitation? (3) Can surface temperature dependence of state-resolved
reactivity measurements be used to ascertain details of reaction mechanisms
(e.g. barrier height determination)? The Utz research group includes active
involvement by undergraduates (Tufts University as well as Stonehill College) in
authentic research. Educational outreach takes place with teachers at Josiah
Quincy Upper School in Boston's Chinatown neighborhood, designing hands-on
activities that complement curricular standards.