* 1465040
* Dynamics of Organic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Charles Doubleday, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2019
* USD 320,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-B) and
Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&E) programs are
supporting computer-based fundamental research of Dr. Charles Doubleday at
Columbia University. This research seeks a deeper understanding of the
mechanisms of chemical reactions by computing the sequence of atomic motions as
starting materials are transformed into products. Dr. Doubleday uses a
combination of quantum mechanics and classical mechanics to understand how
energy flows from starting materials into products. This type of calculation
allows important questions to be addressed; for example, why one product may be
favored over another. The understanding achieved in these calculations will
enable better experimental control over the products of chemical reactions. An
important component of this project is the training of undergraduate students in
scientific research. Since research is collaborative and students learn from
each other, the work fosters group skills as well as individual achievement. In
collaborations with colleagues at Columbia and other institutions, Dr. Doubleday
helps train students in the use of computational methods. In one project, the
focus is on the active center of a class of powerful antibiotics, with the goal
of understanding and control. As the principles uncovered by this research
become incorporated into applied areas, potential benefits could include greater
understanding and control over chemical processes important in atmospheric and
life processes.

The computational procedure involves quasiclassical ab initio molecular
dynamics, in which nuclear forces are computed at each step by an electronic
structure method, usually density functional theory. In applying this method to
several enediyne cyclizations, the Doubleday group has recently found a dynamic
isotope effect in which isotopic selectivity occurs in the product, as a result
of competition between recrossing to reactant on a vibrational timescale and
isotope-dependent intramolecular vibrational redistribution. An important part
of the proposal is to carry out quasiclassical simulations of reactions in
condensed phase using QM/MM (Quantum Mechanics/Molecular Mechanics) techniques.
The proposal describes a statistically converged procedure for quasiclassical
sampling of transition states in condensed phase.