* 1465057
* SusChEM: Anchoring Single Noble Metal Atoms for Better Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Jingyue Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Rauchfuss
* 07/31/2019
* USD 549,998.00

SusChEM: Anchoring Single Noble Metal Atoms/Clusters for Better
Catalysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, carried out by Jingyue (Jimmy) Liu
at Arizona State University, addresses fundamental scientific concepts
encountered in synthesizing single-atom catalysts, testing their efficacy,
establishing their structure-function relationships, and developing new
strategies to stabilize isolated, single atoms of active noble metals. Supported
noble metal catalysts play a central role in energy conversion, chemical
transformations, and the improved quality of our environment. Noble metals are,
however, usually very expensive. The efficient use of noble metals is a critical
factor in developing and applying noble metal catalysts. The atom efficiency and
specific activity (i.e., activity per atom) generally increases with decreasing
particle size, with the ultimate limit of size reduction that of a single atom.
Dr. Liu's approach is to anchor the single atom onto nanostructured supports to
immobilize them and prevent them from clustering together. The insights gained
in this investigation are being used to guide the molecular design of next-
generation catalysts for energy and environmental applications. The knowledge
learned in this study promotes societal broader impact in fostering chemical
sustainability by reducing the usage of limited and expensive raw materials and
lowering the costs of goods. Broader impacts through education are offered in an
annual Winter Workshop of High Resolution Electron Microscopy, attended
primarily by graduate students, and through the John C. Wheatley Education and
Outreach Facility dedicated to the promotion of scientific literacy in K-12
grade students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemical Catalysis
Program in the Chemistry Division and the Solid State and Materials Program in
the Division of Materials Science are jointly funding Dr. Jingyue (Jimmy) Liu
from Arizona State University to conduct fundamental studies of structure and
reactivity of supported noble metal single-atom catalysts (SACs) and
epitaxially-anchored clusters. Dr. Liu's group focuses on developing SACs with
high levels of metal loading and understanding the atom-support interactions,
with a goal of stabilizing single noble metal atoms (Pt1, Au1, Pd1, Ir1 and Rh1)
and nanoclusters on nanostructures of Fe3O4/Fe2O3 (reducible), Al2O3 (non-
reducible), and ZnO (difficult to reduce) supports. The proposed catalytic
reactions include Pd/ZnO for steam reforming of methanol to produce hydrogen,
Ir/Fe3O4 (Fe2O3) and Au/Fe3O4 for the water-gas-shift reaction, and Pd/Al2O3,
Pt/Al2O3 and Rh/Al2O3 for CO oxidation. Dr. Liu's group relies on aberration-
corrected electron microscopic (ACEM) techniques, especially environmental ACEM,
to identify unambiguously the distribution of isolated single noble metal atoms
and epitaxial nanoclusters supported on high-surface-area supports and to follow
the nanocluster movement under ambient gas pressure environments at elevated
temperatures. Both in situ and ex situ catalytic reaction data are analyzed in
detail to understand the synthesis-structure-property relationships of supported
single atom and cluster catalysts with a particular emphasis on catalytic
reactions relevant to energy conversion, chemical transformations, and
environmental applications. Broader impacts through education are offered in an
annual Winter Workshop of High Resolution Electron Microscopy, attended
primarily by graduate students, and through the John C. Wheatley Education and
Outreach Facility dedication to the promotion of scientific literacy in K-12
grade students.