* 1465154
* Full embedding QM/MM scheme for modeling excited state proton transfer processes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Lyudmila Slipchenko, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2018
* USD 441,320.00

Lyudmila V. Slipchenko of Purdue University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop new computational and theoretical tools for describing the
transfer of protons involving molecules in which the electrons have been
excited, often by absorption of light. The systems to be studied are in solution
or in other complex environments. The phenomenon known as excited state proton
transfer (ESPT) is ubiquitous. It naturally occurs in photoactive proteins,
which play many important roles in biology, and takes place between DNA strands
as a pathway for dissipating excess UV radiation. In technology, ESPT is
exploited in artificial photo-devices, fluorescent chemo-sensors, and for
manipulating the acidity of local environment with light pulses. However,
mechanistic understanding of ESPT pathways, which is essential for design of
efficient photochemical cells or photoacids, remains incomplete. This research
is expected to contribute to the understanding and eventual control of ESPT
processes by elucidating the role of environment (solvent, electrolyte, protein
matrix) in these events. This knowledge will benefit scientists and engineers
designing new classes of photoacids, chemo-sensors and artificial photo-devices.
The algorithms developed and validated in this project will be broadly
distributed and serve for predictive studies of a variety of photo-induced
processes in chemistry, biology, and materials.

Slipchenko and her research group aim to characterize static and dynamic
environment effects on complex photochemical and photophysical processes such as
ESPT by (i) developing novel first-principles based methodology of QM/MM
(Quantum Mechanics/Molecular Mechanics) type, (ii) validating and benchmarking
this methodology relative to other established and emerging methods by creating
a condensed-phase photochemistry database, and (iii) applying newly developed
tools for investigating ESPT mechanisms in solvated photoacids and proteins such
as GFP and PYP. The proposed method developments are based on polarizable
quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) approach for electronic excited
states, in which the environment (the MM part) is described by the sophisticated
Effective Fragment Potential (EFP) method. The proposed work enhances the
accuracy and applicability of the QM/EFP methods by (i) developing a full
embedding QM/EFP model in which all interactions between the quantum and
classical systems are accounted for quantum-mechanically, (ii) extending this
model to biological environments, and (iii) developing QM/EFP excited state
molecular dynamics algorithms. The novelty of the proposed research is in
creating a unique full embedding QM/MM model and applying it to excited state
dynamics in various complex environments. The proposed research contributes to
the research infrastructure byintegrating new computer codes in the open-source,
freely available libefp library and in open-source PSI4, GAMESS and NWChem
electronic structure packages and as open-source modules in Q-Chem and MOLCAS
quantum chemistry software. The proposed condensed-phase photochemistry
database, containing a variety of photoactive molecules in various environments,
will contribute to quantum chemistry education in the community by providing
benchmarks of newly developed and established methods for extended systems and
by supplying online tutorials.