* 1465196
* Synthesis of Phostones via Phosphono Substituted Metal Allyl Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Christopher Spilling, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 05/31/2019
* USD 376,673.00

Abstract

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Christopher D. Spilling of the University of Missouri St.
Louis is developing new carbon-carbon bond forming reactions with applications
in the synthesis of medicinally relevant phosphate-substituted sugars. The
phosphate group is a fundamental component of all living systems, and is
important for molecular replication, cell biochemistry, cell signalling
pathways, and activation in metabolic processes. The research builds on prior
phosphorous-based research developing new nickel-based processes to access
important carbon scaffolds. The broader impact of this program lies in
developing new tools for organic synthesis and the training of undergraduate and
graduate students. A particular emphasis is placed on undergraduate
participation in research to provide a solid training in the techniques of
synthetic organic chemistry. The training will help provide skilled workers to
support pharmaceutical research and related chemical industry in the US.

The intellectual merit is focused on developing synthetic methods based on new
organophosphorous chemistry. Metal allyl intermediates derived from precursors
such as epoxy-vinyl phosphonates, 1- and 2- substituted phosphono-1,3-dienes and
phosphono allylic carbonates provide unique methods of stereoselective C-C and
C-heteroatom bond forming reactions. These reactions allow complimentary
approaches to the synthesis of phostones and phosphonosugars that have novel
biological properties and may serve as lead compounds for medicinal chemistry.
This de novo approach provides phostones with unique substitution patterns and
stereochemistry which deviate from the readily available (common) carbohydrates
that is ideally suited to the synthesis of potential antagonists of lipid A.