* 1465292
* Development of Positional Selective C-H Activation Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jin-Quan Yu, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 525,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
funding Professor Jin-Quan Yu of The Scripps Research Institute to develop new
reactions that convert carbon-hydrogen bonds in organic molecules into a wide
range of more complex chemical structures. These transformations are important
tools for the synthesis of molecules that are used in pharmaceuticals, fine
chemicals, and agrochemicals, and controlling the chemistry of carbon-hydrogen
bond functionalization has been a long-standing challenge for the chemistry
community. Additional broader impacts of the research project include student
and postdoctoral researcher training, an outreach program to elementary
students, and inviting high-school students to perform research in the
laboratory over the summer.

Professor Yu is developing methods to perform the site-selective
functionalization of remote and geometrically inaccessible carbon-hydrogen bonds
promoted by weak coordination of palladium complexes, continuing a linge of
research which has led to some of the first such successes along these lines.
Specifically, research is being focused on meta-carbon-hydrogen (C-H) activation
processes using nitrile-based templates. First, new nitrile templates are being
developed and extensively optimized for previously unsuccessful substrates.
Second, new ligands and conditions are being developed to enable challenging
transformations such as meta-carbon-hydrogen carbonylation. Third, an in-depth
understanding of how the nitrile template directs remote carbon-hydrogen
activation is sought by characterizing the large-membered cyclometalation
intermediates as well as seeking to identify the transition state structures
through computational efforts. If successful, the methods being developed in
these studies could find broad application in chemical methods/synthesis
laboratories in both academe and industry.