* 1465180
* Quasi-free electron energy in supercritical carbon dioxide and water: A research program involving rural and first-generation STEM students
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Gary Findley, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Peebles
* 08/31/2020
* USD 395,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor Cherice M. Evans at
CUNY - Queens College and Professor Gary L. Findley at the University of
Louisiana-Monroe to undertake complementary experimental and theoretical studies
of the role of solvent structure in important chemical reactions. Their work
seeks improved understanding upon which to base better, more efficient, and less
environmentally invasive chemical manufacturing and processing. It is congruent
with the aims of sustainable chemistry, including the principles that the use of
solvents should be made unnecessary wherever possible, and solvents should be
innocuous when used. By involving graduate and undergraduate students from CUNY
as well as undergraduates from Louisiana - Monroe (many of whom are from low-
income families and are first generation college students), the work makes
available exciting research opportunities intended not only to advance science,
but to retain student interest and expand capabilities in STEM fields. Some of
the research utilizes synchrotron facilities at the Center for Advanced
Microstructures and Devices in Baton Rouge, LA, allowing all participating
students to interact with scientists from a high caliber user facility, while
introducing CUNY students to new aspects of United States culture in a
Living/Learning community environment. The requirement that Monroe participants
present their research results at Queens College ensures that these students
will be exposed to a major urban environment -a first for many of these
students.

The research specifically focuses on solvation of quasi-free electrons as probes
of the solvent structure in the target media across the broad temperature and
density range represented by these solvents. The systems chosen for study
include supercritical carbon dioxide, high temperature water, and supercritical
water. These solvents are targeted because their solvation properties can be
adjusted by small changes in temperature and pressure, potentially enabling
product isolation and solvent purification in a single step. A free electron in
solution makes an ideal probe of local solvent structure, and will help
illuminate reactivity in these important media. Electrons with low energies are
produced by field-enhanced photoemission from electrode surfaces in the solvent
and the resulting current is detected with a second electrode. Experiments are
being conducted at a new synchrotron facility at the Center for Advanced
Microstructures and Devices in Baton Rouge, LA, and the resulting data are used
to develop empirical models for the microscopic structure of the supercritical
solvent systems.