* 1465243
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Application Specific Data Acquisition Using High Temperature Silicon Carbide CMOS
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Ian Getreu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 257,553.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating silicon
carbide (SiC) integrated circuit technology to fill the need for extreme
environment electronics, which, in turn, facilitates improvements in energy
efficiency and enables new system architectures for mobile transportation
systems. Within the broader scope of integrated circuitry, analog-to-digital and
digital-to-analog converters are the subject of this activity. High temperature
SiC analog-to-digital data converters (SiC ADCs) are important because they can
reside within an internal combustion engine or electric vehicle engine and
convert analog sensor data to a digital form before transmission to the
vehicle?s control computer. This will have the impact of increasing data rates,
improving signal integrity, reducing shielding requirements on cabling, and
enabling the potential for wireless transmission of data in the future. The
project will result in a prototype of a SiC-based data acquisition system (DAQ)
for extreme environment applications utilizing SiC ADCs. The SiC DAQ system has
the main unique feature that it can survive very high temperatures (> 300°C).
This provides the advantage of being able to sense and convert key data
parameters in-situ at temperatures exceeding 300°C, a capability not currently
available, which will improve the reliability and fuel efficiency for all types
of vehicles (planes, trains, automobiles).

The design and manufacture of SiC materials for uses outside of simple power
devices requires new design for manufacturing (DFM) techniques. This project
addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery
towards commercial application: 1) to understand and mitigate the manufacturing
variability of SiC-CMOS (complementary metal oxide semiconductor); and 2) to
qualify the reliability of a full-scale component. To do this, the team will
assemble a demonstration unit that has sufficient capability to illustrate the
potential for the technology while being sufficiently simple to support
extensive test and characterization for reliability in a real world application.
In addition, personnel involved in this project, masters and doctoral students
in electrical engineering, will receive first-hand technology translation
experience through the design activities undertaken that proceed from the
feasibility to prototype phase with serious consideration of the eventual
product.

The project engages Ozark Integrated Circuits of Fayetteville, Arkansas in
guiding the commercialization aspects of the technology as it transitions from
feasibility proof to prototype in this technology translation effort from
research discovery toward commercial reality.