* 1465145
* Development of Group 9 Transition Metal Catalysts for Hydrocarbon Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Thomas Gunnoe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2019
* USD 465,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor T. Brent Gunnoe of the University of Virginia to study the
development of catalysts that can selectively convert hydrocarbons, compounds
that only contain hydrogen and carbon atoms, into more complex compounds.
Hydrocarbons from fossil resources form the foundation of the chemical industry
and the energy sector. Recent years have seen an increase in access to vast
amounts of domestic natural gas reserves; however, with current technological
infrastructure the ability to transport natural gas economically is limited and
therefore much natural gas in the U.S. and around the world remains "stranded"
and unusable. Also, despite years of development, chemical processes that
convert hydrocarbons into higher value chemicals often suffer from low
selectivity for a desired compound and the requirement of high temperatures and
pressures. Thus, new catalysts for alkane functionalization are essential for
use of natural gas, and other hydrocarbons, as a precursor to new chemicals and
transportation fuel. This research project is also providing training to
undergraduate and graduate students to enable a future generation of scientists
to work in the area of catalysis as it relates to the efficient use of fossil
resources. The PI has also participated in several outreach and workshop events
hosted by the University of Virginia's "More Than the Score" program, the Darden
School of Business, and the "Car of the Future Summit."

Professor Gunnoe is synthesizing and studying group 9 transition metal complexes
for the catalytic functionalization of hydrocarbons. This project builds on
preliminary work in the Gunnoe group that demonstrated the ability of novel
rhodium complexes to activate the carbon-hydrogen bonds of hydrocarbons under
acidic conditions. These results are being extended to a detailed study of all
steps in the desired catalytic cycles, including the carbon-hydrogen activation
step (both arenes and alkanes), oxidation of the transition metal hydrocarbyl
complex, and reductive functionalization of the metal-hydrocarbyl ligand.
Reactions in acidic media are being targeted that yield oxy-functionalized
compounds such as esters. One objective seeks to understand how to rationally
design catalysts based upon cobalt, rhodium and iridium to optimize the rate of
carbon-hydrogen activation in acidic solvent. A second thrust seeks to develop
and understand optimization of reductive functionalization in acidic solvent.
The third objective combines these individual steps into catalytic processes for
oxidative hydrocarbon functionalization.