* 1465068
* Homogeneous Solar Hydrogen Photocatalysis: Sensitizer Design and Mechanistic Insights from Transient Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Felix Castellano, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 383,713.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Felix Castellano at North Carolina State University is
developing new molecular-based hydrogen-generating systems that function with
light and in water. While the chemical process of using light to reduce protons
to molecular hydrogen is of fundamental technological importance, only a handful
of molecular-based systems can accomplish this important transformation in pure
water. This research project directly addresses current themes related to the
growing demand for renewable energy sources to power the planet in the future
and safeguarding global environmental integrity. Students involved in this
project are being cross-trained in numerous areas of chemistry. The proposed
investigations are not only fostering the scientific and professional education
of undergraduate and graduate students engaged in the project, but also are
involving these students in regional public scientific education outreach
activities.

Professor Castellano is designing new photosensitizers, new classes of electron
donors, evaluating the photocatalytic cycle activation pathways (reductive or
oxidative electron transfer, triplet energy transfer), and optimizing the
compositions of these components to discover the best systems for detailed
mechanistic studies using transient spectroscopic methods. The new classes of
metal-to-ligand charge transfer sensitizers being synthesizes are based upon
water-soluble Ir(III), Ru(II), and Cu(I) complexes. The concept of employing
triplet energy transfer shuttles to mediate the initial electron transfer
reaction to the requisite cobalt-based water reduction catalyst and/or electron
donor species is being studied as well. Performance metrics of these systems are
being evaluated in parallel using combinatorial photochemistry, and various
analytical approaches are being used to determine the chemical fate of the
numerous reaction components and to identify deleterious decomposition pathways.
A detailed understanding of the mechanisms of action of the optimized
photocatalytic compositions is being gained using a battery of static and
dynamic spectroscopic techniques. This interdisciplinary project is contributing
to the fundamental knowledge base of converting solar energy into a renewable
environmentally friendly, non-carbon-based chemical fuel.