* 1465163
* Center for Systems Security and Information Assurance (CSSIA)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Christy Chatmon, Moraine Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,533,071.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches, and the growth of cyber-threats has
created a need for many more workers who have appropriate, specific knowledge
and skills. The Center for Systems Security and Information Assurance (CSSIA;
http://www.cssia.org) was founded in 2003 to expand the pipeline of
professionals in the emerging field of cybersecurity. Since then, CSSIA has
worked with community colleges, educators at all levels, and business leaders
across the nation to identify and address obstacles in building successful
cybersecurity certificate and degree programs. The center distributes course
content to more than 260 institutions and hosts a national faculty development
academy that provides workshops to over 500 cybersecurity educators annually.
With continued funding as an Advanced Technological Education (ATE) support
center, CSSIA will continue to expand the nation's pool of entry-level
Information Assurance/Cyber Defense (IA/CD) professionals and to improve
curricula and teaching in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSSIA was previously
funded as an ATE regional center (NSF Awards DUE-0302612 and DUE-0702872) and as
an ATE resource center (NSF Award DUE-1002746). As an ATE support center, CSSIA
will focus on four activities:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Increasing the number of minority,
female, and veteran students pursuing IA/CD training. An outreach team will
provide mentoring and will work with the Association of Computer and Information
Science/Engineering Departments at Minority Institutions (ADMI), the Society for
Advancement of Hispanics/Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS), and
Women in CyberSecurity (WiCyS) to prepare minorities, women, and veterans to
compete in cyber defense competitions, which serve as recruiting sources for
cybersecurity employers.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Providing updated, relevant curricula and
faculty development opportunities that meet IA/CD business and industry needs.
Certification classes for college faculty and National Faculty Development
Academy workshops will keep faculty members current with industry trends, help
them earn industry-recognized credentials, and ensure that they are able to
prepare students to combat current and future cybersecurity
threats.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Updating and widely distributing innovative virtual
teaching and learning environments. CSSIA's virtual platform, which has been
developed and fine-tuned over past years, provides a safe setting for
experiential learning, including IA/CD competitions, simulations, and on-site
workforce experiences.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Leveraging CSSIA's social media network,
which has over 3,500 subscribers, across other ATE cybersecurity education
centers and projects. This network will be utilized to assist with business,
industry, and academic needs assessments; to expand the impact of the resources
offered by the ATE centers and projects; and to boost attendance at national
IA/CD events, including the Community College Cyber Summit (3CS), the High-
Impact Technology Exchange Conference (HI-TEC), the Colloquium for Information
Systems Security Education (CISSE), and the National Initiative for
Cybersecurity Education (NICE) conference.