* 1465105
* SusChEM: Defect-laden 2D Catalysts for Carbon Sequestration and Safer Hydrogenation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Talat Rahman, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Rauchfuss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,839.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Drs.
Blair, Rahman, and Tetard of the University of Central Florida are involved in a
vertically integrated effort aimed at understanding catalysis over defects in 2D
structures. This "waste" carbon dioxide, which is presently discarded, could be
a useful material for making a variety of products. By chemically combining
carbon dioxide with hydrogen generated using solar energy, products such as
fuels and plastics could be realized without the need for petroleum, and carbon
dioxide would be removed from the waste stream and used as a starting material.
This would enable carbon dioxide to be seen as a valuable resource instead of a
waste product to be managed. Key to this approach is the application of a new
type of catalyst based on sheet-like materials with imperfections. By
introducing imperfections into materials like boron nitride, which is currently
used as a lubricant and in cosmetics, Drs. Blair, Rahman, and Tetard are
accessing new chemical pathways that may pave the way towards a carbon dioxide
economy. Dr. Rahman is investigating the theoretical underpinnings of these new
catalysts. Dr. Tetard is studying their structure and reactivity at a molecular
level and Dr. Blair is moving the findings toward implementation in the real
world. The catalysts being investigated may supplant existing toxic metal
catalysts, eliminate the health risks associated with the metals, and divert
carbon dioxide from being released into the atmosphere. Summer research projects
targeting those with disadvantaged backgrounds are being developed. Drs. Blair,
Rahman, and Tetard are actively working to integrate disadvantaged minority
individuals in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team is investigating how
defects in h-BN (boron nitride) produce catalytic activity towards the
production of linear alcohols from carbon dioxide and hydrogen as well as the
unique, metal-free activation of olefins for hydrogenation. These defects are
very difficult to characterize and a tiered approach is required to fully
understand this system. DFT-based calculations are used to generate reaction
energetics and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations are performed to evaluate the
temporal evolution of surface species on defects, as a function of temperatures
and pressures relevant to Dr. Blair's experiments. Experimental data acquired by
Drs. Blair and Tetard are linked to the theoretical results in order to develop
a complete understanding of the catalytic system at the atomic level. Dr. Tetard
is developing methods for direct imaging and measurement of defects as well as
bound species using scanning transmission electron microscopy and
functionalized-tip atomic force microscopy. A new technique combining atomic
force microscopy (AFM) hardware with Raman and infrared spectroscopy is being
developed to allow nano-scale analysis of bound species under conditions
relevant to macroscopic reactions. Dr. Blair is studying the kinetics and
reaction products of multi-gram batch reactions for carbon dioxide as well as
olefin hydrogenation. A multi-size ranged understanding of catalysis over
defects in 2D materials will foster innovation in the capture and utilization of
carbon dioxide.