* 1465260
* SaTC-EDU:EAGER:A Wiki Space for Information Security Education Exchange
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2017
* William Conklin, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2017
* USD 286,819.00

Information security remains a persistent and growing problem in the United
States due to ever-progressing reliance on information technologies and systems
to provide critical services and enable society's contemporary way of life. The
economics of computing favor performance and functionality over security and may
continue to do so for some time. This environment is created by graduates of
education programs, programs which can be argued to be lacking in emphasis on
security impacts associated with this new information age. The economics of
education are also pitted against cyber security education. Cyber security
education is a resource intensive endeavor that requires program refreshes on a
regular basis as technology changes and advances. The level of expertise
necessary to provide continual curricula development is also a barrier, which
reduces the number of institutions that are able to effectively keep up with the
advancement of technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is
to create a sharing community of educators from institutions in the Center of
Academic Excellence (CAE) program for Information Assurance and those wishing to
develop better educational resources for their programs. This community will be
reinforced with an online wiki maintained by the community. The mediated wiki
platform will assist in the mapping of resources and tools to the Knowledge Unit
(KU) system emplaced to cover the required learning areas in cybersecurity. This
wiki will allow sharing of educational materials, including texts, labs, tools,
and exams. This project will reduce the level of work required from educators to
build and retool classes to the rapidly evolving field of cybersecurity.