* 1465045
* Structures and excited state dynamics of self-assembled photonic structures
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2018
* George Schatz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2018
* USD 433,017.00

George Schatz of Northwestern University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
division to develop theoretical and computational approaches to study the rate
of energy flow in molecular assemblies and other optical devices that depend on
the flow of energy through an array of molecules. This research is part of an
important effort by chemists to develop new leaf-like materials in which
assemblies of molecules act as antenna structures to absorb sunlight and then
transport this energy to locations where other molecules convert it into
electrical energy. Schatz and his coworkers are developing a new theoretical
approach to describe this process, one which makes it possible to include the
coupling between light, and electrons and vibrational motions of the molecules
and surroundings, so that the rate of transport can be quantitatively determined
for structures that are much larger than have previously been accessible. The
research also includes studies of the assembly of the molecules into structures
that optimize energy flow, and there are extensive collaboration with
experimental groups who are making the structures. This project is carried out
in collaboration with undergraduates, graduate students and postdocs, Results
from this research are used in developing teaching material for college courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, a new theoretical method is
developed for characterizing the excited state dynamics of aggregates and
assemblies of dye chromophores that are of interest in photonic devices. In this
method, the traditional Förster approach for determining the rate of energy
transfer associated with interacting excitons is replaced by a time domain
approach in which the emitted radiation associated with the donor species is
described by classical electromagnetic theory and the resulting electric field
at the acceptor position is used to calculate a response function that describes
the energy transfer rate. This approach, which is borrowed from the optical
physics community, includes several factors that go beyond the Förster approach,
including the incorporation of retardation and complex electromagnetic boundary
conditions associated with the photonic structure. The research involves
generalizing this approach to describe the physical situation associated with
molecular chromophores in which point dipole emitters are replaced by
oscillating currents that act as antennas, and the dielectric response of the
surrounding medium is described by Lorentz oscillator models that enable the
description of spectral shifts due to exciton coupling. Extensions of the theory
include phonon motion, dephasing and relaxation, both incoherent and coherent
energy transfer, and nonlinear effects. Numerical implementation employs the
finite-difference time-domain method and other methods. The capabilities of the
proposed theory is being demonstrated by applications to chromophore aggregates
whose structures are determined from molecular dynamics simulations of the self-
assembly process. Examples of this type include peptide amphiphiles (with
embedded chromophores) that self-assemble to give micelle aggregates in which
the chromophores are stacked into organized structures. Also of interest are
periodic arrays of chromophores that are produced in metal organic framework
materials (MOFs) and DNA-linked nanoparticle superlattices. Emphasis in these
studies is on exciton transport properties that are useful in device
applications.