* 1465203
* Catalytic and Catalytically Relevant Formation, Activation and Functionalization of Covalent Bonds by Late Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* Karsten Krogh-Jespersen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2021
* USD 680,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Alan Goldman at Rutgers University is developing new
catalytic reactions to add molecules together to former larger, more complex
ones. The overall goal is to develop new catalysts and catalytic processes that
are both synthetically useful and practical. Professor Goldman is also studying
the reaction mechanisms (i.e., how the reactions work) and the factors that
control the chemistry of the catalytic reactions, which will help to optimize
the outcomes of the catalysis and to add to our fundamental knowledge base about
chemistry. The development of new catalytic conversions may lead to new routes
to products ranging from fuels to plastics to pharmaceuticals. Products from
catalysis technology have been estimated to account for nearly 20% of the U.S.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), so the potential impacts of such new chemistry
could be broad. Graduate and undergraduate students are receiving broad training
in chemical synthesis, characterization, mechanistic study, and computational
molecular design, which are important for success in any scientific problem-
solving endeavor related to catalysis. Participants in the project are beginning
a collaboration with the Liberty Science Center in Jersey City, NJ to co-design
an interactive touch-table exhibit for visitors to "virtually synthesize" common
household chemicals such as aspirin and plastics. Eventually the plan is to
expand this exhibit to other science centers, and possibly to other platforms
such as personal computers, tablets, or smart
phones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Goldman is studying fundamental oxidative
addition and M-X insertion reactions of late-transition-metal catalysts and
their microscopic reverse. New SiNP, PC(4-py)P, and chiral PCP pincer ligands
are being synthesized, complexed to iridium metal centers and studied for olefin
insertions into M-X bonds, cleavage and insertions into C-O bonds, and ortho-
directed insertions into aryl C-H bonds. Catalytic C-H bond functionalization is
often frustrated by the fact that potential reagents such as carbon monoxide
bind strongly bind to the coordination sites typically required to activate the
C-H bond. Professor Goldman is studying how Bronsted acids catalyze C-H addition
to metal carbonyl complexes that do not readily add additional equivalents of
carbon monoxide. This chemistry potentially is the means to develop a
hydrocarbon carbonylation catalyst. Fundamental studies of insertion into M-X
bonds and C-X addition/elimination reactions (particularly X = O and N) will
inform the development of new and more effective catalysts of this type. This
chemistry eventually could impact commodity and fine chemical synthesis
technology.