* 1465013
* Chemical Connectomics: Nonlinear Dynamics of Electrochemical Reaction Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Istvan Kiss, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 406,002.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Istvan Z. Kiss of
Saint Louis University to investigate complex, far-from-equilibrium charge
transfer chemical reactions that take place on networks imposed by dynamic
environments of electrochemical devices (e.g., sensors and batteries). The
identification of organizing principles and experimental characterization of
far-from-equilibrium systems have broad applications in physical, chemical, and
biological systems. The investigation is relevant to needs of industrial
applications of galvanic and electrolytic cells. The oscillatory electrochemical
media test theories on synchronization and network dynamics that have importance
in circadian rhythms and hypersynchronous neural discharges in epileptic
seizures. The project includes outreach activities aimed at middle school, high
school and college students and the general public through the "Nonlinear
Corner," and conveys novel scientific notions of nonlinear science and the
emergence of complex, intelligent behavior of abiotic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Professor Istvan Kiss and his research group
address three specific aims that are based on fundamental scientific problems in
analytical chemistry utilizing multi-electrodes, design specifics of batteries
and electrolysis cells, and energy distribution networks: (1) Test the
hypothesis that emergent electrochemical networks in multi-electrode
microfluidic flow cells can describe the complex dynamical phenomena, (2)
explore self-organized spatio-temporal behavior in cathode-anode multi-
electrodes, and (3) explore the pattern formation of electrochemical reactions
that take place on a designed network facilitated by a resistance interface. The
construction of versatile emergent and engineered networks provides a new
geometrical space for the chemical reactions to take place. The extraction of
network topology contributes to the establishment of Chemical Connectomics, the
science of connected reactions in dynamic environments.