* 1465067
* Excited States of New Ru(II) Complexes:  Controlling Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Claudia Turro, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2018
* USD 697,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Claudia Turro of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at The Ohio State University, in collaboration with
Professor Kim Dunbar (Texas A&M University) and Professor Randolph Thummel
(University of Houston), aims at understanding the steps that take place at very
early times (femtosecond to picosecond) after a transition metal complex absorbs
a photon of light. These studies are important in applications that include
solar energy conversion and photodynamic therapy. The project also includes the
design of new complexes that release a wider range of potential drugs more
efficiently, as well as those that exhibit dual-reactivity. These complexes will
be useful for the photo-release of "chemical payloads" when exposed to light and
to effect cell death via different mechanisms. The project combines ultrafast
laser spectroscopy, synthesis, and computation, and is therefore well suited to
the education of scientists at all levels. This collaborative team is also well
positioned to provide the highest level of education and training for students
underrepresented in science.

Ruthenium (II) complexes have been widely used in numerous areas of science,
including medicine, engineering, and materials science. Despite the fact that
[Ru(bpy)3]2+ (bpy = 2,2´-bipyridine) is the prototypical inorganic compound for
use in these areas, the ultrafast excited state dynamics and electronic
structure of related complexes remain, in most cases, poorly understood. For the
majority of these applications, deactivation through the low-lying ligand-field
(3LF) metal-centered dd states is undesirable, since it reduces the emission and
lifetime of the 3MLCT (metal-to-ligand charge transfer) excited state. In sharp
contrast, the application of photoinduced drug release is aimed at increasing
the population of the 3LF state(s) with Ru-L dissociative character. The major
focus of the project is to understand the basic principles that govern
photoinduced ligand exchange with the ultimate goal of being able to design new
systems with improved ligand exchange yields with the primary elements being to
effect efficient photorelease of strong ligands, use low energy visible and
near-IR light, and to involve multiple pathways following excitation. The latter
goal provides the potential to exhibit increased biological activity by virtue
of the production of two reactive species that act via vastly different
mechanisms, thus producing a "drug cocktail" contained in a single molecule.
Moreover, the basic knowledge gained regarding photoinduced ligand exchange will
also aid in the design or complexes that require the ligand exchange process to
be eliminated in order to increase the lifetime of the 3MLCT state.