* 1465284
* Mechanistic aspects of dipole-mediated intramolecular electron transfer:  Study of the photoinduced dynamics of charge hopping in anthranilamide structures
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Valentine Vullev, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2019
* USD 417,900.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Val Vullev of the Departments of
Bioengineering, Chemistry, and Biochemistry, and of the Materials Science and
Engineering Program at the University of California, Riverside will develop a
class of bio-inspired electrets with strong dipoles (electrets are the electric
analogues of magnets) and study how they mediate charge transfer. The research
could potentially improve the performance of solar cells, energy-storage devices
and organic electronics. This project lies at the interface of physical organic
chemistry and bio-inspired molecular engineering. Therefore, it provides a solid
foundation for outreach, recruitment, education and retention of diverse cohorts
of students with a wide range of interests in science and engineering. The
project also has an outreach component directed at students currently
underrepresented in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority
of studies investigating the dependence of charge-transfer (CT) kinetics on the
orientation of dipoles use protein helices. Such protein structures, however,
mediate CT via electron tunneling, which limits the distance of efficient CT.
This project focuses on a new class of dipolar molecular structures, based on
anthranilamides, that similar to protein helices have ordered amide and hydrogen
bonds resulting in large electric dipole moments. Unlike proteins, however, the
anthranilamides have extended pi-conjugation along their backbones, which is
expected to provide pathways for long-range CT. In this project, a diverse range
of anthranilamide molecular electrets will be developed to answer the following
questions: 1) By tuning the CT mechanism from tunneling to hopping, can the
range of charge transfer be significantly extended? 2) How will changing the
mechanism from tunneling to hopping affect CT rectification of forward charge
migration and the undesired charge recombination? 3) How the dipole-generated
fields affect charge trapping along CT pathways?