* 1465162
* Theoretical methods in chemistry and biophysics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Frank Brown, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Frank Brown of the University of California - Santa Barbara is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program of the
Chemistry Division for research that is helping us understand the structure and
function of the molecules that make up the membranes that enclose all the cells
in our bodies. These membranes, a combination of fat-like molecules, cholesterol
and proteins, are complex entities across which food and other substances enter
our cells while wastes and cellular products exit them. The investigators are
studying the ways these events occur at a fundamental physical and chemical
level. They are, thus, promoting the progress of science and having an impact on
a wide array of scientific topics involving the healthy functioning of living
things. The research is having a further broad impact through the training of
the next generation of scientists, both in the investigator's research
laboratory and through the distribution of software that results from this work.
In addition, the investigators are helping to coordinate outreach programs at
the UCSB institution that seek to involve elementary school students in science
and encourage them to consider careers in the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are developing theoretical
models, numerical methods and simulation algorithms for the study of lipid
bilayers, lipid and surfactant monolayers and DNA-modifying enzymes. In
particular, field-theoretic models for membrane structure are being refined at
two different levels of description suited to long-wavelength undulations and
short-wavelength lipid tilt/thickness deformations. The investigators are
generalizing the interfacial regularized Stokeslet methodology previously
developed by this group to incorporate compressibility and viscoelastic effects.
In a third project, the investigators are extending their analysis methods to
the development of improved kinetic schemes to analyze enzymatic turnover in
DNA-modificication. A number of applications of this work are expected,
including: (1) extracting quantitatively accurate values of membrane bending
moduli from molecular simulations; (2) interpreting NMR measurements on lipid
bilayers; (3) interpreting interfacial microbutton rheology measurements; (4)
relating membrane elastic properties determined via measurements taken at vastly
different length scales; (5) quantifying the influence of periodic boundary
conditions on simulated dynamics in lipid bilayers; (6) elucidating the kinetics
and processivity of DNA modifying enzymes; and (7) understanding thickness
fluctuations in lipid bilayers and their influence on neutron scattering
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Biophysics Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biolosciences (MCB) in Biosciences Directorate (BIO) and
the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program in the Division of Materials
Research (DMR) contribute to this award.