* 1465110
* SusChEM:  The development of recyclable catalysts and reagents using mechanochemistry.
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* James Mack II, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 08/31/2019
* USD 409,255.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program is supporting Professor James
Mack at the University of Cincinnati Department of Chemistry to explore a
solvent-free method known as mechanochemistry to discover new synthetic pathways
that are not observed in solution. This research seeks to develop
mechanochemical methods for many common synthetic reactions, with a goal of
reducing hazardous waste. One major focus is on the development of recyclable
catalysts through the use of polymer supported reagents and metal reaction
vials, which act as catalysts. The ability to recycle expensive catalysts will
significantly reduce the overall cost to conduct many reactions. Professor Mack
will integrate the research and educational components of this project through
the introduction of students to principles of environmentally benign chemistry.
His program fosters a research and learning environment with overlapping
experiences among high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. In this
environment, high school students are mentored by undergraduates, who are in
turn mentored by graduate students. These connections introduce younger students
to graduate education, as well as providing role models for success. The
mentorship experienced by students is especially beneficial to first generation
college students, many of whom have had no prior knowledge about graduate
education. This process is intended to increase the pipeline of STEM students,
especially women and underrepresented minorities

This research seeks to further develop a solvent-free synthetic method known as
ball-milling (a type of mechanochemistry) to improve the efficiency of chemical
reactions and to reduce hazardous solvent waste. Ball-milling is a procedure in
which solid chemical reactants are first placed inside a reaction vessel along
with a ball bearing. The vessel is sealed and placed inside a milling apparatus
where it is agitated at high speed. This agitation provides energy through the
steel ball to initiate a reaction. The present research focuses on the
development of recyclable catalysts through the use of polymer supported
reagents and metal reaction vials. The planned research will demonstrate new
activation pathways for polymer supported reagents as well as new mechanisms for
the activation of metal catalysts. Because mechanochemistry is a relatively new
field, many of the rules that govern reactions are not well understood. This
research will use metal reaction vials to facilitate metal catalyzed chemical
reactions. This will lead to greater understanding of the reactivity of metal
catalysts in a ligand and solvent-free environment. Additionally, the use of
polymer supported reagents under solvent-free conditions will provide new
mechanistic insights on the activation of polymer supports. Typically these
types of reactions are limited by the slow rate of diffusion; however, under
mechanochemical conditions this limitation is expected to be easily overcome.
Mechanochemical reactions will be compared to their solution counterparts.