* 1465184
* Water-Assisted Oxygen Insertion Reactions Over Supported Gold Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Lars Grabow, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Rauchfuss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 201,005.00

Due to recent advances in shale gas production, increased natural gas recovery,
and reduced natural gas prices, the United States has an abundance of cheap
natural gas. Methane, the primary component of natural gas, has found widespread
use as a fuel for electricity generation; however it is not a good feedstock for
the production of chemicals or transportation fuels such as gasoline or diesel.
This stems from the difficulty in selectively oxidizing methane by insertion of
an oxygen atom into a strong carbon-hydrogen bond while preventing the complete
combustion to carbon dioxide and water. Gold is known to be inert when exposed
to oxygen or air, but when it divided into small nanoparticles, it starts to
catalyze the oxidation of carbon monoxide. Dr. Grabow of the University of
Houston and Dr. Chandler of Trinity University have recently discovered a
mechanism whereby water acts as a co-catalyst during CO oxidation over gold
nanoparticles supported on titanium-oxide. They are now translating this
knowledge to enable the partial oxidation of methane and other alkanes to form
the corresponding alcohol. The team follows a collaborative and tightly coupled
approach using computational and experimental studies to quantify the
promotional effect of water on selective oxidation and to investigate the
dominant reaction mechanism for oxygen insertion into carbon-hydrogen bonds.
With over 7.72 trillion m3 of confirmed natural gas reserves, there is a huge
incentive to develop commercially-viable methane conversion processes to benefit
the U.S. economy and achieve national energy independence. The research
activities are integrated with broad-reaching educational efforts at the K-12,
undergraduate, graduate and professional level to broaden the participation of
minority students and increase the retention of at-risk students at both
participating universities. The University of Houston is a designated Hispanic-
Serving Institution and has the most ethnically balanced student body of all
major research institutions in the U.S. Trinity University provides research
active undergraduate education to San Antonio and the South Texas region, which
are largely populated by a traditionally underrepresented group in the STEM
disciplines. Together, the principal investigators have a strong record for
mentoring research projects for undergraduate, minority and female
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Lars Grabow of the University of Houston and
Dr. Bert Chandler of Trinity University are funded by the Chemical Catalysis
Program at NSF to study oxygen insertion reactions into carbon-hydrogen (C-H)
bonds over supported gold catalysts. The ultimate goal is to convert methane to
methanol selectively, and a rational approach to the problem requires the close
integration of theoretical (Grabow) and experimental (Chandler) techniques. The
prevailing challenge in all processes using methane as a feedstock is activating
the strong C-H bond; hence, the initial focus is on higher alkanes with weaker
C-H bonds to acquire pertinent knowledge about the oxygen (O) insertion
mechanism. To realize the possibility of using small amounts of water to improve
the activity and selectivity of oxidation reactions over supported gold (Au)
catalysts, the team quantifies the amount of surface water on different
supports, investigates the dominant reaction mechanism for oxygen insertion into
C-H bonds, and improves the product yield as guided by computational
predictions. The selected application, O insertion into C-H bonds of alkanes, is
a challenging fundamental problem in chemistry with far reaching technological
impact for upgrading of natural gas to benefit the U.S. economy and achieve
national energy independence. This concept can also be extended to other
difficult selective oxidation reactions, e.g. ethylene epoxidation. Research
activities are integrated with broad-reaching educational efforts at the K-12,
undergraduate, graduate and professional level to broaden the participation of
minority students and increase the retention of at-risk students at both
participating universities. Together, the principal investigators have a strong
record for mentoring research projects for undergraduate, minority and female
students.