* 1465064
* SusChEM: Stochastic Bethe-Salpeter Approach to Excited States in Large Molecules and Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Eran Rabani, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Professor Eran Rabani of the University of California, Berkeley is supported by
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods and the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry programs in the Chemistry Division (CHE) and
the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program in the Division of Materials
Research (DMR)to develop theoretical and computational approaches to study
electronically excited states in large molecular and nanoscale systems. There is
significant interest in the development of new nanostructured materials such as
nanocrystals, nanorods and their composites for light harvesting and energy
storage devices, with the ultimate goal of fabricating lightweight and high
efficiency devices. However, the lack of predictive tools to describe the
physical properties of such systems has been one of the major bottlenecks in the
design of nanomaterials with tailored properties. Rabani and his coworkers seek
to address this problem by working toward an accurate description of excited
electronic states, so-called "electron-hole excitations" in extended systems a
rather challenging theoretical/computational task. It is therefore the goal of
this research to develop a means to describe the excitonic level alignment and
the absorption spectrum with computational complexity that is scalable to
systems of experimental relevance at the nanometer scale. This is the major goal
of the present program. Graduate students and postdoctoral research associates
are involved in this research and are being trained in cutting edge theoretical
and computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To reduce the computational
complexity of describing optically excited states, Rabani and his research group
are developing a real-time formalism based on the Bethe-Salpeter equation, one
the most accurate methods to describe excited states in extended systems. The
Bethe-Salpeter approach is rather popular in condensed matter physics but has
been underused in chemistry. The real-time formalism allows them to reduce the
computational scaling to cubic, which is a significant improvement but not
sufficient for extended systems. Thus, to further reduce the computational cost,
efforts will be made to develop a stochastic formulation based on the time-
dependent description of the Bethe-Salpeter approach, leading to quadratic
scaling with system size. To test the accuracy of the new formalism, predictions
made by the time-dependent stochastic Bethe-Salpeter approach will be compared
with experimental measured quantities on nanocrystals, nanorods, and seeded
nanorods of varying dimensions. If successful, these efforts will make the
Bethe-Salpeter approach a handy tool to describe excited states in extended
molecular systems in much the same way that time-dependent density functional
theory is a handy tool for excited states in small molecular systems.