* 1465104
* Nonclassical Oxidation Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Seth Brown, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 560,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Seth Brown of the University of Notre Dame is developing new
types of catalysts to utilize oxygen to make new compounds and to remove
hydrogen from existing compounds. Catalysts are compounds that accelerate and
direct reactions toward desirable products without themselves being consumed.
Many catalysts contain a metal atom and surrounding organic compounds bound to
it, called ligands, and in most catalysts the reaction chemistry occurs on the
metal atom. Professor Brown is studying ways in which to make the ligand
participate in the catalysis along with the metal atom or to perform all of the
catalysis itself. The structural features of the catalysts and the mechanisms
through which the chemical bonds are made or broken are being studied, and this
information is being used to design new ligands that should perform better
catalysis. Because catalysis accounts for processes that total one third of the
global gross domestic product and a majority of the commercial chemical products
and chemical processes, the discovery of new or improved catalysts for organic
reactions can have a great impact on economic development and growth. The
research team investigating these issues includes high school students,
undergraduate students, and graduate students, with the aim of developing their
technical and intellectual skills to prepare them appropriately for further
training and careers in science or engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Brown is preparing new multidentate redox-active ligands to create environments
where "nonclassical" redox reactions can take place. One target is oxygen atom
transfer or dioxygen activation in which bonds to oxygen will be formed at the
metal center, but redox events will take place at the ligands. A key design
element is the use of high coordination numbers, which may stabilize small bite
angle intermediates such as peroxo complexes and allow the assembly of enough
ligands around the metal to marshal up to four electrons at a single site. A
second class of reactions being explored is based on concerted, purely ligand-
centered 1,2-dehydrogenations of substrates. These can be carried out even by
coordinatively saturated metal complexes, which may lead to greater catalyst
lifetimes. The scope of such reactions, and the possibility that orbital
symmetry constraints will steer the selectivity of such reactions, are being
explored. Novel catalysis mechanisms often open up new selectivity pathways, and
understanding what electronic and structural features make the reactions more
efficient may lead to improved catalysts with impact in the use or production of
chemicals and chemical fuels. A series of educational materials are being
developed to help bring introductory students up to speed on practical
approaches to chemical kinetics, allowing students to be intellectually engaged
with the work at an early stage in their studies.