* 1465289
* Reaction kinetics and solvation: from computational methods to practical theories
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Baron Peters, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2019
* USD 373,644.00

Baron Peters of the University of California, Santa Barbara, is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division for to develop simple and accurate theories to study chemical
reactions in solution. Such reactions are central to many natural and industrial
processes, including our own biochemistry. Current simulation approaches that
treat the solvent as a polarizable continuum have severe limitations. Other,
more sophisticated simulation approaches are able to predict rates but often do
not give any insight into the underlying mechanisms of the reaction. The ability
to predict rates without mechanistic understanding seems like an advantage, but
these analyses do not help researchers graduate from large scale computation to
simple, accurate, and understandable models. Simple theoretical models, such as
those developed in this project; help scientists engineer processes involving
complex reactions. Moreover, simple models can both predict rates and interpret
rate data from experiments. The proposed work will have potential impact on
chemistry, physics, biology, geology, materials science and engineering. Peters
and his research group develop software, documentation, and YouTube tutorials to
help others perform these analyses with LAMMPS (Large-scale Atomic/Molecular
Massively Parallel Simulator; Sandia National Laboratories), CHARMM (Chemistry
at HARvard Macromolecular Mechanics), and other widely used software packages.

The simple but accurate theories that have been developed for gas phase
reactions, surface reactions, and electron transfer reactions share one common
characteristic: they are built around a single reaction coordinate which
accurately summarizes the mechanism. In contrast, solvent reaction coordinates
remain elusive. Peters and coworkers propose a new strategy for constructing the
solvent coordinates using procedures that can be applied across broad families
of reactions with similar electrostatic characteristics. The approach combines
elements of continuum solvation approaches, variational transition state theory,
energy gap coordinates from electron transfer theory, and a new polarization
progress coordinate. The relative importance of these coordinates will be
determined using transition path sampling and likelihood maximization
approaches. Instead of directly generating rates, this computational analysis
guides the construction of simple rate theories that can be used to predict
trends across entire reaction families. These results are used to classify
reactions in solution into mechanistic families and to develop practical rules-
of-thumb for equilibrium and non-equilibrium solvation effects across the
different reaction families.