* 1465189
* Expanding the Scope of Donor/Acceptor Carbenoids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Huw Davies, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 08/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis program is supporting fundamental
research of Professor Huw M. L. Davies at Emory University. Professor Davies and
his students will employ chiral catalysts for the development of new
enantioselective methods in organic synthesis. The study explores reactions
induced by vinylogous reactions of metal-stabilized vinylcarbenes and has the
potential of generating entirely new transformations in an enantioselective
manner. The vinylogous reactions of vinylcarbenes are not yet well understood
and these studies are expected to contribute to the fundamental understanding of
rhodium carbene chemistry. Professor Davies will integrate the research and
educational components of this project within several new initiatives for
developing a collaborative and supportive environment for academic researchers.
A new Chemistry Research & Diversity Program is planned which will bring
professors from minority universities with 2 of their students to work on summer
research projects. A robust student-mentoring plan has been designed to ensure
the students become experts in their specific area of research and develop the
breadth of experience and the communication skills necessary to be highly
effective in their future careers. Professor Davies has developed many outreach
activities available to his students such as the Spelman Journal Club, science
cafes, the Atlanta Science Festival, Chemical Innovator Lecture Series,
videoconference short courses, and career development lectures by visiting
industrial speakers.

In this research, synthetic transformations of metal vinylcarbenes, proceeding
by an initial reaction occurring at the vinylogous position of the vinylcarbene,
will be explored. Methods will be developed to control the site of reactivity of
the metal vinylcarbenes by using either gold catalysts or sterically bulky
dirhodium catalysts. A number of novel stereoselective protocols of limited
prior precedence will be examined, including [4+3] cycloadditions, [4+2]
cycloadditions and crotylations, which will open up new possibilities for the
rapid construction of complex target molecules.