* 1465201
* Coherent and Incoherent Control in Material Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Tamar Seideman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2018
* USD 475,742.00

With this award, the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Method program in
the Chemistry division is supporting Dr. Tamar Seideman of Northwestern
University to develop and apply new theoretical and computational approaches for
controlling the properties of nanoscale devices and thus enhance their
functionalities. This research is focused on molecular or nanoscale electronics.
In one study, Seideman and coworkers introduce an approach to drive current
through junctions with light, rather than with voltage, in a way that
circumvents the earlier experienced light-induced damage. A second research
direction introduces a much needed approach to understanding transport
junctions, which enlists the sensitivity of spectroscopy to accurately
characterize the structure and chemical composition of molecular-scale
electronics. A third, more ambitious study, introduces a new control concept,
namely, quantum optimal environment engineering. Here the Seideman group aims to
develop a theory and a numerical method to optimize reaction outcomes using
reagents that are less costly than lasers. An application is planned to
manipulate charge transfer reactions with a view to enhancing the efficiency of
solar cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first of these studies builds on the
success of previous NSF-supported research, where Seideman introduced an
approach to coherent control of transport via semiconductor-based molecular-
scale electronics as a route to circumventing the difficulties associated with
conventional, metal-based molecular-scale electronics, which were noted in the
previous experimental literature. The current research goes beyond her earlier,
fully analytical solution, which was restricted to the 1- and 2-site bridge
cases and to Markovian dynamics, by developing a numerical method and applying
it to explore memory effects and multiple-site dynamics. The second research
direction explores current-induced Raman spectroscopy as a route to enlisting
the chemical sensitivity of Raman spectra to accurately characterize the
structure and chemical composition of molecular-scale junctions, and the
transport and current-driven dynamics they exhibit. Also under development is a
theory to determine, within a uniform approach, the transport, current-driven
dynamics and Raman spectra first for a simple adsorbed diatomic molecule and
next for a reduced dimensionality model of rhodamine 6G/silver. The third
project relies on recent research that shows that the environment can be
configured to steer the quantum system into entangled quantum states with high
accuracy, as well as to rapidly switch on and off multiple decay channels with
ultrafast time precision. Moreover, these environmental controls can potentially
allow steering the system into regions of the Hilbert space that are out of
reach of coherent control. Environmental engineering concepts are applied to
efficiently transform optically excited donor states into free charge carriers
via intermediate higher-lying bridge states, and to suppress the losses caused
by charge recombination in the polaron states via effective singlet-to-triplet
spin state conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.