* 1465075
* Manipulating photochemical reactivity through restricted bond rotations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Jayaraman Sivaguru, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2017
* USD 440,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism-B program is
supporting the fundamental research of Professor Jayaraman Sivaguru at North
Dakota State University, Fargo, ND. Professor Sivaguru is developing a general
strategy for transferring axial chirality to point chirality during chemical
reactions initiated by UV and/or visible light. By using atropisomeric chiral
chromophores that feature restricted bond rotations, the photochemistry and
photophysics will be investigated in detail. The outcome from the proposed
studies will provide avenues to control excited state chemistry which complement
existing thermal methodologies. These studies will enable the development of a
coherent approach to gain fundamental understanding of molecular interactions in
light initiated reactions. Professor Sivaguru will integrate the research and
educational components through the PICNICS (Parents Involvement with Children,
Nurturing Intellectual Curiosity in Science) program. The PICNICS program is an
outreach program for high school students in the Fargo-Moorhead area that
exposes them to research and is expected to have a long-term impact on the
career path they take in their undergraduate studies. The research and outreach
activities provide an excellent training avenue for graduate students to enhance
their intellectual scientific partnership during their doctoral studies. The
outcome of the research program will have a significant impact on the basic
concepts related to photoscience and asymmetric photochemistry and will broadly
influence other fields such as synthetic chemistry, nanoscience and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is aimed at building a
comprehensive knowledge and understanding of excited state processes by
evaluating chiral energy transfer in systems featuring atropisomeric
chromophores during light initiated reactions. Through molecular restriction
built within these chromophores, it is anticipated that new aspects of excited
state reactivity will be observed. The investigation will explore systems
featuring restricted bond rotations to understand new dynamic aspects and how
they can be harnessed to control excited state reactivity initiated by UV and/or
visible light and compare their photo-reactivity with the corresponding achiral
non-atropisomeric systems.