* 1465248
* Frontiers of Coarse-graining
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Gregory Voth, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2021
* USD 807,425.00

Gregory Voth of the University of Chicago is supported by an award from the
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program of the Chemistry Division for
research to develop computer simulation methods for a number of highly complex
systems, including living systems and a variety of artificial materials.
Although the basic atomic and molecular structure of these systems is understood
in a general way, it is not clear how to create accurate computer simulations of
them that capture all the relevant details in a fast enough calculation to be
practical. The investigators are extending their research that has already
proved highly successful in developing computer simulations of a number of
systems. Applications include, for example, an unraveling of the details of
viral infection, the development of new materials inspired by biology, and the
use of biomass and carbon sequestration to help protect the environment. The
work is, thus, having an impact on the progress of science by influencing our
basic understanding of the molecular structure and function of a wide array of
systems. It is having a further broad impact on the training of the next
generation of scientists and on broadening participation in science through the
involvement in the research of students from underrepresented minority groups in
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are focusing on the development
and application of systematic multiscale theory and computer simulation methods.
The methods being developed in this research fall in the realm of coarse-
graining techniques in which conceptual advances drawn from statistical
mechanics, quantum mechanics and condensed phase dynamics are combined. The
objective of these new multiscale theories and simulation methods is to connect
molecular behavior with phenomena occurring at significantly larger length and
time scales in complex systems. The mathematical basis for this work is the
statistical mechanical implementation of force-matching and related variational
approaches, as well as nonequilibrium statistical mechanics and quantum
mechanics. Various connected resolutions of the theoretical framework are being
considered, including highly (ultra) coarse-grained, quasi-molecular coarse-
grained and quantum mechanically coarse-grained scales.