* 1465049
* RUI: Carbaporphyrins, Carbachlorins and Related Conjugated Macrocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Timothy Lash, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 02/29/2020
* USD 320,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis program is supporting Professor Timothy
Lash at Illinois State University to explore the synthesis, characterization,
and reactivity of porphyrin-like macrocycles. Porphyrins are large-ring
heterocycles which possess many valuable properties and have applications in
materials science, catalysis and medicine. Porphyrins are widely distributed in
nature as catalytic sites in enzymes. Far less research has been reported on
porphyrin-like macrocycles or porphyrinoids even though these systems
demonstrate properties that complement those of true porphyrins. This research
will lead to more efficient routes to carbaporphyrinoid systems, in which one
nitrogen is replaced by carbon, and will also provide access to new classes of
porphyrin analogues. These projects will improve our understanding of
fundamental chemistry concepts such as aromaticity. The new porphyrinoids may
find applications in the preparation of fine chemicals, since metalated
derivatives can be used to construct catalysts for chemical synthesis. Broader
impacts of this research lie in applications of these new substances and in
student training. The target compounds have potential medicinal applications as
photosensitizers in photodynamic therapy. These projects provide an excellent
environment for training undergraduates and M.S.-level graduate students in the
field of organic synthesis. Students will be exposed to the multidisciplinary
nature of modern scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research,
synthetic routes to novel carbaporphyrins and related porphyrinoids, including
"neo-confused" porphyrins, carbachlorins and dicarbaporphyrinoids, will be
developed. Further application of the [3 + 1]-variant on the MacDonald reaction
will allow the synthesis of porphyrinoids with pyranone, phenalene, pyrene and
benz[f]indene units, and these studies will be extended to the preparation of
fused carbaporphyrinoid dimers. A new synthetic approach to carbaporphyrinoids
will also be developed using carbatripyrrin intermediates. This strategy will
allow more direct access to carbaporphyrins, heterocarbaporphyrins and
dicarbaporphyrins starting from indene or cyclopentadiene. Carbachlorins have
been little studied to date, and new routes to dihydroporphyrinoids will also be
developed. Carbachlorins have useful properties in their own right and may also
act as precursors to carbaporphyrins. Furthermore, syntheses of adj-
dicarbaporphyrins will be investigated using a base catalyzed MacDonald [2 +
2]-approach and attempts will be made to prepare tri- and tetracarbaporphyrinoid
systems. The properties of this new collection of macrocycles will be
investigated.