* 1465138
* Quantum chemical methods for studying photon and electron-driven processes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Spiridoula Matsika, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2019
* USD 479,998.00

Spiridoula Matsika of Temple University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop and apply theoretical methods to better understand electron-
driven processes. Electrons are ubiquitous in nature. Collisions of electrons
with atoms and molecules are essential in biology and chemistry, as well as in
technology. Examples of electron-driven phenomena can be found in interstellar
chemistry, radiation chemistry, environmental chemistry, stability of waste
repositories, plasma processing of materials for microelectronic devices and
other applications. A major complication in electron-driven processes is that
the in that the states that are involved are meta-stable since they can lose the
electron via a process known as autodetachment. Matsika and her research group
develop quantum mechanical approaches to treat metastable states and their
behavior in electron-driven processes. They apply these methods to better
understand DNA damage by radiation.. Low energy electrons can cause DNA strands
to break and thus the interaction of low energy electrons with DNA is of major
importance. This research will be carried out by a research team involving
collaboration of undergraduate and graduate students with postdoctoral
associates.

Electron-driven processes have several similarities to photo-initiated
processes, and progress made by the Matsika group and others in the latter field
can be used to enhance the tools available in the former processes. In both
photo-initiated and electron-driven phenomena electronically excited states are
generated which are far from equilibrium and short lived. Nonadiabatic events
are crucial and conical intersections are the rule rather than the exemption in
both cases. Specific goals of this work are: 1) Development of efficient
multireference configuration interaction (MRCI) methods for metastable states.
The complex absorbing potential (CAP) approach is used in combination with MRCI
to obtain both the energies and lifetimes of these states. A combination of
conventional MRCI methods and CAP/MRCI are used to study potential energy
surfaces, conical intersections, and nonadiabatic events related to resonances.
2) Theoretical studies of dissociative electron attachment (DEA) in nucleobases
using the approaches developed in part (1). In order to address DEA in
nucleobases the resonances are identified first, followed by explorations of the
pathways leading to DEA and the experimentally observed products. The
methodology developed will be implemented in publicly available computational
software.