* 1465226
* Thermodynamics and Structure of Chemically Heterogeneous Solid-Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Brian Laird, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 11/30/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Brian B. Laird of the University of Kansas is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division for the theoretical and computational study of solid-liquid interface.
Such interfaces are common in nature and technology, from the commonly observed
interface between ice and water to the surfaces of nanoparticles in solution.
Understanding the structure and thermodynamics of such interfaces is important
in a broad array of fields including chemistry, materials science, nano-
engineering, metallurgy, colloidal science and biophysics. For example, the
energy cost in forming a particular solid-liquid interface control whether the
liquid completely covers (or wets) the solid surface or instead, beads up into
droplets, like water on a freshly waxed car. Direct experimental study of solid-
liquid interfaces, however, is difficult - especially for metallic systems where
high temperatures and lack of transparency to spectroscopic probes severely
limit experimental study. As a result, computational methods have been crucial
in developing a detailed atomic-level picture of the interfacial region. In this
work, molecular simulation techniques are used to examine, at an atomic level,
the properties of so-called chemically heterogeneous solid-liquid interfaces;
namely, interfaces in which the solid and liquid phases are significantly
different in chemical composition. The particular systems used in this study
were chosen specifically to address fundamental questions in interface science,
while at the same time be relevant to specific technological applications, such
as understanding the stability of nanoparticles in solution, mechanisms for
metal embrittlement and the growth of sapphire nanowires. The project also
contributes to the training of students and postdocs in the techniques of
computational chemistry, liquid-state physics and materials science and affords
them a considerable experience in advanced scientific programming. These skills
have wide use in a vast array of applications in chemistry, engineering,
materials science, pharmaceutical science, biology and physics and gives them
considerable marketability in any aspect of computational science and
technology.

The overall goal of this proposed research is to understand, on a fundamental
molecular level, how the thermodynamic and structural properties of chemically
heterogeneous solid-liquid interfaces are shaped by atomic and molecular
interactions and interfacial geometry. This effort requires both (a) the
development, evaluation and application of new computational methods and force
fields to study the interfaces between condensed phases and (b) the extension of
existing methods to classes of systems beyond those for which the methods were
developed. In this project, a concerted program of method development,
molecular-dynamics simulations and applied statistical mechanics is developed to
perform a systematic study of the thermodynamics and structure of chemically
heterogeneous solid-liquid interfaces. The project focuses specifically on three
classes of systems: (a) Chemically heterogeneous metal/metal solid-liquid
interfaces, in particular a study of the interface between aluminum and liquid
gallium, which is of interest as a model system for the study of liquid-metal
embrittlement. (b) Metal/metal-oxide solid-liquid interfaces using the
alumina(s)/Al(l) interface as a test-bed - a system which provides a rare
opportunity to directly compare experiment and simulation results for a solid-
liquid interface at the atomic level. (c) Fluids at curved surfaces. The
curvature dependence of the interfacial free energy for a number of systems is
investigated including fluids at corrugated surfaces, convex colloidal particles
and convex surfaces. Results are examined to assess the validity of Morphometric
Thermodynamics, a recently developed theory of curved surface thermodynamics.