* 1465082
* SusChEM:  Insights into the Surface Chemistry of Water Oxidation on Pure and Modified Hematite Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Bruce Koel, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2018
* USD 498,223.00

SusChEM: Insights into the Surface Chemistry of Water Oxidation on Pure and
Modified Hematite Surfaces&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solutions for supplying
sustainable energy, in particular our demand for fuels, will likely require
developments in photoelectrocatalysis that enable us to go beyond only
electricity generation. Hematite (iron oxide)-based materials are promising for
water oxidation using sunlight, a reaction that currently limits performance in
photoelectrocatalytic devices for generating hydrogen from water splitting or
hydrocarbon fuel from carbon dioxide reduction. Iron oxide is an attractive
photoelectrode material because it absorbs 40% of the solar spectrum, and is
cheap, abundant, nontoxic, and stable against corrosion. Iron oxide is also very
inefficient for energy conversion. This can be addressed by modifying the
surface with other materials to improve performance. This project aims to
develop a fundamental understanding of the surface chemistry of water oxidation
on pure and modified hematite surfaces, which aid the development of new
materials and future solar-driven photocatalytic devices. The work involves
graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral research associates
learning and collaborating on cutting-edge approaches in chemistry, surface
science, and nanotechnology for discovering new catalysts and advancing
sustainable energy production. The research results are integrated into
undergraduate and graduate courses and undergraduate and K-12 educational
outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division funds Dr. Bruce Koel of Princeton University
to study the fundamental surface chemistry and processes associated with water
oxidation on hematite (alpha-Fe2O3)-based photoanodes. The efficiency of this
reaction must be increased to enable several transformative solar fuel
production technologies to be utilized for future sustainable energy production.
Iron oxide is attractive because of its solar absorption spectrum and abundance,
but it is very inefficient. One strategy is to improve reaction kinetics and
overpotentials by surface modifications with co-catalysts or by doping. Dr. Koel
and his group establish composition-activity relationships on well-defined pure
and modified single crystal alpha-Fe2O3 electrodes, with heteroatoms localized
at the surface and subsurface. They also experimentally identify and
characterize surface-bound species in order to investigate key aspects of the
water oxidation mechanism. Measurements include using in operando techniques in
which the electrode surface is probed during oxidation rate measurements.
Insights provided by this work benefit the rational design of nanostructured
catalysts and their applications in energy conversion. This is a Sustainable
Chemistry, Engineering &amp; Materials (SusChEM) proposal.