* 1465043
* SusChem-GOALI: Sustainable C-H Borylation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Jossian Oppenheimer, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 586,203.00

With this GOALI award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professors Milton Smith and Robert Maleczka of Michigan
State University and Jossian Oppenheimer of Dow Chemical Company to develop new
catalytic reactions that form carbon-boron bonds. Molecules with boron-carbon
bonds are valuable building blocks in pharmaceutical, agrochemical, and
specialty electronics industries. They can be directly synthesized by reacting
boron-containing compounds and carbon-hydrogen bonds in a process called carbon-
hydrogen borylation. The most efficient and robust catalysts for carbon-hydrogen
borylation utilize iridium, which is the least abundant metal in the Earth's
crust. For sustainable practice using iridium, it is critical to recycle the
metal and the ligands involved in the catalysis. There are two challenges in
improving the sustainability of this chemistry. The first pertains to the
abundance of iridium, and this university-industry collaborative group is
focusing on improving the iridium recycling in the catalytic process. The second
challenge pertains to the boron reagents used in carbon-hydrogen borylation.
These compounds are currently made using lengthy processes that utilize
hazardous reagents and generate considerable chemical waste. This group is
working on developing "greener" approaches to synthesizing these boron reagents
with the goal of reducing waste, improving safety, and lowering costs. The
chemistry developed in this research could be broadly adopted both in scientific
research as well as in commercial applications. Students participating in this
research project are experiencing the work environment and practices in an
industrial research and development setting.

The team is exploring various strategies to recycle the metal and ligand in
carbon-hydrogen borylation, including supporting catalysts on surfaces with the
aim of translating selectivities in homogeneous catalyst systems to
heterogeneous ones. New ligands are being synthesized to modulate the reactivity
and selectivity of the catalyst and to anchor catalysts on a silica surface.
Catalysts are being characterized and the reaction chemistry is being quantified
using an array of analytical techniques. The team is also exploring strategies
to develop more facile syntheses of the boron reagents that are used in
stoichiometric amounts in the carbon-hydrogen borylation chemistry. New
approaches to boron-boron bond formation are being developed to minimize the
number of steps and improve the scalability of current synthetic routes to this
class of reagents, and smaller alkoxide ligands on the boron center are being
examined in hopes of making the boron reagents cheaper and easier to obtain.
Both research aims are critical to improving the sustainability of carbon-
hydrogen borylation and could be broadly adopted both in scientific research as
well as in commercial applications.