* 1465263
* SusChem: Innovation Inspired by Amides: Oxidative Ni-catalysis, Cascade Acylations, and Green Peptide Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Vy Dong, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 06/30/2019
* USD 585,958.00

The Chemical Synthesis and the Catalysis Programs are co-funding a project by
Professor Vy Maria Dong from the University of California at Irvine that aims to
identify environmentally benign and efficient methods for synthetic chemistry.
Professor Dong's research team is focused on the study of inexpensive and earth
abundant metals as constituents in catalysts that allow the formation of common
linkages in organic molecules. The project provides practical methods for making
molecules by minimizing both costs and waste. An outreach program created by
Professor Dong focuses on a conference/workshop to support and promote women in
the field of organic synthesis. This meeting provides an avenue for graduate
students in Southern California to network, collaborate, and exchange
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Dong's research project impacts the
synthesis of a wide-range of molecules that contain the commonly occurring ester
and amide linkage. The use of base-metal catalysts contributes to the nations
need for more efficient and sustainable chemistry. The pursuit of oxidative Ni-
catalysis is an unexplored mode of reactivity that enables the conversion of
aldehydes into esters, amides, and ketones. This platform provides a unique
avenue for enantioselective reductions and regioselective acylations. The
stereoselective acylations described have the potential to impact synthetic
routes to a vast number of natural products that bear chiral ester and acetamido
ester motifs. Studies on the mechanism of this catalytic process impact related
cooperative catalytic methodology. The final aim pursues an environmentally
benign peptide synthesis as a new approach to a central problem in synthesis
with widespread applications.