* 1465216
* Feedbacks between Vegetation, Aerosol and Cloud Processes Using Observations and a Unified Regional Climate Model
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,04/30/2021
* Lixin Lu, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 04/30/2021
* USD 648,866.00

The impacts of clouds and aerosols on terrestrial carbon and water cycles and
the resultant feedbacks to atmospheric processes are core in understanding land-
atmosphere coupling. This project will advance our understanding of vegetation-
CO2-aerosol-cloud interactions, and improve the representation of CO2- and
aerosol- induced feedbacks within a regional-scale modeling system. This study
will use outreach to broaden K-12 education and the inform the public on these
important interactions to help us better understand the earth's climate system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will merge the existing CSU-RAMS coupled
biosphere-atmosphere modeling system (SiB-RAMS) with the cloud-resolving
Aerosol-RAMS (that includes direct and indirect effects) to form an integrated,
process-based Vegetation-Aerosol-Cloud modeling system (VAC-RAMS). This will
allow us to better understand spatial and temporal variability in land surface
fluxes of energy, water, and CO2, induced by clouds, aerosols and cloud-aerosol
interactions. The study will also identify ecosystem feedbacks that are critical
to cloud-aerosol interactions and quantify these feedbacks using VAC-RAMS and
observations from a 2007 field campaign. This will allow the investigators to
assess the importance of aerosol forcing on clouds through biophysical and
biogeochemical pathways.