* 1465113
* Acceptor-Acceptor Carbenoids in Selective Insertions and Cyclizations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Jon Rainier, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program is supporting Professor Jon
Rainier at the University of Utah to study the conversion of vinyl
diazophosphonates and diazo vinylphosphonates into acceptor-acceptor Rh carbenes
and use the carbenes in insertion reactions with alcohols, amines, and thiols.
Included in this work will be the examination of novel substrates and reactions
having unique properties. The inspiration for many of these substances and
reactions came from both naturally and non-naturally occurring small molecules
that have been shown to be biologically active. As a consequence, these studies
will generate new materials of potentially high impact in the chemical and
pharmaceutical industry. Professor Rainier will integrate the research and
educational components of this project into the teaching curriculum at the
University of Utah as well as into his work with the American Chemical Society
Student Affiliates. By bringing research projects into the undergraduate
curriculum, Professor Rainier hopes to inspire the next generation of scientists
to careers in chemistry. Through his involvement with the Student Affiliates,
Professor Rainier has reached out to many elementary and middle school students
through hands on experiments, workshops and demonstrations in an attempt to
promote curiosity and STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research,
new methods involving acceptor-acceptor vinyl carbenes will be developed for the
synthesis of phosphonate containing materials and small molecules. The work that
will be carried out in pursuit of these goals is unique in that it will both
provide a better fundamental understanding of the properties of phosphonate
containing carbenes and in that it will have practical value. Professor Rainier
and his group will explore the effect of electronic and steric perturbations on
metal carbenes and substrates on the insertion chemistry of vinyl
diazophosphonates. Over the course of this work, a range of phosphonate-
containing small molecules will be generated. Preliminary evidence suggests that
these products may have potential as bioactive small molecules and as ligands
for functionalized iron nanoparticles, themselves with possible application in
the delivery of small molecules and genes in biological systems.