* 1465052
* Energy funneling in plasmonic nanocrystal composites for photocatalytic production of solar fuels
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Mikhail Zamkov, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Rauchfuss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 374,000.00

Energy funneling in plasmonic nanocrystal composites for photocatalytic
production of solar fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Mikhail Zamkov of Bowling
Green State University is developing a novel model system for solar energy
conversion in colloidal nanostructures aimed toward improving their
photocatalytic activity. The proposed nanomaterial architecture is designed to
funnel the solar light into the center of a composite nanoparticle via a built-
in antenna. The absorbed radiation is then routed toward the exterior of the
nanoparticle to drive catalytic reactions on its surface. To enable an efficient
catalytic cycle, a novel type of energy transfer mechanism between the antenna
and the catalyst is employed. The proposed innovation makes use of judiciously
engineered interfaces between inorganic domains of the composite nano-object to
ensure a seamless transfer of the solar energy across the photocatalytic system.
The catalytic nanostructures are rendered soluble, which allows combing the
benefits of homogenous reactions on the surface (excellent activity and
selectivity) with the facility of the heterogeneous systems to recycle the
catalyst. These materials are particularly suited to drive aqueous phase
reactions, including hydrogen production and environmental clean-up, with
enhanced reactivity under the solar flux. The proposed project helps the
investigator in his effort to continue to bring in several students from
underrepresented groups each summer for a full-time research internship in the
lab. The investigator also interfaces with several industrial partners to
provide the undergraduate researchers with industrial laboratory
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Chemical
Catalysis Program, Dr. Mikhail Zamkov of Bowling Green State University focuses
on the synergy of novel synthetic strategies and ultrafast spectroscopy
techniques to explore a new class of photocatalytic materials utilizing
composite colloidal nanostructures. The proposed nanomaterials combine several
inorganic domains in a single nano-reactor designed to efficiently convert the
solar radiation into a catalytically active state. The key innovation of the
nanomaterial architecture lies in the plasmon-assisted light-harvesting scheme,
which takes advantage of the strong electro-magnetic field that exists in metal
nanoparticles to boost the production of excitons in the surrounding
semiconductor shell. The excitation energy of the shell is then relayed to
suitable oxidation/reduction catalysts on the surface. To ensure that different
constituents of the composite nano-object work seamlessly, inter-domain
interfaces are grown using molecular epitaxy. Such stoichiometric bonds, either
covalent or ionic, reduce the density of defect states that dissipate the
excitation energy enabling a high throughput of the absorbed radiation. The
catalytic performance of the investigator's colloidal nanostructures are tested
using common redox reactions in aqueous media, while the energy transfer
processes are investigated using ultrafast spectroscopy techniques. As an active
member of Building Ohio's Sustainable Energy Future and Science, Engineering
&amp; Technology Gateway Ohio programs, Professor Zamkov involves small teams of
undergraduate students in this research project, introducing them to general
concepts in ultrafast spectroscopy, material science, and chemical synthesis.
Special efforts are made to involve minority students and students from
underrepresented groups. Professor Zamkov also interfaces with several
industrial partners to provide the undergraduate researchers with industrial
laboratory experience.