* 8700765
* Kinetics and Thermodynamics of Gas-Phase Electron-Transfer  Reactions
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1990
* John Eyler, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 11/30/1990
* USD 190,000.00

This research project will involve the development of experimental data and a
theoretical framework for the transfer of electrons between metal-containing
molecules in the gas phase. Although such reactions in solutions have been under
investigation for several decades, many details of mechanism remain obscure
because of the difficulty of evaluating the role of solvent molecules. This gas-
phase study will be conducted in the absence of solvent and is expected to allow
an evaluation of the intrinsic factors which govern the rates of this extremely
important class of chemical and biochemical reactions. Redox and photochemical
processes involving primarily metal-containing reactants in the gas phase will
be studied by using Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry
(FTICR-MS). A major goal of the project will be to provide data on gas-phase
redox reactions of large polyatomic reactants, so that this class of reactions
may be compared and contrasted to electron transfer reactions of small molecules
in the gas phase ( i.e. atoms and diatomics) and large reactants in condensed-
phase processes. Kinetics and thermodynamic properties will be measured for
electron-transfer reactions involving a variety of reactants, theories will be
developed to model gas-phase redox reactions of polyatomic species, and solution
and gas-phase results will be correlated. The metallic species studied will be
primarily volatile organometallics, but less volatile metal complexes and non-
metallic reactants will also be investigated using laser desorpotion. Variation
of pressure, temperature and laser excitation will be used to probe the
energetics of the potential surfaces. Marcus theories and other models will be
applied to correlate and systematize the dependence of rates on the experimental
variables. The first extensive set of relative adiabatic ionization potentials
for the metallic complexes will be determined. The role of electron transfer
mechanisms in the chemistry of anionic organometallic nucleophiles will be
illuminated by investigation of the kinetics and thermodynamics of displacement
reactions at carbon centers.