* 8700064
* Concurrent Computation and the Structure of Applied and     Biological Neural Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* James Bower, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 02/28/1991
* USD 906,593.00

The area of neuroengineering and parallel computing are closely related and
their developments go hand in hand. Of the various ways in which a parallel
computer can be implemented with individual computational processing elements,
the hypercube is one. It is arrived at by taking the sequence of a point to a
line, a line to a square, a square to a cube and subsequent generalizations to
hypercube architectures. A processor is located at each vertex. Such a topology
is not as tightly connected as others but is sufficient to allow significant
speed-up in those calculations involving processors in relatively close
neighborhoods. The neural architecture is connected much more densely. It is
also analog and involves nonlinear summing of signals with subsequent
thresholding (taking a large signal or nothing depending upon whether the sum is
large or small). It is thus quite different, although it has parallelism in
common. The hypercube is a good parallel computer on which to study the behavior
of potential neuroengineering systems, for example an artificial vision system.
Vice versa, the neuroengineering approaches in development are excellent tools
by which to control the loading of the processors in a parallel machine such as
the hypercube and to control the actual numerical procedure itself. The fields
of endeavor are highly cross-disciplinary. The benefits to the engineering
profession by support of such a parallel computing effort will be enormous in
terms of speeds of processing and calculations which will be attained, as well
as large problems which can ultimately be handled. The orientation of the
specific cross-disciplinary team is that of neuroengineering. This is an effort
which involves vision in particular and is directed towards its understanding
and its operation as an engineering system. In addition, effort is being
directed towards understanding of learning and memory processes. Learning in
particular involves complex processing which for the moment is too complex and
too little understood to be effectively, if at all, integrated into the hardware
of a neuroengineered chip or optical system.