* 8700414
* Interactive and Non-Linear Effects of Predation, Intraspeci-fic Competition and Environmental Variation Upon Species    Persistence in Marine Soft-Bottom Communities
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Romuald Lipcius, Chesapeake Research Consortium Inc
* Standard Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 12/31/1989
* USD 80,956.00

Scientists in the field of marine ecology have long sought to understand the
complex interactions that occur between various organisms in a natural
community, and how the physical aspects of their environment influence such
important ecological parameters as survival, reproduction, the introduction of
new individuals into a population, and the maintenance of population sizes. Much
has been learned about the direct effects of one organisms on the population of
another (e.g., a predator on a prey species, or a superior competitor on another
living thing sharing the same habitat). More complex indirect effects are still
not well understood nor predictable, yet these types of interactions can have
dramatic controlling influences on the dynamics and maintenance of natural
populations. For example, estuarine animals that rely on planktonic larvae to
sustain populations can be drastically impacted by offshore changes in predatory
fishes that control larval abundance. Dr. Lipcius is a young ecologist who has
already exhibited great productivity and innovation in his research, much of it
dealing with important resources species (lobsters and crabs). Dr. Lipcius has
proposed a sophisticated investigation of such complex, higher-order
interactions that work to control animal populations in coastal estuaries. The
animals he will study include some very important commercial species; the blue
crab, the soft-shelled clam, and the littleneck clam. This research should not
only provide some needed data to test new theory on the organization of natural
communities via higher- order interactions, but it will also yield some
important ecological information useful in the management of valuable fisheries
resources.