* 8700214
* PRF: Phylogeny of the Polyalthia hypoleuca Complex          (Annonaceae) of Malesia: Morphological and Molecular Data
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1989
* Steven Rogstad, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1989
* USD 52,800.00

The Polyalthia hypoleuca species complex (Annonaceae) is a group of six closely
related (monophyletic) species that grow sympatrically in various combinations
throughout the lowland tropical rain forests of Southeast Asia. Restriction
enzyme activity variation of ribosomal and chloroplast DNA extracted from dried
leaves will be investigated as a means of comparing genetic variation within and
among populations of each species, and among species. DNA variation within and
among populations of each species will not only be informative as to genetic
variability in tree populations of the humid tropics, but will illuminate the
constant genetic variation among species. This significant interspecific genetic
variation will be analyzed cladistically (DNA of the most plausible outgroups
will also be examined) to provide a molecular phylogenetic hypothesis for the P.
hypoleuca complex, and this will be compared with a phylogenetic hypothesis
derived from morphological data. The most strongly supported (congruent)
phylogeny emerging from these analyses will be used to examine the radiation of
the members of this group from a common ancestor with regard to ecological
differentiation and biogeographical distributions of the species. Results will
be interpreted in relation to the paleogeography of the region, and to
hypothesized differences in evolutionary forces between tropical and temperate
forests. Dr. Steven H. Rogstad will perform this postdoctoral fellowship
research during two years of tenure at Washington University (St. Louis, MO).