* 8700713
* U.S.-Denmark Cooperative Research on Physical Properties    Models for Molecules Using Computer-Aided Process Design
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* John O'Connell, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 12/31/1989
* USD 500.00

This award will allow Dr. John P. O'Connell, University of Florida, and one of
his graduate students to collaborate with Drs. Rafiqul Gani and Aage
Fredenslund, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark. They will use
computer-aided design methods to develop and test models of physical properties
of chemical compounds. Traditional methods have used specific models dealing
with specific chemicals and properties. These methods are difficult and costly
to use, and the models are not easily generalizable. The proposed research will
try to alleviate some of the problems with past research by developing
techniques and program structures which allow the use of specific models within
the framework of generalized design programs. Dr. O'Connell has developed
specific models for properties in specific situations, and he is an expert on
theories of modern models. The Danish group is well-known for its work on more
general design structures and for its large data bank of phase equilibria in
vapor-liquid and liquid-liquid systems. The U.S. and Danish researchers have
productively worked together and they have exchanged a number of visits. They
will do much of the proposed work by telephone, but occasional visits to each
others' laboratories will be necessary.