* 8700588
* Hydraulic Model Data for Two-Dimensional Dam-Break Flows
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/1987,12/31/1988
* M Hanif Chaudhry, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* J. Eleonora Sabadell
* 12/31/1988
* USD 34,538.00

This work will take advantage of the availability of a 1:50 scale physical model
of the Long Dam that includes part of the upstream reservoir and the downstream
river, built under the sponsorship of the Washington Water power Co., and
presently been used to determine the maximum water levels at the powerhouse in
case the dam fails. The testing program will be modified slightly by measuring
simultaneously the water levels at sixteen locations (instead of one or two)
using precision capacitance probes. The tests will be repeated at least once.
The propagation o> the wave front will be recorded using a high-speed camera,
and maximum water levels on both banks will be recorded using a high-speed
camera, and maximum water levels on both banks will be measured. The complete
data set recorded in magnetic tape will be made available to interested
engineers and scientists. The purpose of this project is to produce quality
currently not available, laboratory data to be used in the development of new
two- dimensional mathematical models, and in the validation of existing models
that simulate the generation and propagation of dam-break waves. The work will
be conducted at the Albrook Hydraulic Lab., Washington State University, one of
the largest in the country. The P.I. is highly qualified to carry out this
project. Consequently an award is recommended.