* 8700944
* Dissertation Research: Theoretical and Experimental         Investigations of Fisher's Sex Ratio Theory
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* James Bull, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 12/31/1989
* USD 5,777.00

R.A. Fisher first proposed that there is a mechanism of selection for the
evolution of a sex ratio of 1/2 males and 1/2 females in populations in which
there is equal investment in males of females. Although the principles suggested
by Fisher are widely accepted, no one has provided test results supporting them.
Experimental testing of this theory is important to basic scientific research,
but it requires an animal system with genetic variation in sex ratio. Variation
of this type is found in the platyfish, Xiphophorus maculatus, a tropical
freshwater fish which has three sex chromosomes (W,X,Y). This experiment will
investigate sex ratio changes from one generation to the next in populations of
platyfish which are initiated with sex ratios other than 1/2. The results will
be compared to those predicted by computer simulations. This project will
provide quantifiable results supporting a generally accepted theory of sex ratio
evolution. This research is important not only to basic science, but also has
potential applications to aquaculture. A thorough understanding of sex ratio
evolution is necessary if sex ratio manipulation techniques are to be applied as
a means to increase production. Manipulation of population sex ratios could
greatly increase production by increasing the number of offspring produced in
the following generation.