* 8700691
* A Study of Radon-222 and Lead-210 Distribution and          Transport in the North Atlantic
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1991
* James Friend, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 08/31/1991
* USD 287,300.00

Over the past 10-15 years atmospheric chemistry has evolved from a young
research discipline devoted primarily to local problems of urban pollution and
air quality to a mature science concerned with the hemispheric to global scale
cycling of a wide variety of chemical species. To a large extent this change has
resulted from an increasing realization that human activities can cause chemical
disturbances to the natural troposphere on scales far beyond local concerns.
Well-known examples include changes in the regional-to-global concentrations of
certain nitrogen compounds, lead and other heavy metals, artificial
radionuclides, a number of synthetic organic substances, certain acid-forming
species, carbon dioxide and methane. These chemical changes in the atmosphere
can often extend to the earth's soils, oceans, and biota far from the original
source region. They can result in alterations in the earth's climate, changes in
vital nutrient cycles, and impact significantly on the public health and quality
of life on earth. The Atmosphere/Ocean Chemistry Experiment (AEROCE) will be a
coordinated multi-institutional atmospheric and marine chemistry research
project centered in the North Atlantic region. The ultimate goal of the AEROCE
project will be the development of a predictive capability for the continentally
derived species observed in the marine troposphere over the North Atlantic. The
selection of sites and the measurement protocol in AEROCE has been developed
jointly by modelers and field experimentalists. This element of the AEROCE
project is designed to provide a body of data and information on the temporal
and spatial distributions of concentrations of 222Rn and 210Pb which will be
usable for the "calibration" of models that simulate the transport and removal
of trace atmospheric species. The chemical inertness of 222Rn makes it a nearly
ideal substance for validating the transport portion of the models. Study of the
daughter nuclide of 222Rn, 210Pb, can give useful information on the aerosol
removal processes occurring in the marine atmosphere and thereby provide
guidance in the modeling of these processes for other trace substances. It is
proposed to use proven methods of sampling and analysis of 222Rn and 210Pb to
provide, as a component of AEROCE, surface level air measurements of the
concentrations of these two naturally occurring radioactive tracers on island
sites in the North Atlantic Ocean. The sampling scheme will provide 4-hour
samples at each site of 222Rn continuously from start-up time to the end of the
project. Filter samples will be taken for 210Pb analyses at the same sites
during passages of selected well-formed fronts between contrasting air masses.
One-hour samples will be taken starting 12 hours before the forecast passage
time and ending 12 hours after passage. About one set of 24 samples will be
taken each month at each location. The resulting data will be interpreted using
data-analytical methods to correlate the concentrations with the air mass
characteristics and to generate a body of statistical characteristics (4-hour,
diurnal, seasonal, and annual averages and associated standard deviations).