* 8700468
* Electoral Accountability
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Jeffrey Banks, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1990
* USD 79,264.00

Previous research on coalition formation in legislatures has focused on general
hypotheses to derive predictions concerning which parties would agree to form a
government. This generality implies a lack of uniqueness in the predictions,
inhibiting their use as a basis for studying the preceding stage of interaction,
namely that of actual election of the parties to the legislature. The goal of
this research is to develop a model applicable to all types of coalition
governments regardless of differing institutional arrangements (e.g. which party
initially attempts to form a government) that structure the process of
government formation. This project has as its motivation a deeper understanding
of the institutional structures within which coalition governments form. These
institutional structures typically generate strategic possibilities for the
parties in terms of the proposals and concessions to make to other parties, on
policy, cabinet portfolios, and so on. By employing the techniques of non-
cooperative game theory, the investigators will generate predictions of
coalition formation and legislative outcomes as a function of the institutional
rule in place, thereby allowing for the comparison of the effects of different
structures. These techniques will also allow the investigators to "roll-back"
the analysis to the electoral stage, where the voters will be modeled with
specific predictions of what will happen if they vote one way or another. In
this way the investigators hope to unify the study of electoral competition and
coalition formation in multi-party systems of government. Recent advances in
non-cooperative game theory permit the development of these more sophisticated
models. One of these advances has been toward relaxing the informational
assumptions of previous work and allowing some participants to possess
information that is both valuable, in that it effects payoffs to other
participants, and private, in that no one else has it. The knowledge of exactly
what it would take to convince another party to agree to a government is an
example of such information. Incorporating these advanced techniques will result
in a model that is both rich in strategic possibilities for the participants,
and more realistic than its predecessors. This will enhance the theoretical
unification of elections and coalition formation described above, and lead to a
better comprehension of the motivations and behavior of participants in this
type of political setting.