* 8700081
* Proton Multiple Quantum NMR Studies of Space and End Chain  Conformation in Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Gary Drobny, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/1990
* USD 240,000.00

The problem of the conformation and ordering of flexible chains in anisotropic
phases has attracted a good deal of attention in recent years. The motivation of
most of this work is a desire to understand the manner in which alkyl chains
pendant to aromatic cores influence mesomorphic phase properties and stability.
Liquid crystal polymers have also been the subject of research as possible
sources of high tensile strength fibers and coatings, and for their possible
applications in electro-optic devices. Although polymers with rigid backbones do
not generally form liquid crystalline phases, or decompose before melting into
memorphic phases, the introduction of flexible spacer chains into the polymer
backbone will lower mesophase transition temperatures to below the range of
thermal decomposition. Deuterium NMR spectroscopy has been the principal tool
for probing the microscopic structure and dynamics of end and spacer chains, and
for testing models of chain ordering in nematic phases. Professor Drobny
proposes an approach to studying spacer and end chain ordering in the nematic
phase and in several in low temperature mesophases using multiple quantum
spectroscopy. Rather than test models of chain ordering and conformation,
conformational probabilities and order tensor elements will be directly
calculated from proton-proton and proton-carbon dipolar couplings obtained from
multiple quantum spectra.