* 8700940
* Dissertation Research: Phenotypic Plasticity of Jaw and Skull Morphology in the Cichlid Fishes, Geophagus braziliensis and G. steindachneri
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Amy McCune, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 11/30/1990
* USD 9,635.00

Phenotypic plasticity is the modification of some trait of an organism in
response to environmental change. Often this plasticity has a genetic basis and
as a result can influence the rate and direction of evolution. Morphological
plasticity is little known among vertebrates. Increasing evidence indicates
braziliensis and G.steindachneri, which represent the extremes of cichlid
developmental modes. Our research aims to answer the following questions: (1)
What effect does the size at which feeding commences have on the amount of
morphological plasticity that is expressed? (2) Are there age-related
differences in the amount of plasticity that can be induced? (3) Do induced
morphological differences affect feeding efficiency on diets that are associated
with different feeding modes? (4) Is there genetic variation for the plasticity
of jaw and skull bones? This study will go beyond a description of morphological
plasticity; it will examine plasticity in a developmental, genetic, functional,
and ecological context. Only through such an interdisciplinary approach can the
effect of plasticity on evolution, and the evolution of plasticity, itself, be
understood. 8700940 McCume Phenotypic plasticity is the modification of some
trait of an organism in response to environmental change. Often this plasticity
has a genetic basis and as a result can influence the rate and direction of
evolution. Morphological plasticity is little known among vertebrates.
Increasing evidence indicates that jaw and skull morphology of cichlid fishes,
Geophagus braziliensis and G.steindachneri, which represent the extremes of
cichlid developmental modes. Our research aims to answer the following
questions: (1) What effect does the size at which feeding commences have on the
amount of morphological plasticity that is expressed? (2) Are there age-related
differences in the amount of plasticity that can be induced? (3) Do induced
morphological differences affect feeding efficiency on diets that are associated
with different feeding modes? (4) Is there genetic variation for the plasticity
of jaw and skull bones? This study will go beyond a description of morphological
plasticity; it will examine plasticity in a developmental, genetic, functional,
and ecological context. Only through such an interdisciplinary approach can the
effect of plasticity on evolution, and the evolution of plasticity, itself, be
understood. 8700999 Johnson Vocal behavior is important in evolutionary
processes in songbirds, yet few studies have attempted to explain morphological
and genetic diversification in light of vocal information. This research will
integrate vocal, morphological, and genetic data in the highly polytypic North
American red crossbill (Loxia curvirostra) complex. This group presents an
unsolved evolutionary paradox: the birds are nomadic, suggesting a high rate of
gene flow, yet there is extreme diversity in bill size, body size, and plumage
coloration within the group. Several testable alternative hypotheses regarding
the nature