* 8700803
* Catalysis, Adsorption and Charge Transfer Kinetics in       Reactions at Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1987,04/30/1991
* Fred Anson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Vickie Lewis
* 04/30/1991
* USD 652,595.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of electrochemistry. It contains five specific research thrusts:
(1) Studies of electron transfer kinetics across well-defined Langmuir-Blodgett
oriented molecular films; (2) Electrocatalysis using colloidal clay-supported
electron transfer mediators; (3) Mechanistic studies of the electrocatalytic
reduction of dioxygen; (4) Studies of polyoxymetallates as electrocatalytic
reagents; and (5) Oxidative electrocatalysis using nitroxyl compounds. These
studies address fundamental issues in heterogeneous electron transfer kinetics
across membrane-like molecular structures, basic studies in the electrochemistry
of dioxygen that are of prime importance to efficient fuel cell technology, and
the development and evaluation of new catalytic systems with which the
electrochemical production of desired materials can be made to proceed
selectively and cost effectively. Realization of the goals of this project can
be expected to enhance our understanding of the fundamentals of electron
transfer processes at membrane-solution interfaces, which is essential to the
development of biosensors, and to define new electrocatalytic systems with which
economical electrosyntheses and the efficient interconversion of electrical
energy and chemical energy can be facilitated.