* 8700813
* Research in Differential Games
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Leonard Berkovitz, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1989
* USD 83,869.00

The principal investigator intends to develop the theory of the so-called
differential games. This term refers to problems described by differential
equations in which there are two or more different equations in which there are
two or more different control variables, one for each decision maker or
"player". For instance, competition games on stock markets or pursuit-evasion
games (encountered in aerial combat) can be mathematically analyzed by using the
theory of differential games. The latter represents a mixture of more
traditional game theory, control and various recent mathematical theories about
partial differential equations. The theory of differential games developed by
the principal investigator will be used to develop methods for approximating the
solutions of differential games to an arbitrary degree of accuracy. The first
method to be used is that of approximating the continuous time game by a
sequence of multimove infinite games corresponding to the discretization of the
time interval. It will be shown that the solutions of these infinite multimove
games converge to the solutions of the original game. Estimates of the rates of
convergence of the values of the n-th stage games to the value of the
differential game will be obtained. If the Isaacs condition does not hold then
mixed strategies will be used. Methods for solving multimove infinite games will
also be investigated, as the solutions of such games is an essential part of the
program. For the multimove games, methods based on necessary conditions and
direct backward recursions will be investigated. Another method that will be
developed is one based on the numerical solution of the Isaacs equation. Since
the value function is a viscosity solution of this equation, the adaptability to
out problem of numerical techniques proposed in the literature will be
investigated. The preceding program will first be applied to games of fixed
duration and then extended to games of generalized pursuit and evasion and to
games of survival. A question that arises in pursuit and evasion problems that
is different from the two person zero-sum game is that of determining those
initial points from which capture can be assured and those initial points from
which evasion can be assured. We shall investigate this problem when both
pursuer and evader are permitted to choose their actions at each instant time,
knowing the previous actions of both players. This is in contrast to previous
Soviet and other work in which only one of the antagonists is allowed to choose
his action as play evolves. Program Director for Applied Mathematics recommends
a twenty-four month award funded jointly with the Air Force Office of Scientific
Research.