* 8700872
* Toughness, Strength, and R-Curve Behavior of Microcracking  Materials (Materials Research)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,04/01/1988
* Katherine Faber, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* John C. Hurt
* 04/01/1988
* USD 36,000.00

This research is continuation of work (previous research under DMR-8305800) on
understanding the toughness and stress- induced microcracking of ceramic
materials. The investigation emphasizes the following topics: 1) computer
computation and modelling of the growth of cracks in ceramics which incorporates
the important physical materials parameters, 2) characterization of ceramic-
glass composites systems which demonstrate stress- induced microcracking using
small angle neutron scattering, 3) study of the strength-toughness relationships
for ceramics and ceramic-glass composites. In multiphase ceramic materials,
microcracking is common, especially when there is a pronounced difference in the
coefficient of thermal expansion between the several phases present in the
material. This phenomenon can be used to tailor the mechanical behavior of the
material, by proper selection of the various phases, to allow elimination of the
microcracks or introduction of the microcracks in the vicinity of regular cracks
as desired. The presence of microcracks can often reduce the stress intensity at
the tips of regular cracks, and thereby cause the regular cracks to stop
propagating. This phenomenon causes the ceramic to be tougher in service, and
less susceptible to catastropic failure under stress. The present research is
designed to increase understanding of the phenomenon, and allow design of
tougher ceramics.