* 8700835
* Mathematical Sciences: Subnormal Operators and Related      Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* John Conway, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 11/30/1989
* USD 60,726.00

Operator theory is a central discipline in Modern Analysis. Its origins lie in
the study of mathematical physics and partial differential equations in the
early twentieth century. Thus, it was seen that numerous physical problems in
the theory of equilibria, vibration, quantum theory, etc. could be studied
productively via the integral equations that model the phenomena. So it has
been, that from the fertile minds of Hilbert, von Neumann, and other giants that
the subject of operator theory has grown to a central position in such
investigations, and in core mathematics as well. At the heart of this
methodology is the deep investigation of the spectrum of an operator and the
concommitant study of its invariant subspaces. For the so-called self-adjoint
operators, this theory is now a standard technique throughout analysis, and the
spectral theorem provides the necessary building blocks for all such operators.
Although not quite as complete, spectral theory is significantly well understood
for an extensive generalization of the self-adjoint case; viz., the "normal"
operators. The current frontier, therefore, in the study of this structure
theory rests in the non-normal theory. Professors Conway has long been a leader
in the study of subnormal operators, a broad class of operators that arise in
applications, and for which there is enough residual normal information to
attempt a deeper understanding of their inherent structure. Recent results,
suchas the fact that subnormal operators are reflexive and have invariant
subspaces, have given an added impetus to the study of their spectral
properties. Since many explicit operators that arise in complex function theory,
differential geometry, and approximation theory are subnormal, there is a broad
range of developing interaction. Professor Conway will study subnormal operators
that arise naturally in actions on Hardy spaces, thereby exploring the
interaction with function theory. He will also investigate the internal
structure theory of subnormal operators, with particular consideration of
unitary equivalence, bundle shifts, and the relationship with general operator
theory.