* 8700022
* Simultaneous Measurement of Intracrystalline Diffusion in   Molecular Sieve Zeolites by NMR and Gravimetric Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Paul Inglefield, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1990
* USD 137,392.00

Research Summary: The diffusive and adsorptive properties of hydrocarbons on
high-silica zeolites are investigated by gravimetric and NMR methods to resolve
the differences in diffusion measurements, which are reported in the literature
to be of several orders of magnitude between measurements made by these two
techniques, in order to gain fundamental understanding of diffusion in zeolites.
Novelty: A new apparatus is being constructed and will be used to make
simultaneous diffusion measurements of identical zeolite samples, activated
under exactly the same conditions, under identical sorbate pressure, using NMR
and gravimetric methods. This unique method of measurement will make it possible
to compare the results from microscopic NMR measurements to those from
macroscopic gravimetric measurements, thus resolving currently existing large
differences. Technical Impact: The information obtained from the proposed work
will not only provide fundamental understanding of the transport and adsorption
properties of zeolites but also will be of importance in improving engineering
design in such important operations as purification of gas streams, separation
processes, and catalytic conversion units. A better understanding of the
diffusion mechanisms and equilibrium properties can provide valuable information
in understanding catalytic behavior of shape-selective zeolites used in
practical industrial applications such as xylene isomerization, dewaxing and
conversion of methanol to gasoline.