* 8700122
* PRF: Factors Controlling Periphyton Abundance and ProductionDuring Stream Sucession
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Nancy Grimm, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* None
* 11/30/1989
* USD 52,800.00

A central question in ecology has been whether abundance and production at a
given trophic level are limited by resources or by higher trophic levels
(predation, grazing). This project includes research to answer that question for
primary producers (periphyton) of a desert stream ecosystem during its recovery
or succession following flash flooding. A first project is to provide background
information on grazer population dynamics and energetics which heretofore have
not been studied in this system. Project 2 will utilize field manipulations of
both resource availability (nitrogen concentration) and grazer abundance to
determine how limiting factors change over successional time. This will add to
an increasing base of knowledge of how stream ecosystems respond to and recover
from disturbance (flash flooding). The third project will explore effects of
grazing intensity on primary production using grazer density manipulations. If
grazing is found to stimulate primary production, hypotheses explaining the
mechanism of stimulation will be tested experimentally. If grazing is not
stimulatory, an attempt will be made to explain why nutrients released by
grazers are not recycled to stream periphyton. This final project deals with a
controversial topic in ecology, the question of whether herbivory may actually
prove beneficial to plants that are eaten. Dr. Nancy B. Grimm's approach differs
from others in that experimental field manipulations will be used to test
hypotheses. Arizona State University will serve as the host institution during
the two-year postdoctoral fellowship tenure.