* 8700292
* Systematics, Zoogeography and Phylogenetics of Skates       (Chondrichthyes, Rajoidei)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1991
* John McEachran, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/1991
* USD 95,135.00

This proposal is a request for funds to continue a long term study on the
systematics, distribution, and evolutionary relationships of skates and rays
(flattened cartilaginous fishes). The overall objectives of the study are to
clarify the evolutionary relationships within and among the subgenera and genera
of skates, to use this information to construct distributional and evolutionary
patterns for skates, and to speculate on the evolutionary relationships of
skates and the other taxa of rays (sawfishes, guitarfishes, electric rays and
sting rays). Specifically, the proposed research will: 1) test, elaborate and
revise as necessary the current hypothesis of evolutionary relationships of
skates by comparative analysis of the skull, gill arches, shoulder girdle,
pelvic girdle, intromittent organs, and tooth morphology of all subgenera and
genera and a majority of the species; and 2) compare these structures, and the
gill arch musculature, cranial nerves, and head and gill arch blood vessels of
skates with those of other rays. Detailed systematic and evolutionary studies of
skates over the past 30 to 40 years have set the stage for a comprehensive and
in-depth evolutionary study of skates. These studies have clarified most of the
species level systematic problems and recognized most of the subgenera and
genera. However, the evolutionary relationships remain uncertain. Successful
completion of the proposed study will contribute to: 1) clarification of the
evolutionary interrelationships of the cartilaginous fishes (chimaeras, sharks
and rays); 2) the understanding of the distributional patterns of benthic
fishes; and 3) knowledge of the evolutionary patterns of a diverse but
morphologically conservative group of organisms.