* 8700705
* Logical Foundations for Inheritance Theory and Knowledge    Update (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Richmond Thomason, MPC Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 11/30/1989
* USD 207,063.00

Continuing research that has been supported since April, 1986, under NSF Grant
No IST-8516313, we are extending and deepening our investigation of interactions
between logical theory, on the one hand, and inheritance and knowledge update in
semantic networks on the other. The research consists of both theoretical work
and experiments on implementations, and includes a number of interrelated
projects: (1) Logic analysis of knowledge update as applied to semantic
networks; we will continue to explore the theory of conditional logic as a
framework for dealing with knowledge update in semantic networks, and to compare
the resulting accounts of update with those proposed by other computer
scientists and logicians. (2) Articulating the design space for nonmonotonic
inheritance reasoners; building on our foundational investigations, we will
begin to work toward a mathematical classification of nonmonotonic inheritance
reasoners, and to establish some general theorems in this area. (3) The theory
of nonmonotonic inheritable relations and roles; we will extend our analyses of
inheritance in nonmonotonic semantic networks to richer network representation
languages, including at least the resources for describing relations and roles.
(4) The theory of mixed semantic networks; we will extend our analyses of
inheritance to semantic networks in which both strict and defeasible information
is mixed together in a single representational structure. (5) Nonmonotonic
hybrid reasoners; we will explore validated systems that employ both
nonmonotonic network-based reasoning and theorem proving in information
retrieval. The broader significance of this work is that it addresses the urgent
need to design mechanical systems capable of intelligent reasoning in a variety
of expert tasks. Such systems will need to store large quantities of complex
information in a form that is efficiently accessible by mechanized reasoning
processes, and also structured in a way that is intelligible to domain experts
so that it can be validated and improved. Research in Artificial Intelligence
has shown that there is a conflict between two desirable goals for systems of
knowledge representation: they must be powerful enough to express complex
concepts, but at the same time they must reason quickly and allow efficient
updates. Designing computer systems that can meet both of these goals
constitutes a large-scale research project; new theoretical concepts and
experiments with working reasoning systems must both be developed. Our project
will combine theory and experiments to produce systems of knowledge
representation and knowledge update. The dual approach will produce knowledge
and reasoning systems which not only work better, but which are grounded in a
sound theoretical analysis.