* 8700087
* Phylogeny of the Euglenoid Flagellates:  An Ultrastructural Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1987,03/31/1991
* Richard Triemer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 03/31/1991
* USD 114,932.00

Euglenoid organisms have fascinated biologists for generations, because of
their peculiar amalgamation of plant-like and animal-like features. About 800
species of euglenoids have been described, usually quite briefly, mostly from
freshwater and estuarine sources. Because they are small cells, there are a
limited number of morphological features that can be detected with the light
microscope and used in the classification of these organisms. Capitalizing on
the pioneering application of electron microscopy to unicellular organisms, Dr.
Richard Triemer is studying aspects of mitosis (cell division) and of the
internal feeding apparatus, to acquire reliable new characters of use in the
taxonomy of these creatures. Already, his work has strengthened the view that
euglenoids evolved from colorless, flagellated protozoa and that they are
closely related to such protozoan groups as the trypanosomes. Dr. Triemer will
survey several groups of euglenoids, examining them for the diversity of mitotic
and feeding apparatus likely to occur in the group. These novel observations,
combined with existing morphological, molecular, and physiological data, will be
used to establish a reliable system of taxonomy for the euglenoids and to
construct an evolutionary tree showing relationships within the group and
between the euglenoids and other groups of protists.