* 8700085
* Population Biology and Evolution of an Androgen Regulated   Gene
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1991
* Kenneth Paigen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 02/28/1991
* USD 200,000.00

Every gene has two essential attributes. It determines the structure of a
protein and it is regulated. The structure of the protein it produces determines
its function - whether it is a structural part of the organism or whether it can
serve as a catalyst of a metabolic reaction. If it is a catalyst, the structure
determines exactly what metabolic reaction it catalyzes. The regulation of the
gene determines how much of the protein is produced in each cell type and how
the production of the protein changes in response to hormonal factors. It is
differences in the regulatory properties of genes that allow complex organisms
like ourselves to be composed of many cell types, each with a different
function. Without these differences in regulation it would not be possible to
produce diverse tissues, such as muscle and pancreas that have very different
physiological functions. Current evolutionary theory suggests that changes in
gene regulation have been extremely important in evolution, particularly among
groups, such as primates, that have evolved especially rapidly. Despite this,
because of technical limitations, much less is understood about the evolution of
gene regulation than has been learned about the evolution of protein structure.
The proposal is an effort to exploit recent advances in our understanding of the
molecular mechanisms of gene regulation to help remedy this deficiency. The
experimental system to be studied is a gene, called B-glucuronidase, that is
thought to be involved in the metabolic production of pheromones, chemical
signals between animals that alter their mating and productive behavior. This
gene is regulated by the male sex hormone testosterone and provides a favorable
experimental system because the molecular details of the regulation are well
understood. The specific experiments are designed to determine more precisely
the nature of the regulatory changes that are occurring in the evolution of this
gene, and to clarify the nature of the underlying genetic changes that bring
about this evolution of gene expression. The work will be carried on among mouse
species where the regulatory properties of the gene are known to be evolving
rapidly.