* 8700555
* Circadian System Ontogeny:  Role of the Environment
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/1987,10/31/1991
* Terry Page, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 10/31/1991
* USD 127,140.00

The goal of the proposed research is to investigate the impact of the
environment on the post-embryonic development of the circadian system. He plans
to use the cockroach as a model system for these studies because of the wealth
of background information that is available on the anatomical organization and
physiological properties of this animal's circadian system. Preliminary data
indicates that specific lighting conditions to which the cockroach is exposed
during development can have major effects on properties of the adult circadian
system. He plans to further investigate the effects of changing light cycles to
determine specifically which properties of the circadian system are affected.
Other aspects of the environment, such as temperature may affect the development
of the circadian system. They plan to determine if there is a critical period
during development when the system is susceptible to various other environmental
manipulations. Finally they plan to investigate the functioning of the circadian
system in the developing animal. The discovery that the environment of the
developing organism can affect the development of the circadian system is most
important. Because of the pervasive influence of the biorhythm system on various
aspects of behavior and physiology in most animals, the results of these studies
will provide basic information on the fundamental question of whether or not the
properties of the circadian system that are established during development are
susceptible to environmental manipulation.