* 8700903
* Estimation and Signal Processing for Spatial Data:          Efficient Algorithms, Inverse Problems, and Computational   Vision and Geometry
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Bernard Levy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/1991
* USD 409,913.00

This research focuses on estimation and signal processing for spatial data.
Three major areas are considered. The first deals with efficient algorithms for
the processing of spatial data. Problems to be addressed include (i) the
employment of novel notions of recursion as well as spatial decompositions to
develop recursive and highly parallel algorithms for the estimation of 2-D
processes described by noncausal models and for other 2-D digital filtering
applications; and (ii) the exploitation of the symmetries present in some
classes of random fields (e.g. isotropic fields) to develop efficient procedures
for recursive and spectral estimation. The second deals with the development of
algorithms for inverse and signal reconstruction problems in several dimensions.
Among the problems to be investigated are (i) the development of efficient and
generalized-tomographic methods for exact and approximate solution of 2-D and
3-D inverse scattering problems; and (ii) the development of system-
identification-based approaches to inverse problems with particular emphasis on
algorithms that work at multiple spatial scales. The third area deals with
computational vision and geometry. A number of research problems are described
including (i) the development of estimation-based algorithms for problems of
computational vision such as motion and depth estimation; and (ii) the
investigation of system and estimation-theoretic formulations of problems in
computational geometry such as the reconstruction of objects given uncertain
measurements of various quantities such as the support of a convex object, its
silhouette, its interior, etc. This research focuses on estimation and signal
processing for spatial data. The three major areas considered are (i) efficient
algorithms for the processing of spatial data (ii) the development of algorithms
for inverse and signal reconstruction problems in two and three dimensions and
(iii) questions related to computational vision and geometry.