* 8700898
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research:  A Paleomagnetic Study of the Pontide Mountains in Northwestern Anatolia
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Ian Evans, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 12/31/1989
* USD 12,500.00

This award will allow Drs. Stuart A. Hall and Ian Evans, University of Houston,
University Park, to collaborate with Dr. Nezihi Canitez, Scientific and
Technical Research Council of Turkey, Kocaeli, Turkey. Their research will be
part of a larger Turkish Geotraverse Project in a north-south corridor in
western Anatolia. They and other researchers from Istanbul Technical University
will examine the interactions of large lithospheric plates with smaller,
continental fragments to determine the study basin's original setting and
development. They will try to determine the size and integrity of the
continental block in the Deresakari region and to learn of the block's
relationship to the "Sakarya Continent." They will use paleomagnetic methods to
determine some of the structural complexities associated with geological
movements in the area. The remanent magnetism of the samples will be measured
using a cryogenic magnetometer at the University of Houston. Both Drs. Hall and
Evans have worked extensively in Turkey. Their Turkish colleagues have been
active in geological research in the study area and they have proposed a
tectonic model for the region. This cooperative research is a promising way to
test aspects of the model and to contribute to goelogical theory. The proposed
cooperation presents the U.S. investigators with an opportunity to collect data
not easily available in the U.S.