* 8700099
* X-Ray Absorption and Magnetic Resonance of Multiple Valence Materials  (Materials Research)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Juana Acrivos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 08/31/1989
* USD 132,739.00

The properties of multiple valence materials will be investigated by electron
spin resonance and X-ray absorption spectroscopy. The systems to be investigated
include metal in ammonia solutions near the metal to insulator transition,
compounds containing the same element in at least two different valence states,
intercalated layer materials and one dimensional organic conductors. All these
materials have applications in connection with the development of high duty
batteries, catalysts, solid lubricants and new types of anisotropic conductors.
The research work will be carried out at the University of California- Berkeley
Biodynamics Laboratory and at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory. Dr.
Acrivos will also teach a new graduate course on "XAS Applied to Multiple
Valence Materials" and co-direct Ph.D. theses at the University of California-
Berkeley. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the
disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.