* 8700454
* Problems in Game Theory and Decision Theory and Their       Economic Applications
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* John Harsanyi, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 11/30/1989
* USD 70,122.00

This project contributes to game theory, decision theory, and utilitarian
ethics. The investigator is a very distinguished scholar. His early work helped
define these fields and he remains an active contributor in all of these areas.
His recent research is partly responsible for a breakthrough in game theory. He
is capable of pursuing this ambitious research agenda. The project consists of
three parts. The first part builds on a major breakthrough by the investigator
in game theory, i. e., the development of a principled systematic theory that
defines a unique outcome for any game. This is an important advance because
almost any nontrivial noncooperative game will have very many and sometimes even
infinitely many significantly dissimilar outcomes. This means that without this
new theory specific testable predictions can be derived from game-theoretic
models only by imposing various ad hoc restrictions on acceptable solutions.
Further work is needed to define the assumptions that underpin this new theory,
contrast the theory with other methods used to obtain unique solutions such as
stability theory, and make this theory easier for economists to use. The second
part demonstrates that utilitarian theories of ethics are not inconsistent with
nonutilitarian concepts of moral obigation and moral rights. The investigator
justifies a rule that gives precedence to certain individual moral rights over
direct social-utility maximization on the grounds that such a rule has enormous
social utility in its own right. If this line of research is successful it could
provide a way of rationally justifying moral rights and obligations that modern
philosophies now can only define as important. The third part continues the
development of a general theory of inductive logic based on Bayesian decision
theory. This project explores the relationship between rational presumption of
truth and probabilities. It extends earlier work on the relationship between the
simplicity of empirical hypotheses and their prior probability.