* 8700284
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometry of Convex Sets
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Robert Phelps, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1989
* USD 60,600.00

Banach space theory is a basic tool of mathematical analysis that has been of
importance since its inception at the turn of the century. In recent years,
there has been a rebirth of interaction with other aspects of mathematical
analysis -- such as harmonic analysis and operator theory -- and probability
theory. In particular, Banach space methods, in the hands of highly creative and
powerful researchers, have led to fundamental breakthroughs in these other
fields. World centers of excellence in this area are in Israel, Paris, Warsaw,
Ohio, and Texas. Professor Phelps has had a long and distinguished career in
Banach space theory, his emphasis being on convexity analysis and
differentiability. His recent work, however, has emphasized applications outside
of Banach space theory -- to statistical mechanics, optimization, and
approximation. His theoretical work led him to problems in lattice gases,
important to statistical mechanics, in which he proved differentiabilty of the
statistical mechanics pressure function, and to interesting work on conjugate
projections and nearest point maps in the theory of optimization. He has also
obtained (negative) results for researchers in mathematical economics. All of
these applications are made possible by his expertise in the "pure" theory, and
they bring evidence to the importance of basic mathematical research for applied
problems. In the current proposal, Professor Phelps plans to investigate a
number of related problems concerning the geometry of convex subsets of Banach
spaces. In particular, he will consider the validity in complex spaces of the
classical Bishop-Phelps theorem on the density of support functionals, as well
as other problems related to Asplund spaces and the Mazur intersection property.
Research is also to be conducted by two postdoctoral mathematicians, Professors
Rychlik and Zhu. Professor Zhu is a new Ph.D. whose work in operator theory
addresses a variety of aspects of several complex variables. He will continue
his research on Toeplitz and Hankel operators on Bergman spaces of bounded
symmetric domains and the relation to functions of bounded mean oscillation.
Professor Rychlik, an expert in ergodic theory and dynamical systems, will focus
his research on the development of Poincare-type expansions near a saddle of a
vector field in n-dimensions. He will also continue his work on the dynamics of
the Lorentz and Henon equations.