* 8700865
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Chinese Plants as Sources of Biologically Active Natural Products Against Insects and a Mite
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* James Klocke, AgriDyne Technologies Incorporated (NPI)
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 01/31/1990
* USD 49,320.00

The objectives of this cooperative project between James Klocke and Manuel
Blandrin, NPI, Salt Lake City, Utah, and Chiu Shinfoon, South China Agricultural
College, Guangzhou, China are to isolate, identify and bioassay natural products
derived from three species of Chinese plants known for their insecticidal
properties and to test those products against a number of economically
significant pests such as cabbageworm, citrus redmite, and tobacco budworm. This
cooperative research supports the objective of the U.S.-China Program which is
to promote opportunities for cooperation in basic science between scientists of
the U.S. and China on projects of mutual interest and benefit to both countries.
In addition to defining currently unknown structural properties of certain plant
constituents, this research has the potential of identifying naturally occuring
plant derived insecticides of economic and ecological significance to both
countries. This proposal is a carefully considered and well documented research
plan involving scientists with excellent credentials. The Chinese principal
investigator, Dr. Chiu, has an excellent international reputation in the
entomological field of plant pesticides and the U.S. scientists are well known
for their work in phytochemical research. This project is jointly sponsored by
NSF and the Chinese State Education Commission under the U.S.-China Protocol for
Cooperation in Basic Sciences signed in December 1980 and extended April 1986.
This is a new two-year award. Under the terms of the U.S.-China Agreement in
Basic Sciences, all costs incurred in the U.S. will be covered by NSF and all
costs in China will be covered by the Chinese government.