* 8700523
* Systematics of Recent and Fossil Conidae
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1987,04/30/1993
* Alan Kohn, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* B. Jane Harrington
* 04/30/1993
* USD 220,899.00

This project focuses on one of the largest families of marine gastropod
molluscs, the Conidae. This family of mainly tropical marine snails is important
because of its very high diversity, the broad geographic range of many of its
species, its ecological role as a dominant predatory group, primarily in shallow
tropical seas of the Indo-West Pacific region, and its unusual danger to man.
Its neurotoxic venom, normally used to overpower prey organisms, has claimed at
least 30 human lives; the venom peptides are becoming increasingly significant
in neurobiological studies of cell membrane proteins that regulate ion
transport. The family also serves as a model of a type of evolutionary adaptive
radiation characteristic of many groups of marine organisms in the Indo-West
Pacific. These radiations have contributed importantly to the richness of the
shallow-water marine biota of this vast region, in contrast to other marine
environments. The Conidae originated at or just preceding the Cenozoic era.
Fossils occur throughout the Tertiary and Quaternary geologic record; the major
expansions occurred in the Eocene and Miocene epochs. The overall goal of this
long-term project is to elucidate important evolutionary trends in species
diversity, morphological adaptations to different environments, distribution,
and ecology in the Conidae. For the proposed grant period the main goal is to
improve the taxonomy and identification system of species in this complex and
taxonomically very difficult family. Objective, quantitative taxonomic methods
will be applied, a chronological study of type specimens and identity of species
described through 1840 will be completed, and a revisionary study of one
important subgroup will be made. The project will integrate study of fossils
with continuing taxonomic, comparative biological, and biogeographic studies of
recent species. The results may increase understanding of the evolutionary
processes that lead to high biotic diversity in tropical regions and of the
impact of these patterns of evolutionary radiations on the organization of
communities of marine organisms.