* 8700970
* Collision Dynamics of Free Radical Chemical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Paul Dagdigian, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence L. Lohr, Jr.
* 06/30/1991
* USD 314,560.00

The collision dynamics of reactions of small free radicals will be investigated
by molecular beam scattering and laser fluorescence detection techniques. In
reactions between two open-shell species, several potential energy surfaces
arise in both the reactant and product channels. Of particular interest will be
the effect these multiple reaction paths have on the product internal state
distribution, especially the partitioning among fine-structure states of open-
shell products. Special emphasis will be placed on the study of the prototypical
O + NH reaction, for which two possible chemical pathways are available, namely
the formation of OH + N and H + NO products. In addition, further investigation
of the effect of initial spin-orbit level on chemical reactivity will be carried
out for reactions of metastable Ba and other metal atoms. This work provides
important insights into the reaction dynamics of open shell systems. Such
reactions are essentially unexplored in the field of reaction dynamics because
of experimental difficulties. Such unstable radicals may occur in flames,
electrical discharges, and atmospheric processes. Information to be obtained in
Dr. Dagdigian's research program can have an impact on understanding such
systems and in some cases controlling chemical reactions.