* 8700734
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research: Statistical Methods  for Analyzing Data Arising from Reliability Studies         (Mathematical Sciences)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1990
* Michael Akritas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 03/31/1990
* USD 4,626.00

This is a two-year cooperative research project between Professor Michael G.
Akritas, Department of Statistics, The Pennsylvania State University, and
Professor Willem Albers, Department of Medical Informatics and Statistics,
University of Limburg, The Netherlands. The mathematicians are cooperating in a
study of tests and estimators that are based on distance measures, the
associated use of the bootstrap technique, and the application of the bootstrap
to certain rank procedures including multiple comparisons. The work may lead to
the development of a common theory for testing and estimation with both censored
and uncensored data, and so is relevant to data arising from reliability, life
testing, and medical studies. Some of the performance aspects that will be
considered are: sensitivity to tail alternatives and to crossing hazards
alternatives for the one- and two- sample problem, respectively, and robustness
of the estimators and how this depends on the degree of censoring. The second
aspect of the work is concerned with applications of the bootstrap technique to
approximating the null distribution or the null variance of some common rank
statistics with or without censoring, and to rank-based multiple comparison
procedures with both censored and uncensored data. This study is concerned with
developing and refining statistical procedures for making "goodness of fit"
tests that permit one to judge how well a chosen model fits data derived from
experimental observations. In particular, applications of the procedures will be
made to situations in which data are "censored," that is, missing for some
reason, as when a patient drops out of a clinical study before the study is
over. The methods would permit a comparison of the effectiveness of two or more
treatments for a disease, for example, as well as indicate the levels of
confidence that should be placed on the conclusions that are drawn. The so-
called "bootstrap" technique, a relatively new and powerful statistical tool,
will be applied in this study to obtain approximations to the true probability
distribution of parameters of interest. Professor Akritas has considerable
experience in applying statistical methods to censored data. Professor Albers is
a recognized authority in asymptotic theory with special emphasis in
nonparametric methods. Collaboration by the two researchers on the many
mathematical and computational aspects of this work should greatly facilitate
the development of the new procedures as well as their comparison with existing
statistical methods.