* 8700505
* Diatom Record of Pleistocene Climatic Change in the Eastern Equatorial Atlantic
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1987,09/30/1989
* Edward Pokras, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Continuing grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 09/30/1989
* USD 130,000.00

Much study has been devoted to land-based records of climatic change in tropical
Africa through the last several tens of millenia. Paleoceanographers are also
unravelling the climatic history of oceans on all sides of tropical Africa
during the late Pleistocene. These studies have shed important light on such
factors as the history of monsoonal circulation and the impact of fluctuations
in the earth's orbit on tropical climate. In addition, the growing
sophistication of climate models has opened up the possibility of integrating
the continental and marine records of past climates with numerical simulations.
The combination of these diverse lines of research has led, in turn, to
substantial improvements in our understanding of the earth's climate system, and
our ability to predict climatic changes in the future. The equatorial Atlantic
is a dynamic hydrographic environment, with a number of different surface
currents interacting in a relatively small area. This results in sharp gradients
in sea-surface temperature and primary productivity, both of which affect the
diatom assemblages in equatorial sediments making them sensitive monitors to
climatic changes. The goal of this study is to determine the interconnections
between conditions in the equatorial Atlantic and in tropical Africa and other
parts of the tropics, and the influence of higher-latitude climates on the
climates of tropical regions. To achieve this, the PIs will reconstruct temporal
and spatial variations in surface oceanography as well as changes in the
intensity of runoff from equatorial African rivers, as revealed by changes in
the diatom assemblage. They will also search for significant periodicities in
the data, as an aid to understanding the mechanisms which control climatic
change in the tropics. The ultimate purpose is to improve the understanding of
tropical climates and our ability to model the response of the climate system to
orbital or other forcing mechanisms.