* 8701725
* Cytoskeletal Involvement in Autographa Californica NPV      Production
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Loy Volkman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1991
* USD 150,000.00

Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus (AcNPV) is a baculovirus that
is useful both as an expression vector and as a biological pesticide. Optimal
performance of this virus in both applications depends upon our knowledge of
host cell factors involved in viral gene expression and replication. Available
data suggests that cytoskeletal elements, especially actin microfilaments, are
critically involved in viral replication. The goal of the proposed research is
to learn more about cytoskeletal involvement in viral gene expression and
replication and how cytoskeletal elements might be regulated in lepidopteran
cells. The research involves documenting changes in the immunofluorescent
staining pattern of microfilaments, microtubules, and intermediate filaments
throughout the course of infection, monitoring how infection is affected by
substances known to interact with cytoskeletal elements and cytoskeletal
regulatory elements, and determining the role that cell shape plays in
infection. Principal research methods are immuno-light and electron microscopy,
cell extractions, protein radiolabelling and electrophoresis, and dot-blot
hybridization. The results of these studies will not only shed light on the
importance of host- cell cytoskeleton structure on the reproduction of this
virus, but aid materially in its development as a biological pesticide and
potential expression vector. More generally, these studies will be significant
in understanding the nature of molecular and genetic interactions between
parasites and their host.