* 8701887
* Vapor Pressure Studies of Hydrophobic Interactions          (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Sherril Christian, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence L. Lohr, Jr.
* 06/30/1990
* USD 122,945.00

Although hydrophobic interactions are ubiquitous and fundamentally important in
a variety of chemical and biological systems, vapor pressure results are unique
in that they provide unambiguous thermodynamic information about the association
of hydrocarbon moieties in dilute aqueous solution. Dr. Christian will undertake
extensive new solution studies, with the goal of obtaining highly-precise data
for systems in which hydrophobic interactions are the predominant associative
effects. By making a major improvement in the automated vapor pressure
apparatus, it is planned to expand considerably the range of systems that can be
investigated. Aqueous systems to be studied will include: binary solutions of
individual hydrocarbons and fluorinated hydrocarbon molecules, ternary solutions
containing volatile hydrocarbons and nonvolatile polar solutes (including
surfactants), and very dilute solutions of aliphatic alcohols in water. This
latter type of study has already yielded extremely precise vapor pressure
results for methanol, ethanol, 2-propanol, and tert-butanol. Interaction
parameters (Gibbs free energies, enthalpies, and entropies) for pairwise and
higher-order interactions of alcohol molecules have been obtained with an
accuracy that has never been attained previously. The new automated system will
make it possible to obtain excellent total and partial vapor pressure results
for solutions of many compounds, including the aliphatic alcohols, that are less
volatile than water.