* 8701865
* Mathematical Sciences: The Arithmetic and Analysis of       Automorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Isaac Efrat, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann K. Boyle
* 12/31/1989
* USD 35,271.00

This research is divided into three parts. The first part concerns automorphic
forms that arise as determinants of elliptic operators on certain manifolds.
Ways of obtaining GL(n) analogs of theta and other elliptic functions which are
of arithmetic interest will be studied. Also studied will be symplectic
automorphic forms recently discovered in mathematical physics as well as Selberg
zeta functions in higher rank spaces. In the second part, the existence problem
of cusp forms for co-finite subgroups of SL(2,R) with special emphasis on the
family of Hecke groups will be studied. In this area a conjectural spectral
theoretic characterization of arithmetic groups as well as a criterion that
should distinguish congruence and non-congruence subgroups will be investigated.
The third part of this research will be devoted to the interplay between cusp
forms on GL(n) and Kloosterman sums. Possible connections between certain
automorphic objects such as Kloosterman zeta functions and Hecke polynomials and
certain infinite sums and products attached to Kloosterman sums in algebraic
geometry will be described. This research will concentrate on the theory of
automorphic forms. These are complex analytic functions which lead to great
insights into number theory. They encode basic number theoretic information,
allowing the powerful tools of modern analysis to help solve fundamental
problems in number theory. This area is one of the very most important in
mathematics today and this young investigator has done much already done much of
importance in it. Further important results will surely result from this current
grant.