* 8701877
* Mathematical Sciences: Optimal Control Theory of            Input-Output Systems - Control Theory of Partial            Differential Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Hector Fattorini, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1991
* USD 131,348.00

This work will focus on the control theory of partial differential equations.
Two primary thrusts will be undertaken. The first line of investigation deals
with optimal control of input-output systems described by partial differential
equations, functional differential equations and associated applications. This
work will expand on recent work of the principal investigator which extended the
classical Pontryagin maximum principle to general nonlinear systems in infinite
dimensions. Applications of the resulting convergence principles have only been
exploited in classical cases to date. Work will now be directed to at least two
new areas: functional differential equations and to shape optimization where the
control is a time-dependent set. Here the general maximum principle is
especially suited since the state equation is a partial differential equation in
the variable domain and does not fit any of the available maximum principles.
Work is also planned on the problem of characterizing the set of attainable
states for both the heat equation and the wave equation, primarily on special
geometric domains at first. In this active area of research, boundary conditions
through which the control action is exercised are not specified. These questions
often reduce to problems in Fourier analysis in which estimates on the norms of
sequences are required. Fundamental questions focus on determining attainable
states by means of boundary control, a state being represented by a function in
the space variables which one wishes to reach in prescribed time from an initial
shape.