* 8701657
* Analysis of the George H. Pepper Collections
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1987,03/31/1989
* Jonathan Reyman, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 03/31/1989
* USD 43,000.00

This grant permits Dr. Reyman to study and prepare for publication notes, and
cultural and archaeological materials included in the Geroge H. Pepper
collection. George Pepper died in 1924 after an anthropological career which
spanned almost thirty years. He conducted extremely important archaeological
excavations at Pueblo Bonito, a large prehistoric site in New Mexico and at
other sites in the U.S. Southwest. As part of his ethnographic work, he
conducted studies among the Pueblo and Navaho peoples and collected a wide range
of artifacts. His notes include detailed descriptions of manufacturing processes
and native terminology. However he published relatively little of this data and
his notes and artifacts are scattered across a number of U.S. institutions. Dr.
Reyman has studied much of these materials and transcribed Dr. Pepper's notes.
This grant permits him to complete this task. He will focus on the one remaining
collection which he has not examined. This is stored at the Middle American
Research Institute at Tulane University. This will allow him to 1: complete an
inventory and analysis of Pueblo and Navajo ethnographic materials; 2: integrate
this information with previously collected data to produce a comprehensive
catalogue of Pepper's archaeological and ethnographic collections and; 3: use
recently discovered unpublished archaeological materials from Chaco Canyon to
publish a revised report on Pueblo Bonito and a new synthesis of Chacoan
prehistory. This research is important because it will provide scholars with
access to primary ethnographic and archaeological data no longer obtainable
through fieldwork. As the costs involved in field research increase and as it
becomes more difficult to work with traditional peoples, material such as
Pepper's gains in importance. It is essential that it be catalogued and
described before it is lost.