* 8701004
* The Synthesis of Transition Metal Stabilized Heavy Olefins
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,03/31/1989
* Michael McGeary, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly O'Neal Moorer
* 03/31/1989
* USD 31,250.00

The Synthesis of Transition Metal Stabilized Heavy Olefins: This award
recommendation is made under the U.S.-Industrialized Countries program for the
Exchange of Scientists and Engineers, 1987/1988 Competition. The program is
designed to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research
at research institutions in the industrialized countries of Western Europe as
well as Japan, Australia, New Zealand and Canada. Exchange awards provide
opportunities for the conduct of joint research and the utilization of unique or
complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign
countries. Awards are selected on the basis of scientific criteria relevant to
his/her field of science, the prospective potential of the applicants for
professional growth, as well as criteria relevant to the furthering of
international cooperation in science and engineering. The program is
particularly directed to scientists and engineers who are embarking on their
research careers. This research project suggests that heavy olefins may be
stabilized by using low oxidation state transition metal complexes as
substituents on the 4A metal and bulky, electron attracting groups as
substituents on the carbon. Methods of product characterization are addressed.
Future experiments designed to probe the synthetic utility of such heavy olefins
are also discussed. The project is under the direction of Dr. Michael J.
McGeary, Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
NC 27514, U.S.A., and Professor Michael F. Lappert, The School of Chemistry and
Molecular Sciences, The University of Sussex, Falmer Brighton BN1 9QJ, England.
This award recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international
travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents allowance, if applicable,
language training, if required, and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for
the U.S. home institution.