* 8701516
* Topics in Concurrent Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Richard Schlichting, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 01/31/1991
* USD 453,354.00

This project addresses several related topics in the design and use of
concurrent program languages. First, the implementation of the latest version of
the SR distributed programming language is being polished so it can be acquired
and used by interested parties. Second, various extensions to the language and
its implementation are being examined. Specific topics include providing
facilities to link new programs into an executing SR program, providing
efficient support for data abstraction, developing a stand-alone implementation,
and implementing a powerful macro-processor to facilitate experimentation with
new language mechanisms. Third, aspects of fault-tolerant programming are being
investigated. This work includes developing, implementing, and experimenting
with language mechanisms to handle the asynchronous nature of processor
failures; and devising analytical techniques for determining the performance of
fault-tolerant programs. Fourth, work is continuing on the MLP system for
constructing distributed mixed- language programs. The focus here is on adding
concurrency to the system by including SR as one of the supported languages,
developing distributed applications using MLP, and extending the system to
include additional sequential languages. Fifth, ways are being examined to
extend SR to provide support for parallel programming; specific topics include
providing global, shared operations and providing mechanisms for group
communication. The final topic being explored is the development of paradigms
for systematically solving distributed and parallel programming problems. It is
expected that this research will lead to significant improvements in our
understanding of language support issues for building concurrent systems.