* 8701194
* Mathematical Sciences: Complex Geometry and Representation  Theory of Lie Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1991
* Hugo Rossi, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 12/31/1991
* USD 135,094.00

The theory of Lie groups, named in honor of the Norwegian mathematician Sophus
Lie, has been one of the major themes in twentieth century mathematics. As the
mathematical vehicle for exploiting the symmetries inherent in a system, Lie
theory has had a profound impact upon mathematics itself and theoretical
physics, especially quantum mechanics and elementary particle physics. The
abstract theory of representations of Lie groups provides a list of the minimal
linear realizations -- or in technical jargon, the irreducible representations
-- of the group. These form the building blocks for all such realizations.
Often, Lie groups arise as motions of geometric objects, as for example, the
orthogonal group is the group of distance preserving motions of the sphere. In
order to study the fine structure of such representations, or of the group
itself, it is necessary to obtain realizations of the representation that
reflect the inherent geometric structure. This has been an area of fundamental
research in noncommutative harmonic analysis for several decades. Professor
Rossi is an expert in this interface of representation theory and geometry,
especially complex geometry. For a large class of Lie groups, the most
accessible set of irreducible representations is the holomorphic discrete
series, discovered in the 1950's by Harish-Chandra. However, there are many more
representations of this type -- called highest weight representations -- that
only recently have been realized concretely. Some of these representations, said
to lie in the analytic continuation, relate directly to elementary particle
physics and also to the study of differential equations. Professor Rossi has
been in the forefront of the discovery and investigation of such
representations. Recently, he observed that these geometric contexts would allow
considerable generalization. This point of view connects representation theory
with analysis and geometry of several complex variables. In his present
research, Professor Rossi intends to explore these constructions and make
precise which representations arise on vector bundles of forms on invariant
domains in Grassmanians, and as far as possible develop the analytic tools to
make a complete study of the structure of these representations. For example,
the representations which arise in this way are subrepresentations of the tensor
product of holomorphic discrete series and adjoints, and they should be in the
analytic continuation of non-holomorphic discrete series.