* 8701861
* The Visual Hierarchy of Model-Based Recognition             (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Robert Hummel, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce
* 11/30/1990
* USD 119,945.00

Flexible computer vision systems for robotics and automation must be capable of
recognizing three-dimensional objects in arbitrary positions and orientations
from partial image data. Previous research by the author has led to the
development of a system that can solve this task for a small library of possible
objects. This project will extend these successful methods to much more general
problems which will allow the system to work efficiently with large numbers of
objects containing internal degrees of freedom. Research will continue on
developing new methods for perceptual organization, in which image features are
grouped into meaningful structures for matching to object models. Object models
will incorporate variable parameters and articulations, and these internal
parameters will be solved for simultaneously with the determination of
viewpoint. Objects will be described as a hierarchy of models, in which
components can be recognized and used to infer the presence of higher-levels.
Low-level segmentation and perceptual grouping will be extended to allow for the
detection of arbitrary curves. A major goal will be to develop an overall theory
of recognition that can be applied to each level of the visual hierarchy. Such a
theory would describe each level of recognition in terms of fitting over-
constrained data to partial models, in which the evaluation of each level of
recognition would be based on the use of similar statistical operations.