* 8701292
* Tracing the Origin and Measuring the Deposition of Aerosols Over the North Atlantic Ocean Through the Use of 210 Pb and 7Be (AEROCE)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1991
* Karl Turekian, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/28/1991
* USD 338,000.00

Over the past 10-15 years atmospheric chemistry has evolved from a young
research discipline devoted primarily to local problems of urban pollution and
air quality to a mature science concerned with the hemispheric to global scale
cycling of a wide variety of chemical species. To a large extent this change has
resulted from an increasing realization that human activities can cause chemical
disturbances to the natural troposphere on scales far beyond local concerns.
Well-known examples include changes in the regional-to-global concentrations of
certain nitrogen compounds, lead and other heavy metals, artificial
radionuclides, a number of synthetic organic substances, certain acid-forming
species, carbon dioxide and methane. These chemical changes in the atmosphere
can often extend to the earth's soils, oceans, and biota far from the original
source region. They can result in alterations in the earth's climate, changes in
vital nutrient cycles, and impact significantly on the public health and quality
of life on earth. The Atmosphere/Ocean Chemistry Experiment (AEROCE) will be a
coordinated multi-institutional atmospheric and marine chemistry research
project centered in the North Atlantic region. The ultimate goal of the AEROCE
project will be the development of a predictive capability for the continentally
derived species observed in the marine troposphere over the North Atlantic. The
selection of sites and the measurement protocol in AEROCE has been developed
jointly by modelers and field experimentalists. This element of the AEROCE
research project is designed to measure: (1) the concentration of 210Pb and 7Be
in all aerosol samples collected as part of the standard AEROCE protocol at all
sites, (2) the monthly deposition flux of 210Pb and 7Be to all sites and (3) the
long term mean deposition rates of 137Cs and 210Pb to soils at a majority of the
sites. These nuclides have well known sources and do not undergo chemical
transformations. This research seeks to achieve 5 objectives: (1) The observed
concentrations and deposition of these nuclides will be used to test and refine
both event-oriented and climatological numerical models of atmospheric
transport. (2) The correlations between the radionuclides and other species will
be used to infer the sources of the other species and of seasonal changes in
source or transport. (3) The ratio of deposition rate to surface air
concentration will be used to quantify the efficiency of transfer of aerosols to
the surface. (4) The 7Be/210Pb ratio will be developed as a measure of vertical
mixing in the troposphere. (5) Comparison of 7Be/210Pb in air and deposition
will help quantify both the absolute value and the vertical variation of these
elements.