* 8701014
* Dissertation Research:  The Influence of Predation on       Mayfly Assemblages:  Comparative Studies in Neotropical     Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* David Allan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 12/31/1989
* USD 12,792.00

Little is known about the role of predators in tropical rivers. This study will
examine predator prey relationships in a series of Venezuelan streams, where a
wide range of predation regimes are found in close proximity. In order to
investigate the direct and indirect effects of predators on mayflies
(Order:Ephemeroptera), a series of comparative studies will be conducted between
streams that range from naturally fishless to others containing &gt; 60 fish
species. Direct effects of predators will be examined by performing field
enclosure/exclosure experiments. Field experiments will be coupled with data on
mayfly drift, predator numbers and diet, to determine if the efficacy of
predators in controlling prey abundance differs according to predator density
and/or prey recolonization potential. Indirect effects of predators will be
examined in several contexts. Diel patterns of mayfly drift and activity on
stone tops will be compared between sites. Cinematography will be used to
explore the importance of predators in determining both when and where mayflies
forage, and the effects of predator harassment on foraging efficiency. Findings
from this research will have bearing on general questions concerning the
significance of predation in structuring lotic systems and whether the role of
biotic interactions differs between tropical and temperate systems. Professor J.
D. Allan and doctoral candidate A. S. Flecker are well qualified to conduct the
investigation which will entail significant logistic and scientific challenges.
The ecology of neotropical rivers is an important area for ecological research.