* 8701157
* Trace Elements and Radionuclides in North Atlantic          Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1991
* Thomas Church, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/28/1991
* USD 229,519.00

Over the past 10-15 years atmospheric chemistry has evolved from a young
research discipline devoted primarily to local problems of urban pollution and
air quality to a mature science concerned with the hemispheric to global scale
cycling of a wide variety of chemical species. To a large extent this change has
resulted from an increasing realization that human activities can cause chemical
disturbances to the natural troposphere on scales far beyond local concerns.
Well-known examples include changes in the regional-to-global concentrations of
certain nitrogen compounds, lead and other heavy metals, artificial
radionuclides, a number of synthetic organic substances, certain acid-forming
species, carbon dioxide and methane. These chemical changes in the atmosphere
can often extend to the earth's soils, oceans, and biota far from the original
source region. They can result in alterations in the earth's climate, changes in
vital nutrient cycles, and impact significantly on the public health and quality
of life on earth. The Atmosphere/Ocean Chemistry Experiment (AEROCE) will be a
coordinated multi-institutional atmospheric and marine chemistry research
project centered in the North Atlantic region. The ultimate goal of the AEROCE
project will be the development of a predictive capability for the continentally
derived species observed in the marine troposphere over the North Atlantic. The
selection of sites and the measurement protocol in AEROCE has been developed
jointly by modelers and field experimentalists. This element of the AEROCE
project is concerned with examining trace elements (Al, As, Cd, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni,
Sb, Se, and Zn) in precipitation to the North Atlantic to assess atmospheric
transport and deposition of continentally derived material to the sea. The North
Atlantic is chosen because it is surrounded by relatively strong natural and
anthropogenic sources of these elements. Precipitation is sampled because it is
largely responsible for trace element deposition from the marine troposphere.
The data will be compared to that in associated aerosols to help identify
sources of trace elements over the North Atlantic, to help confirm associated
air mass trajectory information, and to help evaluate the extent of trace
element removal by marine precipitation. The corresponding wet flux data will
reveal the contribution of precipitation to North Atlantic trace elements
budgets. Specifically, these wet atmospheric fluxes comprise a significant
portion of the global ocean flux and ultimately influence the biological
productivity of oceanic surface waters. To meet the research objectives, the
P.I.'s will utilize a carefully selected suite of trace elements, employ
synoptic collection procedures, ensure accurate data through intercalibration
and quality control protocols, and integrate fully with other research results.