* 8701687
* Energy Balance and Control of Physiological Dormancy
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* George Kenagy, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 01/31/1990
* USD 75,000.00

Energy balance and constancy of body temperature are controlled by the brain in
relation to changing conditions of an animal's body and environment. An attempt
will be made here to investigate the characteristics of this regulatory system
by studying an exceptional situation: the brief nightly period of 1-10 hours
when the normal constancy of body temperature is abandoned as an energy
conserving measure by one of the smallest known warm- blooded animals, a
hummingbird. Like hibernating mammals, hummingbirds can enter a physiological
state of torpor, in which metabolic rate and body temperature are greatly
reduced. The kind of information about the internal state of the bird and the
environment that is integrated by the physiological control system that
initiates torpor will be determined. The special role of torpor in making
possible the rapid and repeated weight gain necessary to achieve long-distance
migration will also be investigated. Although hummingbirds enter the deepest
state of torpor known among birds, almost every species of bird studied, as well
as many mammals, reduce nighttime body temperature and metabolic rate to some
degree in times of energy shortage. Torpor also appears to be analagous to human
sleep. Thus torpor in hummingbirds provides an opportunity to study series of
generally important physiological fundamentals with the special experimental
advantages afforded by an exception to the rule of constant regulation.