* 8701021
* Dissertation Research:  Differential Stress Tolerance in    Dioecious Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1989
* Russell Monson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 06/30/1989
* USD 3,000.00

In the past, botanists have reasoned that the separation of the male and female
flowers on different plants (dioecy) may have prevented self-fertilization and
the inherent problems associated with continuous inbreeding. Recently, however,
other suggestions concerning the evolution and maintenance of dioecy have been
proposed. Several of these hypotheses are based on the differential costs of
reproduction in males and females. Females are hypothesized to have higher
reproductive costs because they supply the energy, and water, and nutrients for
seed and fruit development. Males, in contrast, only experience the costs of
producing pollen for fertilization. Because of this difference in reproductive
costs, it has been assumed that females would experience greater stress under
low resource conditions such as shading, low nutrient availability and low water
situations and would therefore be found with less frequency in unfavorable
ecological sites. This prediction has been borne out qualitatively in many
descriptive studies which have indicated that in some species males and females
are spatially segregated along ecological stress gradients. However, differences
between male and female plants in degree of stress tolerance has been
experimentally studied in only three species and results have been inconclusive.
This project will focus on differences in stress tolerance between male and
female plants of several dioecious species under conditions of low availability
of light, water and nitrogen. In order to gauge the level of stress tolerance
the response of plant growth and photosynthesis rate to the stress treatments
will be measured. Individuals of three dioecious species, Thalictrum dasycarpum,
Silene alba, and Spinacia oleracea, will be used. Individuals will be monitored
for differences in photosynthetic rates and growth patterns within each species.
Water and nitrogen contents of leaves will also be measured.