* 8701967
* Mathematical Sciences: Constant Term Identities and Schur   Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Kevin Kadell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard McDonald
* 11/30/1989
* USD 29,600.00

This research will concentrate on three areas: the completion of the proof of
the q-MacDonald-Morris constant term conjectures, combinatorial proofs of some
results related to the B root system and the q-Selberg polynomials. The basic
theme is the extension of techniques which are successful for the A root system
to the other root systems. Kadell has extended Aomoto's proof of Selberg's
integral to the q-case and proved the q- MacDonald-Morris conjecture for BC root
system. This should extend to treat the remaining root systems. A number of
results for Schur functions related to the A root systems have been proven
combinatorially. Kadell will attack some related problems associated with the B
root system. Finally the q-Selberg polynomials extend the Schur functions, the
little q-Jacobi polynomials and the zonal polynomials and it is hoped that a
theory of these polynomials, including a combinatorial representation, can be
based on a conjectured orthogonality relation. This research focuses on the
theory of combinatorial identities, an important subject that combines
combinatorial ideas with deep problems and techniques from algebra and analysis.
The subject has recently become even more important with the discovery with
important ties to physics. The MacDonald conjectures and their many variants
have been the central focal point of this area for years. Kadell is making
significant progress on these deep problems and will continue to make exciting
contributions during this research.