* 8701911
* SIPP Access:  Facility for the Analysis of Large-Scale      Complex Longitudinal Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1990
* Alice Robbin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Larry Whittaker
* 07/31/1990
* USD 505,150.00

SIPP ACCESS represents a prototype for managing data of the social sciences and
producing a scientific understanding of what is required to approach large-scale
data bases. It is an experimental facility aimed at the discovery of improved
techniques for creating scientific knowledge through the application of computer
and information science to the social sciences. Its goals include (1) increasing
the utilization of stored longitudinal data, (2) improving data retrieval from
large-scale complex data collection activities, (3) clarifying the meaning of
replicated measurements, and (4) training researchers in understanding such data
in order to produce new knowledge of social and economic phenomena. The
experiment incorporates an evaluation component to determine whether this
conception of managing large-scale complex data can be appled to data other than
SIPP (the Survey of Income and Program Participation). SIPP ACCESS mobilizes new
technologies to make complex panel data available to researchers, analysts, and
policymakers at low cost. SIPP ACCESS links measurements to documentation,
online data to a national network of users, and results of research to users,
thereby accelerating research developments. Its public utility aspect creates
economies in data handling by reducing the complexity of materials that a
researcher must deal with and by reorganizing replicated measurements into a
form consistent with the conceptual structure of analytical models of dynamic
phenomena. Efficiencies in retrieval and clarity in the longitudinal design of
SIPP are achieved through eliminating redundant data and through restructuring
cross-sectional data into time series and event histories. Data and
documentation are integrated through an information management system that
improves the delivery of data by eliminating delays, clarifying the meaning of
measurements, and ensuring the retrieval of appropriate measures for analysis.
Interactive access to data and documentation is provided through a national
dial-in system, a relational data base management system which allows
researchers to "build" their own data files and reorganize, transform, and link
data over time according to their particular research questions. Optical
archival data storage eliminates all programmer interventions between users and
the data base. The data base management system improves retrieval of data from
very large files, thereby assisting researchers in solving problems related to
analysis such as identifying longitudinal samples, converting events to time
series, time series to event histories, and identifying inconsistent data.
Training workshops are used to introduce researchers and policy analysts to the
subtleties of longitudinal data, relational theory, and the relational data base
management system.