* 8701226
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Nitrogen Metabolism in    Laminaria Japonica
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Boudewijn Brinkhuis, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 01/31/1989
* USD 30,344.00

This proposal is for support of a seasonal study of the nitrogen metabolism of
the brown alga Laminaria japonica. The studies will focus on the relationships
between nitrogen deficiency, nitrate utilization and kelp growth with the goal
of establishing a productive fertilization approach for natural populations of
the alga while assessing questions relating to the timing of nitrogen-limited
growth. The work will be conducted by Dr. Boudewijn Brinkuis, SUNY at Stony
Brook, and Dr. Wu Chaoyun, Chinese Academy of Science's Institute of Oceanology,
Qingdao, China, under the terms of the US-PRC Protocol for Cooperation in Basic
Sciences. The proposed research will draw on a vast store of empirical knowledge
which China has accumulated in response to the commercial demand for kelp
(laminaria). This seaweed is one of the major seaweeds used for food and
chemical extracts and has been mass produced in China since the early 1950's.
While other studies have been conducted on kelp species, no studies to date have
looked at the commercial kelp, Laminaria japonica. This study, while of
potential practical benefit, will also attempt to answer questions unresolved in
earlier research on nitrogen metabolism in kelp. Field studies will be conducted
in China and laboratory analyses will take place both in the CAS laboratories in
Qingdao and at SUNY Stony Brook.