* 8701388
* Observations of the Ecology and Behavior of Mesopelagic Fishes From the Submersible Johnson-Sea-Link
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* G. Richard Harbison, Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 12/31/1989
* USD 54,736.00

The region of the ocean called the mesopelagic, of midwaters, lies in the depths
between -200 and -1000 meters. It covers virtually the entire extent of the
world's ocean excepting the continental shelves and small areas around ocean
islands; therefore it represents one of the world's largest types of
environments. The mesopelagic is characterized by cold, dark waters with ususual
life forms but, in general, our knowledge of this huge region is minimal, We
know of the accounts of strange fishes and the prevalence of bioluminescent
organisms, but little of the distribution, abundance, and behavior of the living
things that occupy these depths. Now, with the advent of some extremely
sophisticated submersibles that make open water observations very sucessful, our
understanding of this ocean region is starting to expand greatly. Dr. Harbison
and colleagues have contributed greatly to our initial progress studying the
ecology and behavior of animals in the mesopelagic world. They have proposed to
conduct some preliminary investigations into the responses of mesopelagic fishes
to environmental stimuli (visual and acoustic); they will also make comparisons
of traditional vs. submersible sampling techniques using comparisons of
traditional vs. submersible sampling techniques used in the midwaters. These
studies will provide exciting new findings from this poorly known region and
will yield some important information about how effective our past sampling
efforts have been in this environment. The Biological Oceanography Program
recommends a one-year award at $54,736.