* 8701356
* Mathematical Sciences: Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Stuart Hastings, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1989
* USD 129,969.00

Work will be done on problems involving nonlinear differential equations. The
work will focus on three areas. In the first, investigations will be carried out
on the relation between Painleve transcendents and certain linear integral
equations arising in inverse scattering theory. Certain ordinary differential
equations in the complex plane have only poles for singularities. These
equations, or transcendents, are related to nonlinear partial differential
equations solvable by the method of inverse scattering. At this time only
selected examples illustrate the connection but it is clear that an entire class
of equations can be treated. A systematic study of the entire relationship will
be undertaken. A second line of research deals with the failure or blow-up of
solutions of nonlinear diffusion equations. Blow-up of solutions depends heavily
on the nature of initial conditions (as well as the nonlinearity term in the
equation). Since one is often dealing with functions of several space variables,
blow-up can occur at different points at different times. This leads to the main
conjecture of the project: blow-up must be confined to a set of space variables
of negligible size (measure zero). Third, work will be done on existence,
multiplicity and asymptotics for combustion theory models with complex chemistry
including radicals. The models represent steady planar flame fronts in premixed
combustion. This analysis goes beyond traditional simple reactions. Most models
have to confront or hypothesize away what is known as the cold boundary
difficulty to support traveling wave solutions. If intermediate species or
radicals are introduced into a system of reactions, a scheme of the principal
investigator leads to new existence proofs for flame layers. Work will proceed
in expanding methods developed to cover other complex models, validate their
asymptotic expansions and consider problems of multiplicity or uniqueness.