* 8701048
* Dissertation Research:  Physiological-Ecological Correlates of Hexose/Sucrose Preference in Neotropical Avian Frugivores
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1989
* Peter Feinsinger, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 05/31/1989
* USD 8,500.00

Plants pollinated by hummingbirds produce nectars containing mainly sucrose
whereas those pollinated by perching birds produce mainly fructose and glucose
(hexoses). A possible explanation for this pattern is that the nectars that
plants produce are the result of selection by pollinators and that hummingbirds
prefer sucrose over hexoses and perching birds prefer hexoses over sucrose. The
question then is why do some animals prefer hexoses over sucrose? Sucrose must
be hydrolyzed by an intestinal enzyme (sucrase) into glucose and fructose before
being absorbed in the intestine. In man and other animals there is variation in
the activity of these enzymes. At least some of this variation has been
explained by dietary habits. Among birds the presence and activity of sucrase
may be correlated with dietary habits. Species with diets high in carbohydrates
should have higher sucrase activities than those whose diets are poor in
carbohydrates. Thus, the dietary habits of birds strongly influence their
preference and tolerance for simple sugars thus narrowing their spectrum of food
choices especially in regard to fruit and nectar. The rewards offered by plants,
therefore, probably reflect the evolutionary constraints imposed by the feeding
habits of the birds that pollinate them or disperse their seeds. In this
research the investigators will test these ideas in a neotropical community that
includes several species of hummingbirds and perching-birds that visit flowers.
Intestinal enzumes and sugar preferences will be assayed.