* 8701405
* Mathematical Sciences: Spatial and Temporal Patterns in     Non-Linear Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1990
* William Troy, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 11/30/1990
* USD 129,735.00

The investigators will continue their studies over the last several years of
pattern formation in biological systems and the behavior of nonlinear equations
in fluid mechanics. Their joint work includes extending a recent theorem which
proves the existence of oscillatory solutions in an inhomogeneous reaction
diffusion equation. They will also extend their recent studies of a fourth order
nonlinear differential equation which arises in boundary layer theory in fluid
mechanics. Professor Ermentrout will continue his joint research work with
Professor Nancy Kopell of Boston University on the behavior of aggregates of
coupled oscillators. He will also continue his joint research work on molluscan
pigmentation patterns with Professor George Oster of University of California at
Berkeley and work on fungal growth with Professor Leah Edelstein of Duke
University. Professor Troy will extend his recent investigations of a reaction
diffusion equation arising in chemical reactor and combustion theory. Depending
on the values of physical parameters in the model, the solutions exhibit a
variety of possible behavior ranging from finite time "blow-up" to finite time
"extinction". He will continue his investigations of the behavior of self
similar solutions which are used in analyzing the asymptotics of both the blow-
up and extinction processes. This research falls into the general area of
applied mathematical analysis, with potential applications to chemistry and
biology.