* 8701897
* Molecular Analysis of Fungal Sporulation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Lawrence Yager, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1991
* USD 270,000.00

The formation of conidia (asexual spores) in the filamentous ascomycete,
Aspergillus nidulans, involves the production of differentiated structures
composed of several different tissue types and results in the synthesis of a
large number of new poly (A)+ RNAs not observed in undifferentiated mycelia. An
important feature of this organism is that conidiation is normally suppressed in
submerged culture, but can be initiated by changing the growth habitat to an air
interface. Induction (the transfer of colonies from liquid to solid media),
however, will permit the initiation of conidiation only after the organism has
attained a change of state termed developmental competence. The proposed
research is directed toward determining the molecular basis of developmental
competence and toward understanding the mechanisms involved in the initiation of
a regulatory pathway. Preinduction mutants have been genetically characterized,
but a molecular approach is required to determine how different preinduction
functions interact, and to deduce how the expression of preinduction genes
initiates the expression of the large number of post induction genes which are
transcriptionally activated by growth in the induced state. The specific aims of
this proposal are (l) to clone the wild-type genes represented by the
preinduction and early postinduction mutants, (2) to compare the transcriptional
activity of these genes with their time of expression as ascertained by
temperature-shift analysis, and (3) to identify gene interactions by determining
if the transcription of one gene is affected by the mutation of another gene.
Development, the transition of a totipotent undifferentiated cell to a regulated
collection of differentiated cells, is a complex process. The use of a "simple"
eukaryotic organism such as Aspergillus as a model system for mechanisms
utilized in the differentiation process can suggest approaches and mechanisms
for understanding the process in more complex organisms. The results to be
obtained from this work should give greater insight into the as yet mysterious
process of differentiation.