* 8701335
* Neurogenetic Studies of Biological Rhythms in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* F. Rob Jackson, Worcester Foundation for Biomedical Research, Inc.
* Continuing grant
* Stacy Springer
* 01/31/1991
* USD 200,014.00

In both vertebrates and invertebrates, endogenous clocks governing the
expression of biological periodicity are localized in the central nervous
system. One such clock in the fruitfly Drosophila has been the subject of
extensive genetic and molecular studies. These studies have resulted in the
identification of several genes whose products determine the properties of
biological clocks in Drosophila. One of these genes, per, has been cloned and
sequenced, making it possible to elucidate the structure of a clock protein. The
presence of per-homologous transcripts in deletion-bearing mutants lacking the
per locus suggests that a family of related clock genes exists in Drosophila.
Dr. Jackson has begun to test this hypothesis by using reduced-stringency
hybridization conditions to isolate per-homologous clones from phage/Drosophila
cDNA and genomic libraries. In order to further characterize these putative
biological rhythm genes, he proposes the following studies. (1) He will
characterize the tissue and developmental expression of per-homologous genes.
(2) The chromosomal location of these genes will be determined, and (3) genetic
methods will be used to assess their role in the development and maintenance of
biological rhythms. (4) The complete DNA sequence of one of these related genes
will be derived in order to predict the primary structure of a per-homologous
protein. Completion of these aims will provide information on the genetic basis
of biological rhythms.