* 8701369
* Multiprocessor-Based VLSI (Very Large Scale Integrated)     Layout Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Rob Rutenbar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 12/31/1989
* USD 97,000.00

Dr. Rutenbar will investigate VLSI design layout tasks that can be structured as
combinatorial optimization problems and solved with parallel simulated annealing
algorithms. Two sorts of multi-processors are becoming available: shared memory
and distributed memory machines. The research will consider running parallel
algorithms on distributed memory machines. This is because parallel simulated
annealing in shared memory machines tends to be conceptually easier and has
received more attention than in distributed memory machines. The research will
build on an operational floor-planner, which the principal investigator has
recently built. It will be the vehicle for testing new ideas for algorithm
decompositions and different styles of parallel simulated annealing. This work
will be carefully instrumented and measured to identify and quantify important
effects on speedup and solution quality. After the experimentation and
measurement phase, the principal investigator will develop models of how speedup
and solution quality are effected by different styles of parallelism. The goal
is to gain sufficient knowledge of parallel simulated annealing in general to
permit reasonable control of the process applied to a range of VLSI design
problems. Very and ultra large scale integrated (VLSI/ULSI) circuit design has
become a topic of intense interest in the research community and practical
interest to engineers and scientists. This research addresses the need to run
sophisticated design algorithms for ULSI circuit design. It is a need that has
become of paramount importance as such devices become increasingly complex and
the industry more competitive. To do this in a reasonable amount of time, it is
necessary to consider the speedup that running the design software on parallel
computers. This entails development of new algorithms which run efficiently on
parallel machines. A general method for running algorithms on parallel machines
is called "simulated annealing". This method, while conceptually simple, does
not have obvious implementations for VLSI/ULSI design algorithms. The principal
investigator has made important conceptual advances in this area and will
further develop them toward practice in his research.