* 8701512
* Response of Reinforced Masonry Walls to Out-of-Plane DynamicExcitation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Sami Masri, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 12/31/1988
* USD 105,920.00

Masonry construction comprises a large portion of building construction in the
U.S. and the world. Reinforced masonry construction use is increasing in
moderate to higher seismic zones because of its apparent features of economy,
fire safety, architectural flexibility and ease of construction. The present
state of masonry structural analysis and design and materials and construction
technologies does not enable an accurate prediction of building behavior under
lateral loads such as seismic loads. In the U.S., masonry buildings are designed
and built with methods, codes, and standards that rely upon a mixture of working
stress methods, empirical rules, and questionable methods for determining
allowable stress values. Masonry is also a complex building material because of
the large number of design and construction variables which influence the final
product configuration and its response under seismic loads. In order to describe
the seismic response of masonry buildings it is necessary to develop the
fundamental knowledge base to determine basic design methodologies consistent
with safety and economic requirements. This research project will investigate
and provide basic data for verification of analytical models that describe the
out-of-plane response of masonry walls. It is focused on reinforced clay masonry
walls. The experimental portion of this program will consist of quasi- static,
cyclic testing of reinforced clay masonry walls subjected to out-of-plane
loadings. The data produced will include force- displacement load paths and
hysteretic loops, as well as strain data in the masonry and reinforcement. The
analytical portion will utilize the mathematical models developed by others in
the TCCMAR program. The final research results will then be used to establish
rational limit state design methodologies to resist seismic loadings. The
principal investigator is highly qualified to conduct this research project and
the institution provides excellent facilities. An award is recommended for this
twelve-month research project. This research project is part of the U.S.-Japan
Coordinated Program for Masonry Building Research and the Technical Coordinating
Committee for Masonry Research (TCCMAR) Program.