* 8701263
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis on Spaces of       Homogeneous Type
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Guido Weiss, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* William Y. Velez
* 11/30/1990
* USD 221,949.00

Historically, classical harmonic analysis originates with the problem of
modeling such physical phenomena as the transmission of sound and heat, and in
particular the superposition of fundamental modes of transmission.
Mathematicaly, this translates into the more general idea of the representation
of functions in terms of simple building blocks, and in the modern theory one
studies generalized functions and operators as well. Classically, the building
blocks would typically be related to the algebraic structure of the underlying
space; however, in current "robust" theory they may be chosen in relation to a
class of operators, and the underlying domain may be less well structured. Most
research is understandable in terms of operators that carry one space into
another. The underlying domains include classical Euclidean spaces and
generalizations such as space-time, Lie transformation groups, local fields, and
discrete structures. Applications are pervasive throughout mathematics, and in
applications as wide ranging as antenna design, CAT scans, tomography,
seismology, particle physics, economic forecasting, pattern recognition, and
coding theory. Seemingly abstract domains such as local fields and "trees" are,
in fact, natural settings for applications in pattern recognition and numerical
approximation. Professors Weiss and Taibleson conduct research in the following
areas: Hary space theory, in terms of which the building blocks are atoms and
molecules; convergence of Fourier series by means of spaces generated by
"blocks"; interpolation theory, which is concerned with mappings of families of
functions; and the development of harmonic analysis on trees. Professor Weiss is
a leader in the study of harmonic analysis that treats building blocks that do
not derive from algebraic structure, while Professor Taibleson is a leader in
the extension of classical harmonic analysis techniques to local fields and
trees. Their proposed research includes the extension of methods, used in the
study of blocks, to related function spaces and properties that are not yet well
understood; extension of interpolation methods; and the cexpansion of harmonic
analysis on trees to more general structures such as graphs. The latter would
bring this methodology to bear in the context of probability and combinatorics.