* 8701024
* Dissertation Research:  Impact of a Predator and Competitor on a Multi-species Community:  Brook Trout and Appalachian  Salamanders
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1989
* William Resetarits, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 07/31/1989
* USD 8,808.00

Perturbation experiments have become an important tool of community ecologists
trying to understand what factors determine the distribution and abundance of
species. Biotic perturbations, such as the introduction of new species into
communities, are of particular interest. How a community responds to a new
species and how that species integrates itself into the existing framework of
interactions are especially useful in inferring mechanisms of community
organization. Predation and competition are important interactions within
streamside salamander communities. These commnunities are partially sympatric
with a large predatory fish, the brook trout, providing a biotic perturbation
relevant to natural distributions. Predation and competition are important
interactions within this salamander community. Impact of trout likely involves
both predation and competition and may affect the community via direct and
indirect effects. Community organization, species interactions and responses to
brook trout will be studied using three approaches. Natural experiments will
provide data on the effects of long-term co-occurrence. Replicated field
experiments allow rigorous testing of the hypothesis that brook trout affect
community organization in streamside salamanders. Factorial experiments in an
array of artificial streams will determine the nature and relative importance of
interactions.