* 8701879
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research on Systematics of the   American Marsupials Using Single-copy DNA-DNA Hybridization
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1990
* John Kirsch, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1990
* USD 22,995.00

This award supports the participation of Prof. John A. W. Kirsch of the
University of Wisconsin-Madison in a program of cooperative research with Prof.
Osvaldo Reig of the University of Buenos Aires aimed at using the latest
techniques of biochemistry and genetic analysis to clarify the taxonomies of
sister-group relationships among various marsupials. An additional object of
this research is to test the proposition that the average rate of evolution in
DNA is both regular and the same in mammals as in birds. Determining the
taxonomies among the major groups of marsupials can be of great use, first in
understanding processes of evolution and, eventually, in obtaining a complete
description of the sequence of evolution in both marsupials and in man. It is
believed that biochemical signatures--e.g., genomes--evolve as regular functions
of time and therefore, each of different lines derived from a common ancestor
evolves at the same rate. Given this evolution, the amount of divergence between
any two lines will be proportional to the time elapsed since their most recent
common ancestor, and the sequence of branching points among all lines may be
accurately reconstructed. The researchers involved in this project will use
single-copy DNA-DNA hybridization, a relatively simple technique of comparing
the DNA from two species, in order to assess the magnitude of DNA
complementarity. Genetic variability will be analyzed using electrophoretic
techniques, and chromosomal development will be studied using direct chromosome-
chromosome comparison techniques. The U.S. investigators are expert in
hybridization studies, while their Argentinian collaborators will perform the
remainder of the analytical studies; both groups will be involved in the
collection of sample material in Argentina and the U.S. Verification that
structural genes evolve in a predictable fashion with time would be important in
demonstrating that the degree of chemical similarity among organisms is
proportional to their "relatedness"--or degree of common ancestry--and a
biochemically based time-developing sequence of evolutionary branching points
from common ancestors should become possible based upon this theory.