* 8701574
* Mathematical Sciences: Analysis and Control of Mechanical   and Flexible Systems and Identification of Dynamic          Errors-in-Variables Models
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1990
* Anthony Bloch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/1990
* USD 31,500.00

The principal investigator will use a variety of theoretical techniques to
analyse certain problems in the field of modeling and control of dynamical
systems. The two areas considered are the analysis and control of mechanical
systems which contain rigid and flexible components, and the identification of
static and dynamic systems from sets of data. The class of mechanical systems to
be analyzed can be modeled as Lagrangian or Hamiltonian systems evolving on
finite-or infinite- dimensional manifolds. Using the theory that has been
developed for analysing systems of this mathematical type, the principal
investigator will investigate properties such as the existence of equilibria,
stability, and the existence of conserved integrals and symmetries for these
mechanical systems. Further, he will generalize aspects of the theory of control
of nonlinear finite-dimensional systems to encompass control of these more
complex infinite- dimensional systems. In the area of identification, the
principal investigator will analyse systems where all variables are subject to
error- the "errors- in-variables" systems. His aim is to build on recent work in
this area to develop a satisfactory theory of dynamic error-in variables
systems. Frequency domain techniques as well as techniques from stochastic
realization theory will be used. The problems analysed here from a theoretical
perspective are also of great importance for many practical applications in
aeronautics, robotics and other areas.