* 8701904
* Mathematical Sciences: Research on Optimal Stochastic       Control and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Wendell Fleming, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1990
* USD 189,052.00

This project includes several subprojects and represents quite a vast research
program in the area of stochastic control, stochastic processes and nonlinear
filtering. The research in stochastic control proposed by Professor Fleming is
focused on the questions related to the existence and properties of solutions to
the Hamilton-Jacobi equation. One outstanding question is whether given the
Hamiltonian function there is a corresponding stochastic control problem for
diffusion processes leading to this function. Recently, Fleming and Souganidis
introduced a new formulation of a stochastic differential game, based on a new
deterministic approach to differential games, which leads to the solution of
this problem by replacing the control problem by a game problem. Fleming also
intends to work on a number of open problems related to viscosity solutions for
nonlinear first- order partial differential equations. Among open problems to be
considered are the theory of discontinuous viscosity solutions, and the
application of duality theorems of convex analysis to approximate the value
function of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation. The research in stochastic processes
centers on the exit problem of Freidlin-Wentsel theory. Fleming introduced the
stochastic control approach to this problem and applied an asymptotic expansion
to the dynamic programming equation obtained after a logarythmic transformation.
This enables him to compute exit probabilities from the expansion. These
expansions are of interest for problems of rare overloads in communications
channels. On the nonlinear filtering problem, Fleming proposes to use some
asymptotic techniques to describe analytically the structure of the nonlinear
filter for small intensities of noise in the output equation. Stochastic control
is a branch of applied mathematics and engineering system theory that deals with
control of dynamical systems in situations involving random inputs and
measurement noise. The mathematical tools involved in this research are the
theory of stochastic processes, nonlinear partial differential equations,
asymptotic methods and numerical methods.