* 8701275
* Mathematical Sciences: Smooth Multivariate Piecewise        Polynomials; Subdivision Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1990
* Carl De Boor, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1990
* USD 156,992.00

This award will support mathematical research on problems of approximation
theory and subdivision algorithms. Work on approximations will deal with the
approximation power and local structure of spaces of smooth piecewise polynomial
functions of two and three variables. The immediate goal is to make precise the
limitations put on approximation power by smoothness demands and choice of the
underlying partition or mesh of the approximating space. The underlying
structure is relatively simple although the problems are difficult and not
motivated by one- dimensional theory. A domain is subdivided and a function is
defined to be equal to some polynomial on each piece of the subdivision (the
polynomials can change with each piece). Each degree of overall smoothness
forced on the function changes its approximating power. The interdependency of
the polynomial pieces makes it difficult to come up with effective approximation
procedures. In two-dimensions for example, use of highly symmetrical partitions
(triangles) results in the theorem that the compactly supported functions
already have best-possible span. Work is to be done in establishing whether or
not this is an isolated phenomenon. Subdivision algorithms provide an intriguing
alternative to standard ways of generating smooth curves and surfaces. Such
algorithms obtain a curve or surface as the limit of a sequence of successively
refined piecewise linear elements, each obtained by "whittling" pieces off its
predecessor. They are fundamental tools in the area of computer aided geometric
design. One can control the shape of the limiting curve by controlling the
choice of initial broken lines, for example. Thus one may be able to design
specific shapes and arrive at specified design characteristics through these
algorithms. What is not completely clear is whether or not the subdivision
algorithms always converge. As might be expected, the problems concerning
surfaces are more difficult than those for curves. Yet even in the latter case,
examples show that limiting curves which for all appearances are smooth (on a
monitor) are actually fractals.