* 8701158
* International Symposium on Bombesin-Like Peptides
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1988
* Yvette Tache, New York Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 11/30/1988
* USD 5,000.00

In the past few years, much has been learned about how small molecules like
neuropeptides exert influence on the body and brain. The objectives of this
conference are to provide an in- depth review of the various aspects of
bombesin-like peptide research and applications of such findings. Progress in
the bombesin field has been accelerated by three decent developments. First, was
the demonstration of the potent biological activity of bombesin to influence gut
function and the central regulation of homeostasis. Secondly, the
characterization of mammalian bombesin-like peptides, called gastrin releasing
peptide (GRP) and the subsequent cloning of the human GRP gene. Thirdly, was the
discovery that bombesin and mammalian related peptides acts as an important
autocrine type growth factor in human small cell lung cancer. These findings
have lead to a proliferation of interest and multidisciplinary studies. Invited
speakers will address issues related to the following topics: 1) Chemistry and
molecular biology of bombesin-like peptides including cloning and
characterization of bombesin cDNA and the translational products of bombesin
genes, 2) Tissue distribution and content of bombesin-like peptides, 3) Bombesin
receptors, localization, characterization and progress in the development of
competitive anatagonists, 4) Cellular, peripheral and central nervous system
actions of the peptide. The meeting will provide for the first time a forum for
neuroscientists, anatomists, pharacologists, gastroenterologists, molecular
biologists and oncologists to update current research activities on bombesin-
like peptides and also to delineate the areas for further development and set up
directions for coming years particularly the role of these peptides in normal
and malignant tissue growth and regulation of gut function. The book to be
published by the New York Academy of Sciences as a result of the meeting will be
the first comprehensive monograph on the subject.