* 8701627
* Mathematical Sciences: Abstract Spectral Decompositions and Transference Methods in Modern Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Earl Berkson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1989
* USD 54,922.00

Professor Berkson conducts research on the interface of harmonic analysis,
ergodic theory, and operator theory. All three are important subdisciplines of
Modern Analysis. Harmonic analysis, roughly speaking, embodies the
interrelationships of mathematical analysis and group actions. Historically,
harmonic analysis has its origins in Fourier series and partial differential
equations. The related field of ergodic theory originated in statistical
mechanics. Its thrust is in the understanding and exploitation of the concept of
recurrence. Both ergodic theory and harmonic analysis, as throughout all of
mathematical analysis, utilize methods and operations that are susceptible to
broad abstract principles. Modern operator theory, which arose in the
development of the mathematical foundation of quantum physics, seeks to identify
and explicate these abstract principles so as to unify and expand the frontiers
of science. The subject matter of this proposal is operator theory in this
conceptual sense, with emphasis on applications to ergodic theory and harmonic
analysis. Professor Berkson proposes to continue his development of an abstract
operator theory that encompasses weakened forms of orthogonality (such as
Fourier inversion and triangular truncation in noncommutative analysis). The
approach is based upon the notions of trigonometrically well-bounded operator
and spectral family of projections which are used in the general settings of
analysis to replace, respectively, the unitary operators and projection-valued
measures central to Hilbert space operator theory and its physical applications.
In prior collaborative research, Professor Berkson has developed these notions,
along with extensive applications to commutative and noncommutative analysis.
The current investigations will expand and sharpen the abstract operator theory
along these lines and its companion vector-valued transference methods, while
extending its scope to such topics as representations of locally compact abelian
groups, Fourier multiplier transference, ergodic theory, and generalized
analyticity.