* 8701541
* The Computational Complexity of Problems Related to         Number Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Ming-Deh Huang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gannon
* 12/31/1989
* USD 51,180.00

The primary focus of this research is the computational complexity of problems
related to number theory. The goal is to develop efficient algorithms for these
problems, to investigate complexity theoretic relations among them, and to apply
the results obtained to the design and analysis of public key cryptographic
systems. In the last few years, researchers have begun to explore the use of the
geometric and arithmetic theory of number fields and Abelian varieties as
fundamental tools in the study of the computational complexity of number
theoretic problems. Very recently, the principal investigator (jointly with L.
M. Adleman) used such tools to show that primality testing is in random
polynomial time. This is the first time the problem was proved to be tractable
(in the sense of randomized computation) without any hypothesis. In this result,
extensive use is made of the theory of Abelian varieties. The theoretic
machinery and algorithmic techniques developed in this work are quite general.
The project explores further applications of these techniques particularly as
they apply to primality testing, integer factoring, deterministic polynomial
factorization over finite fields, and other fundamental problems in this area.
In addition, the project investigates computational complexity under the
parallel network model and the virtual-memory model, and in addition studies
approximation algorithms for the generalized satiafiability problem. The project
addresses important computational tasks involving integers, in particular
primality testing and factorization. If successful, the new techniques will
enable computation with much larger integers which will have several practical
ramifications particularly to cryptography.