* 8701166
* Dissertation Research: The Influence of Competition and     Environmental Heterogeneity on the Movement Patterns of a   Benthic Invertebrate
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1988
* Peter Chesson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 11/30/1988
* USD 3,304.00

Although migration occurs in many communities and theoretical studies suggest
that it can be an important influence on community dynamics, it is not well
understood. Stream communities provide an excellent opportunity to investigate
migration. Recent research suggests that movement may be influenced by
intraspecific and interspecific competition such that it is density-dependent.
However, the prevalence of biotically induced migration in these communities is
unknown. A few theoretical studies suggest that density-dependent migration can
have important consequences for community dynamics; however, no thorough
investigations have been undertaken. It is clear that both empirical and
theoretical investigations are needed to understand not only the prevalence of
density-dependent migration in streams, but its importance to community
structure. A combination of laboratory and field experiments will be used to
quantify the effects of environmental heterogeneity and intraspecific
competition on the migration of a caddisfly, Hydropsyche slossonae. Laboratory
studies will document processes and field studies will verify their importance
in natural communities. Existing theoretical models will be modified to
incorporate density-dependent migration. Through this modeling effort, the
influence of such migration on community structure will be assessed. A computer
model to will also be used to generate predictions specific to stream
communities. Combining both empirical and theoretical studies will provide a
unique opportunity to understand the influence of migration on population
dynamics.