* 8701609
* Mathematical Sciences: Differential Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1987,10/31/1990
* Wu-Yi Hsiang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* James Glazebrook
* 10/31/1990
* USD 530,600.00

This research will cover many aspects of contemporary geometry. The geometers
at Berkeley form one of the world's major centers of excellence. All four
investigators have consistently made outstanding contributions to geometry and
the prospects for substantial progress in the present research program are very
exciting. Hsiang will continue his work in global differential geometry of
submanifolds, in geometry of simplexes in constant curvature spaces and
symmetric spaces and in the geometry and the topology of Lie transformation
groups. Weinstein will carry out research in symplectic geometry and its
relations with other areas of geometric analysis and mathematical physics. In
particular he will investigate the connections between symplectic geometry and
operator algebra. This is one of the most exciting areas of modern geometry and
Weinstein is universally acknowledged as being at the forefront of this
research. Chern is the grand old man of modern differential geometry whose
continued activity into his seventies is inspiring. He will work principally on
two projects. The first concerns taut immersions and Lie sphere geometry. The
second continues work done with Wolfson concerning harmonic maps of a surface
into classical spaces. Wu will work on harmonic maps, the geometry of
4-manifolds and rational homotopy in Riemannian geometry. This will continue his
excellent work on Kaehler manifolds relating function theory with curvature
properties.