* 8701472
* Mathematical Sciences: Variational Methods and Quadratic    Differentials
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1990
* Yuk Leung, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1990
* USD 36,495.00

This project will be concerned with problems related to analytic functions of a
complex variable and associated geometric questions. The principal investigator
is particularly concerned with univalent functions defined in a disc or in the
exterior of a disc. By virtue of their analyticity, these functions have power
series expansions in the variable or its reciprocal. Objectives of this work
include the analysis of extremal problems in terms of the series coefficients
and a description of the image boundary for extremal maps. Techniques to be used
involve methods of extremal metrics and quadratic differentials (techniques
which are actually closely related) The principal investigator has displayed
considerable expertise in using these methods in his past work. The coefficient
function of the quadratic differential often gives precise information
concerning the boundary image of an extremal map. Work will be done
investigating this function further. In particular, the principal investigator
will seek to establish whether or not this function must have simple roots. A
new direction of research undertaken by the principal investigator focuses on
iteration of analytic maps and Julia sets. These are sets representing the
infinite past history of points carried by mapping iterates. Evidence suggests
an interesting connection between the nature of Julia sets (simple or extremely
irregular) and the decay of coefficients of univalent mappings. Work on such
questions is still at the computer-experimental stage but appears to hold
promise for interesting and unexpected relationships with dynamical systems.