* 8701291
* The Cycling and Deposition of Sulfur, Nitrogen and Organic  Acids Over the North Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/1987,01/31/1992
* James Galloway, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 01/31/1992
* USD 367,669.00

Over the past 10-15 years atmospheric chemistry has evolved from a young
research discipline devoted primarily to local problems of urban pollution and
air quality to a mature science concerned with the hemispheric to global scale
cycling of a wide variety of chemical species. To a large extent this change has
resulted from an increasing realization that human activities can cause chemical
disturbances to the natural troposphere on scales far beyond local concerns.
Well-known examples include changes in the regional-to-global concentrations of
certain nitrogen compounds, lead and other heavy metals, artificial
radionuclides, a number of synthetic organic substances, certain acid-forming
species, carbon dioxide and methane. These chemical changes in the atmosphere
can often extend to the earth's soils, oceans, and biota far from the original
source region. They can result in alterations in the earth's climate, changes in
vital nutrient cycles, and impact significantly on the public health and quality
of life on earth. The Atmosphere/Ocean Chemistry Experiment (AEROCE) will be a
coordinated multi-institutional atmospheric and marine chemistry research
project centered in the North Atlantic region. The ultimate goal of the AEROCE
project will be the development of a predictive capability for the continentally
derived species observed in the marine troposphere over the North Atlantic. The
selection of sites and the measurement protocol in AEROCE has been developed
jointly by modelers and field experimentalists. Wet deposition will be collected
at the four islands in the North Atlantic Ocean: Bermuda, Ireland, Barbados and
Tenerife. The wet deposition will be analyzed for Ca++, Mg++, Na+, K+, Cl-, H+,
NH4+, NO3-, SO4=, and methanesulfonate (MSA). The resulting data and their
variability will be used to establish a chemical climatology for wet deposition
over the North Atlantic Ocean. The sources (natural and anthropogenic) that
affect the composition of wet deposition will be investigated. The sampling
sites are downwind of North America and thus are ideal stations for
investigating not only the fate of the North American plume but also the
interaction of the plume with the North Atlantic Ocean background atmosphere.