* 8701115
* Dissertation Research:  Changes in Performance Ranking of   Seedlings of Coexisting Tree Species Under Different Combi- nations of Light, Mineral Nutrients and Soil Moisture
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1988
* Brenda Casper, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 11/30/1988
* USD 4,998.00

This is a proposal by Dr. Brenda Casper and her graduate student Mr. Roger
Latham of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. They postulate that
differences among tree species in their resource requirements as seedlings may
not be responsible for species coexistence in humid temperate forests. The
research proposed presents a well reasoned and tightly oraganized plan to
evaluate species differences in seedling response to different resources. They
will provide a comprehensive analysis of the response to resources of several
interacting tree species. Even though limited to seedlings, they will be in a
good position to evaluate the possibility of the general hypothesis referred to
above, a definite empirical advance from the present situation, as we have many
more ideas than data on the questions they address. The context is well
developed, and brings together some ideas and results from population ecology,
physiological ecology and ecosystem ecology. This integrative approach is much
needed and the pilot studies demonstrate that the proposed work will be a good
investment. Results will be of importance to forestry and forest management. Dr.
Brenda Casper is gaining in stature in this area of ecology as attested by an
enthusiastic reception for her most recent publications. The University of
Pennsylvania is well equipped to pursue this work to a successful completion.
The program recommends funding.