* 8701188
* Expression of Storage Protein in Somatic Embryos of Plants
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* David Stuart, Plant Genetics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 02/28/1990
* USD 201,450.00

Antibody to the 11S seed storage protein of alfalfa and to the 14.5S seed
storage protein of lettuce were prepared during Phase I. In Phase II, the PIs
propose to use these antibodies to determine the developmental stage of somatic
embryos of both crops. In alfalfa, 11S storage protein will be measured during
zygotic seed maturation and during germination. This will determine a timetable
against which the development of somatic embryos can be compared. Conditions of
alfalfa somatic embryo culture are presented which result in very high rates of
embryo germination. Somatic embryos from these treatments will be tested and a
correlation determined between embryo germination and 11S seed protein
accumulation. Conditions which control precocious germination of somatic embryos
will be tested for the loss of 11S storage protein in alfalfa. In lettuce, a
similar developmental timetable for zygotic embryos will be established. Lettuce
cell cultures will be initiated in which conditions for embryo propagation will
be established. Conditions for embryo maturation will be studied with respect to
14.5S protein. The overall objective of the proposal is to improve commercial
plant propagation using somatic embryogenesis. The specific objective is to
determine whether storage protein levels in somatic embryos correlate with
embryo development and vigor. On this assumption, the PIs anticipate improving
somatic embryo development by increasing internal protein storage reserves.