* 8701290
* AEROCE (Atmospheric/Ocean Chemistry Experiment) Secondary   Network Operations Group
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1991
* Joseph Prospero, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/28/1991
* USD 509,700.00

Over the past 10-15 years atmospheric chemistry has evolved from a young
research discipline devoted primarily to local problems of urban pollution and
air quality to a mature science concerned with the hemispheric to global scale
cycling of a wide variety of chemical species. To a large extent this change has
resulted from an increasing realization that human activities can cause chemical
disturbances to the natural troposphere on scales far beyond local concerns.
Well-known examples include changes in the regional-to-global concentrations of
certain nitrogen compounds, lead and other heavy metals, artificial
radionuclides, a number of synthetic organic substances, certain acid-forming
species, carbon dioxide and methane. These chemical changes in the atmosphere
can often extend to the earth's soils, oceans, and biota far from the original
source region. They can result in alterations in the earth's climate, changes in
vital nutrient cycles, and impact significantly on the public health and quality
of life on earth. The Atmosphere/Ocean Chemistry Experiment (AEROCE) will be a
coordinated multi-institutional atmospheric and marine chemistry research
project centered in the North Atlantic region. The ultimate goal of the AEROCE
project will be the development of a predictive capability for the continentally
derived species observed in the marine troposphere over the North Atlantic. The
selection of sites and the measurement protocol in AEROCE has been developed
jointly by modelers and field experimentalists. This project provides
installation and operational support for AEROCE. A network of four aerosol, gas
and precipitation sampling stations will be established in the North Atlantic
Ocean at the following locations: Barbados, West Indies; Bermuda on the west
end; Mace Head, Ireland, on the west coast; Tenerife, Canary Islands, at the
obervatory at Izania at 2600 meters. Each station will have a three-pump aerosol
filter sampling system and a triplet rain collector. The network will be
completely operational by early 1988. During the first year all stations will
collect aerosol and precipitation samples on a weekly basis, thereafter, on a
daily basis. When the four station network is in full operation, it will yield
about 6000 discrete filter and precipitation samples each year. The Secondary
Network Operations Group will construct all equipment, install the stations on
site, manage operations at the site through a local cooperative, and support and
maintain the network stations. This group will also receive the samples and data
from secondary network stations and redistribute the materials as required by
AEROCE investigators.