* 8701713
* Cloning and Functional Analysis of Fungal Differentiation-  Specific Genes and Intracellular Localization of the Gene   Products
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Harvey Hoch, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/28/1991
* USD 235,000.00

Invasion of host plants by the bean rust fungus, >>>Uromyces> >appendiculatus>,
occurs through stomata and requires the development of infection structures,
e.g. appressoria. Appressorium formation is a cell differentiation event that
occurs in response to contact (thigmotropic) stimuli. Cell differentiation
begins with the onset of nuclear division. Evidence that at least fifteen
species of protein are synthesized when germlings are induced to differentiate,
has led to the study of the nature of the genes which are activated and the
nature and role of the proteins. During the previous granting period four genes
have been isolated that are specifically expressed by the time differentiation
is complete. Dr. Staples will now analyze the dr.genes in terms of detailed
structures, the time in the differentiation process when they are first
expressed, their homology with DNA from other fungi, and an identification of
their gene products. He will prepare antibodies specific for these protein gene
products and use them to determine the location in the germling of the
dr.proteins. In addition attempts will be made to isolate differentiation
related genes that are expressed earlier than 6 h in the differentiation
process, i.e. before differentiation is complete. The studies will significantly
advance our knowledge of the mechanisms involved in the fungal sensing responses
that result in the accurate placement of the appressorium over the stomate
during host colonization.