* 8701480
* Colony-level Response to Perturbation
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1987,03/31/1988
* Deborah Gordon, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 03/31/1988
* USD 13,062.00

Dr. Gordon will investigate the social organization of harvester ants, so called
because they collect and eat seeds. These ants do various tasks outside the
nest. Foragers travel along cleared trails to collect seeds; nest-maintenance
workers clear the surface of the nest mound and maintain tunnels inside the
nest; patrollers inspect the nest area and respond to disturbances or new
sources of food, and midden workers sort and arrange the colony refuse pile, or
midden. Each task is done each day, in a predictable sequence that Dr. Gordon
calls the "daily round" of the colony. The daily round changes in response to
changes in the colony's environment. Dr. Gordon has found experimentally that
groups of ants doing different tasks are interdependent. For example, if she
increases the amount of nest maintenance by giving the colony extra work to do,
the colony will also do less foraging. These interactions between different
worker groups depend on the age of the colony. When disturbed experimentally,
5-year-old colonies emphasize foraging more than do 2- year-old colonies. The
older colonies also respond in the same way if an experiment is repeated many
times, while younger colonies respond in many different ways. As individual ants
live only about a year, this cannot be because 5-year-old colonies contain
older, "wiser" ants than do 2-year-old colonies. Somehow, the organization of
the colony must change as it gets older. Dr. Gordon will carry out experiments
designed to help answer the following questions: (1) When an increase in the
numbers doing one task causes a decrease in the numbers doing another task, is
this because ants are switching tasks, or do increases result from recruitment
of ants from reserves inside the nest? Dr. Gordon will mark ants distinctively
to identify individuals. (2) Do older colonies respond to experiments
differently from younger colonies because they are older, or because they
contain more ants? Dr. Gordon will remove ants from older colonies to see if
they then act like younger, smaller colonies. (3) Do experiments that change the
behavior of one colony cause changes in the behavior of neighboring colonies? If
so, this may help to explain how colonies interact in an environment in which
they are competing for food. Dr. Gordon's research will help us to understand
how a complex society functions at the group level. A forager's behavior depends
on the conditions affecting foraging: where food is, how accessible it is, how
much food the colony has. But Dr. Gordon's experiments show that a forager's
behavior also depends on events affecting the ants doing other tasks--for
example, on how much clean-up work there is to be done on the nest mound. The
dynamics of relationships between different worker groups suggest a complex
model for how an ant society functions in an ever-changing environment. Such
models may apply to other societies as well.