* 8701561
* The Making of Colonial Culture in North Sumatra
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* Ann Stoler, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly O'Neal Moorer
* 12/31/1988
* USD 34,659.00

The Making of Colonial Culture in North Sumatra: This award recommendation is
made under the U.S.-Industrialized Countries Program for the Exchange of
Scientists and Engineers, 1987/1988 Competition. The program is designed to
enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research at research
institutions in the industrialized countries of Western Europe as well as Japan,
Australia, and New Zealand. Exchange awards provide unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. Awards
are selected on the basis of scientific criteria relevant to his/her field of
science, the prospective potential of the applicants for professional growth, as
well as criteria relevant to the furthering of international cooperation in
science and engineering. The program is particularly directed to scientists and
engineers who are embarking on their research careers. This research project
will explore the nature of the colonial communities and their internal divisions
through an ethnographic reconstruction of one such community, namely that of the
Dutch East Indies' Sumatran plantation belt. Through interviews with former
members of the planter and government administrations now living in the
Netherlands, Belgium and France, combined with archival research, the project
will examine some of the social and economic commonalities and antagonisms out
of which they emerged. The project is under the direction of Dr. Ann L. Stoler,
Assistant Professor, Department of Anthropology, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI 53706 and Professor Klass W. van der Veen, Chairman, Department of
South and Southeast Asian Studies, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
This award recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international
travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents allowance, if applicable,
language training, if required, and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for
the U.S. home institution.