* 8701918
* The Molecular Biology of Polydnavirus Gene Organization and Expression in Campoletis Sonorensis and Heliothis Virescens
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Max Summers, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1991
* USD 240,000.00

The successful parasitism by a parasitic insect wasp of its host insect is
dependent upon the transfer and expression of a polydnavirus along with the
parasite's egg during oviposition. The virus and its life cycle are unique in
two major aspects: 1) it is a DNA animal virus with a complex multipartite
genome consisting of at least 28 doublestranded, covalaently closed DNAs; 2) the
virus has an apparent symbiotic relationship with the wasp insect and causes
certain changes in the parasitized host effectively compromising the host's
cellular immune defenses to favor the successful development of the parasite.
The parasitic Campoletis sonorensis wasp, its virus (CsV), and the host insect,
Heliothis virescens, is the most thoroughly studied parasite-virus-host system
at the molecular level. Studies will be continued on mapping the genetic
organization of the multipartite genome. This will be done by physical mapping
and a mapping of the transcription products in the wasp insect and parasitized
host. Once mapped those genes believed to be important factors interfering with
the parasitized insect's cellular defense system will be cloned and studied for
function and identity of viral encoded gene products. It is the ultimate goal of
the research to identify the specific functions of the virus and mechanisms
(target sites and effects) in the parasitized insect abrogating cellular immune
response. This should lead to an elucidation of insect immunity defenses and how
these may be manipulated for the control of insects of public health or
agricultural importance, or for control of the ability of insects to transmit
animal and plant pathogens.