* 8701492
* Dynamic Characterization of Trickle-Bed Reactors            (Industry-University Cooperative Project)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Milorad Dudukovic, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/1988
* USD 49,994.00

Trickle-bed reactors are used in a wide variety of petroleum processing systems
such as hydrodesulfurization, denitrogenation, demetallization, hydrotreating
and in manufacture of chemicals involving hydrogenation and oxidation reactions.
The reactors consist of solid catalyst pellets, 0.08 cm to 0.32 cm in diameter,
packed into a vertical tubular reactor with cocurrent (downflow or upflow) or
countercurrent gas/liquid flow configurations. They are widely used because
their flow pattern approaches plug flow, high catalyst loading per unit volume
of the liquid is possible, energy dissipation is low, and there is flexibility
in production rate and operating conditions. The potential of trickle-bed
reactors has never been fully utilized especially in chemical processing and
manufacture of specialty products. This is due to the fact that the phenomena in
trickle-beds are incompletely understood, and the difficulties which are
associated with trickle-bed design exceed those encountered with other reactor
types. While scaleup of trickle-bed reactors in petroleum processing for certain
types of known feeds is well established as an art, "a priori" prediction of
trickle-bed performance of scaleup from small laboratory units for feeds and
processes for which previous know-how does not exist is still considered very
risky and is simply not done. The scaleup problem in trickle-beds is hampered
mainly by inadequate knowledge of both the particle scale incomplete contacting
as well as by the gross liquid maldistribution on the bed scale in industrial
trickle-beds. Accurate design presupposes the knowledge of local liquid-solid
contacting (i.e. of the extent of external and internal wetting of the
particles) and of the non-idealities of flow of the liquid external to particles
(i.e., bypassing, radial non-uniformity in flow, other deviations from plug
flow, etc.). Tracer methods offer a tool for evaluating both of these reactor
scale and particle scale non-idealities. It is the scope of the proposed
research to investigate new methods of tracer data interpretation in
identification and decoupling of the above effects. The key idea behind the
proposed project is the use of multiple tracers i.e. the use of non-adsorbing
and adsorbing (non- volatile) tracers to characterize the behavior of the liquid
phase in a reactor. The PIs want to show that additional information, which
allows the decoupling of the reactor scale and particle scale non-idealities,
can be obtained by the use of this technique.