* 8701718
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Project:  Scat-    tering and Spectroscopic Investigation of Non-Ideal and     Colloidal Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Erdogan Gulari, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/1989
* USD 150,000.00

Research Summary: In this project, molecular association in non-ideal solutions
through hydrogen bonding, condensation and hydrophobic effect at the molecular
level are being examined using scattering and spectroscopic techniques.
Specifically, the PI will investigate: 1) Diffusion and association in solutions
of alcohols and carboxylic acids; 2) Sol formation by the hydrolysis of organo-
silicon esters; 3) Component activities for oil-in-water and water-in-oil
microemulsions; and 4) Stability and formation mechanisms of Silicone
oil/nonionic surfactant/water microemulsions. This research group was one of the
very first to use the tools of light scattering and vibrational spectroscopy in
investigating non-ideal solutions at the molecular scale. They combine light-
scattering, which is sensitive to aggregate size, with vibrational spectroscopy
(IR-Raman) sensitive to the changes at the functional group (O-H, C-H etc.)
level, to find out what molecular processes and reactions are responsible for
the usual macroscopic behavior of non-ideal solutions. Technical Impact: The
impact of this research will be at several levels: 1) The research on
association through hydrogen bonding is desperately needed in developing and
refining predictive models of diffusion and thermodynamic activity in non-ideal
solutions. These data are used in designing common separation processes such as
liquid-liquid extraction and distillation, as well as gas purification; 2)
Development of new processes to form narrow distribution silica sols in the 100
A size range from organic esters of silicon will be very useful for producing
regulated secondary size standards for electron microscopy and light scattering
instrument makers. A second and equally useful application will be in optical
thin film coatings for high power laser optics. Finally, what is learned here is
directly transferable to production of high purity, exotic ceramic powders; 3)
Developing new methods of silicon oil microemulsion formation, and understanding
the molecular parameters affecting their stability will impact the cost and
shelf life of this new class of microemulsions. Silicone oil microemulsions have
the potential to be used extensively as textile softeners as well as in cosmetic
products.