* 8701804
* Mathematical Sciences: Low-dimensional topology and infinitegroups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1990
* Peter Shalen, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 11/30/1990
* USD 180,600.00

Professor Shalen will continue his work with H. Gillet on the structure of
groups acting on lambda-trees. They will then explore applications to hyperbolic
geometry, K-theory and linear groups. Shalen will also continue his work with P.
Wagreich on growth functions of groups and applications to the study of volume
and diameters of hyperbolic manifolds, as well as his work with G. Baumslag and
J. Morgan in which properties of finitely presented groups are derived from
studying their varieties of linear representations over fields. Professors
Culler and Shalen will continue their work on Dehn surgery on knots with the
ultimate goal of classifying surgeries that give manifolds with cyclic
fundamental groups and settling the Property P conjecture. They will also work
on extending the Cyclic Surgery Theorem to links, and interpreting the new
polynomial invariants for knots and links in terms of varieties of groups and
representations. Professor Culler will continue his work with K. Vogtmann on the
outer automorphism group of a free group. They will develop further the analogy
between this group and arithmetic groups. Culler will also study the dynamics of
these outer automorphisms in analogy with Thurston's work on dynamics of surface
automorphisms. In addition, he will work on constructing generalized buildings
for a class of goups that includes these outer antomorphism groups as well as
arithmetic groups and mapping class groups. Exploring these numerous strong
connections between low- dimensional topology and group theory will advance both
fields, with ultimate impact on mathematical physics and other heavy users of
the machinery of modern mathematics, particularly on users of precise and
concise ways of describing the symmetries of highly connected spaces.