* 8701363
* Cost/Benefit Analysis of Anguillid Foraging Mode
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Gene Helfman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 02/28/1990
* USD 52,895.00

Do animals forage in an "optimal" manner, one thatrepresents an evolved
response in terms of the amount of energyspent compared to the amount of energy
gained? Research hasgenerally focused on what animals eat, where they feed, and
howthey decide to switch between food types or feeding locales. Anoverlooked and
common feature of feeding involves animals thathave different ways of acquiring
prey, such as different huntingtactics. An unanswered question is whether
animals switchbetween feeding tactics in ways we would predict based onenergetic
considerations. American eels either feed by suction,by grasping food and
shaking to tear off a piece, or by graspingand spinning to tear off a piece.
Hypotheses to be testedconcern whether switching among these three modes
represents adecision.making process that maximizes energetic intake
whileminimizing energetic expense and costs associated with attractingpredators.
Results of this study will have broad application to areasof behavioral and
ecological research, particularly those thatfocus on trade.offs and cost/benefit
analyses of ecologicalactivities. Data will be useful to theoretical
ecologistsinterested in decision rules and processes in animal behavior,and will
aid in understanding the energetics of switching amongalternative foraging
modes. Results will also provide insightinto selection pressures influencing the
convergent evolutionthat occurs among the more than 60 different families of
largelyunrelated, eel.like fishes, amphibians, and reptiles. The datawill also
greatly increase our understanding of the feedingbehavior of the American eel,
an abundant, commercially important(approx. 5,000,000 annually), predatory fish
species that occursin most freshwater and estuarine habitats draining into
theAtlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico.