* 8701127
* Micronesian Archaeology Conference; University of Guam;     September 10-12, 1987
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1989
* Rosalind Hunter-Anderson, University of Guam
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1989
* USD 29,547.00

This grant provides partial support for a conference on Micronesian archaeology
which will take place at the University of Guam in September 1987. Approximately
50 non-local scholars will participate and the audience will include an equal
number of individuals attending the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association Congress
which will be held in conjunction with this conference. The major objective of
the conference is to bring together for the first time a diverse group of
researchers who have conducted archaeological fieldwork in Micronesia during the
past 10-15 years. Seven sessions are planned: five cover theoretical and
methodological topics. One will present new findings in Micronesian physical
anthropology and one will address historic preservation issues. A number of
community-oriented presentations and events such as public lectures will also
take place. While synthetic work has been done in other areas of the Pacific, in
the Micronesian region such an overview is lacking. Excavations have been
conducted on a project by project basis and many of the results remain
unpublished. Because researchers come from different continents, face to face
interaction is rare. this conference will allow excavators to present results
from Their work and hopefuly lay the basis for a broad synthetic overview. Much
of the Micronesian archaeology has been supported by U.S. government agencies.
Such site by site work only gains its full value when fit together into a
broader context. This confernence will help to accomplish this goal.