* 8701696
* Mathematical Sciences: Global Decompositions of Nonlinear   Control Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Kevin Grasse, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/1990
* USD 29,529.00

The problem of decomposing a large-scale nonlinear control system into an
interconnected family of smaller-scale subsystems is a natural one and has
received the attention of many researchers. The vast majority of the work done
on this problem thus far has concentrated on local decompositions. By
decomposition one usually means a change of variables that produces an
equivalent system that has at least two independent but interconnected parts.
Decomposition is very important from a practical point of view, because it
simplifies the analysis of complex systems. The investigator proposes a notion
of global system decomposition which is reasonable from a conceptual point of
view and has potential of producing results that can be applied to specific
examples. He will attempt to extend known results on local decompositions to a
global setting. Both necessary and sufficient conditions of existence of global
decompositions will be sought. A study of symmetry groups associated with a
control system will constitute a portion of this research. Applications of
global decompositons to the study of global controllability of nonlinear control
systems will also be pursued. This research attempts to develop further the
applications of differential geometry to control systems. If succesful, it could
produce results of considerable importance for such applications of control
theory as robot manipulators and helicopter autopilots.