* 8701586
* Structure of Highly Disordered Chains in Polymers           by Vibrational Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Herbert Strauss, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* None
* 07/31/1991
* USD 327,000.00

This research is a study of conformation disorder in polymer systems by
vibrational spectroscopy. Disorder plays an important role in determining the
properties of polymeric materials, and this has stimulated much activity aimed
at characterizing and understanding its complex nature. The range of
applicability of vibrational spectroscopy to disorder has been seriously limited
by the absence of a general, but practical, theory that can be used to provide
quantitative relations between the conformational statistics and the infrared or
Raman spectrum of a system of disordered chain molecules. Work by the authors
has led to a model that enables general relations to be established between the
structure and spectra of disordered chains. The model is based on the finding
that the vibrations of disordered chains have some of the long-range coherence
of ordered chains. Preliminary results on a simple system show that infrared
band shapes calculated with this model reproduce the main features of those
observed. This model will be modified to make it more widely applicable. A
second approach to this problem will also be pursued in which the spectra of
ensembles of disordered chains are generated numerically by summing the spectra
computed for each constituent conformer. Spectra obtained in this way will be
used to develop models that relate spectra and disorder, and to test
conformational models that have been proposed for various polymers. In addition,
vibrational spectroscopy and other available techniques, including inelastic
neutron scattering, will be used to study a variety of disordered polymer
systems. Special emphasis will be devoted to systems that exist in
nonequilibrium states and to chain monolayers, liquid crystals, and liquid
crystal polymers.