* 8701456
* Mathematical Sciences: Local and Global Techniques for the  Location of Periodic Solutions of Parameter Dependent       Systems with Time Delay
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 11/30/1989
* USD 60,000.00

The purpose of this project is to develop new numerical techniques for the
study of periodic solutions of nonlinear differential equations with time delay.
The theory of such equations has been developed in the last twenty years and
applied to study of various dynamical systems in engineering, biological
sciences, and economics. These equations are also called functional differential
equations. One of the phenomena of practical importance and theoretical interest
is the existence of oscillations, mathematically described as periodic
solutions. Three sub-projects will be pursued by this investigator. First, he
will translate earlier known results on the so called Hopf bifurcation (a change
from non-periodic to periodic solutions due to a small change of a parameter)
into new computational methods. The investigator has recently developed a
technique to detect the existence of small periodic solutions which avoids the
analysis of equations in the infinite dimensional state space. His method is
based on the analysis of a scalar "bifurcation function", which can be computed
in a very direct manner. He now proposes to extend the use of this technique to
more general equations such as Volterra integral equations, functional
differential equations of neutral type, and abstract functional differential
equations. Second, the investigator will develop algorithms to locate
numerically the values of parameters for which the Hopf bifurcation occurs. He
will extend the existing methods to compute such bifurcation points by analyzing
the characteristic equation of a linearized system, and by performing a
numerical minimization of the norm of the left hand side. He will also use curve
tracking procedures, similar to those developed for ordinary differential
equations. He will also develop methods for computing the Floquet multipliers
for the equations under study, by using collocation methods. Much of this work
is technically difficult and requires substantial computational skill and
resources. The investigator will use a Cray-2 supercomputer at the main campus
of the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis. Third, the investigator will
study a number of concrete examples equations arising in applications, and will
test his numerical methods on these examples. The results of this work are
expected to provide new interpretations for dynamical phenomena encountered in a
number of other disciplines. The University of Minnesota at Duluth is a
primarily undergraduate institution which has good traditions of student
involvment in research. In this project students will be employed to assist with
programming and computations. Their involvment in this research will have a
strong positive impact on their education, especially because of various
possible interpretations of the results on the grounds of applications to other
sciences. The project will be funded jointly with the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research.