* 8701012
* Dissertation Research:  Field Metabolic Rates and Guild     Dynamics of Tropical Hummingbirds
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Peter Feinsinger, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 06/30/1990
* USD 10,878.00

Feeding guilds of neotropical hummingbirds are known for their diversity and
flexibility of composition, but the actual mechanisms that determine the
structure of these guilds are unknown. It is known that guild member species
differ in their ability to exploit different resource states and that changes in
guild structure can be correlated with changes in food availability. Thus, it
seems probable that differences in energetic constraints are a major mechanism
behind changes in guild composition, yet this has not been empirically
demonstrated. It is the goal of this study to quantify this suggested link
between the energetic success of individual species and their relative
representation in the guild. Syntopic pairs of species found at Monteverde,
Costa Rica, will be used to test a priori predictions on relative energetics.
Energy budgets will be measured using: a) flight-cage experiments to quantify
energetic responses to manipulated changes in competitor pressure and food
availability, and b) field metabolic rates (using doubly-labeled water) during
periods of high versus low resource availability. The research will be conducted
by Mr. Harry Tiebout under the direction of Dr. Peter Feinsinger. This excellent
team assures a productive project on an exciting topic in tropical ecology.