* 8701277
* Very Long Baseline Interferometric Research at North LibertyRadio Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1987,04/30/1990
* Robert Mutel, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 04/30/1990
* USD 232,400.00

The technique of Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) is used in radio
astronomy to observe fine-scale structure in radio sources. Observations are
made simultaneously from radio telescopes separated by thousands of miles. The
data is recorded on magnetic tapes and sent to a single location to reduce the
data. One can thus observe structures one-thousandth of a second of arc in
angular separation. This is more than a hundred times better than one can
observe with physically connected or single telescopes. The same techniques can
be used to measure crustal motions on the Earth. The VLBI observations are
important to our understanding of the physical processes taking place in radio
sources such as quasars. The Principal Investigator will carry out radio
astronomical observations using VLBI techniques. There is support of continued
operation of the North Liberty Radio Observatory (NLRO) as part of the U.S. VLBI
Network. The NLRO is 1 of 6 institutions in the U.S. which are full members of
the U.S. Network. The NLRO is an important participant in VLBI observations
(using MkII) recording at frequencies of 5 GHz and below. The NLRO was used for
more than 1200 hours for 62 separate experiments during the last 2 years. The
use of NLRO for Network VLBI experiments is steadily increasing as the use of
global fringe fitting and self calibration techniques (which work best with a
large number of telescopes) become more common. The "Iowa" element of the Array
should be completed in the next 2 years and will supplant the present telescope.
This award will support Dr. Mutel's VLBI research. Observations will be made of
structures in the radio source BL Lacertae, whose parts seem to be expanding at
speeds exceeding the speed of light. Other observations will be made of selected
compact double radio sources. A search will be made for a central component.
Radio emissions from certain binary stars will be observed to look for coherent
radio bursts. Interstellar scattering of compact radio sources near the galactic
plane will be studied. Dr. Mutel is a competent and well-experienced radio
astronomer and the results of his research will be important to our
understanding of radio sources.