* 8701986
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research on the                  Measurement and Mechanisms of Microbial Corrosion
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* William Characklis, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1990
* USD 18,819.00

This award will help establish a joint microbial engineering research program
between the Institute for Biological and Chemical Process Analysis (IPA), at
Montana State University, and the Research Institute of Theoretical and Applied
Physical Chemistry (INIFTA), La Plata, Argentina. Dr. William G. Characklis,
Director of the IPA, will work primarily with Dr. Hector A. Videla of the INIFTA
to study microbial corrosion although other scientists at both institutes will
be involved in the research as well. Their objectives will be to develop methods
to characterize the biofilm-metal interface (microelectrodes), to
electrochemically monitor corrosion, and to observe biofilm population dynamics.
Additionally, they will determine the significance of biofilm patchiness,
microbial product formation, surface roughness, and surface welds and crevices
on microbial corrosion processes. Microbial corrosion poses a significant and
costly challenge to U.S. industry. A number of industries support research at
the IPA. Thus far, not enough is known about the topic and of how to ameliorate
its effects. The cooperation between the IPA and the INIFTA is important because
it integrates their two areas of expertise and distinct methodologies for
uncovering the mechanisms of microbial corrosion. The IPA group is expert in
biofilm process engineering and the INIFTA has a long, successful history of
working on electrochemical techniques for determining microbial corrosion rates.
The cooperation will permit the exchange of these methodologies to the benefit
of both groups.