* 8701923
* Mechanics of Fish Interactions with Planar Rigid Boundaries
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/1987,10/31/1991
* William Schultz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 10/31/1991
* USD 227,460.00

Terrestrial animals must continually support their bodies against the force of
gravity which restricts the range of locomotion methods used by these animals.
In contrast, fish live in an environment which buoys up the body, so that
locomotor effort can be focussed on moving through the environment. As a result
aquatic animals, and especially fish, move using a wider diversity of methods
than their terrestrial relatives. Nevertheless, certain body and fin forms allow
for more effective use of some locomotor methods compared to others, and, as a
corollary, affects the habitat in which fishes live and their behavior. Most
work to date has examined how fish form, function and habitat interrelate for
fish living in open water environments. In practice, fish usually occupy, and
indeed prefer, habitats including structures, especially surfaces such as the
water bed, sides and weeds. This area of fish biology has been neglected, a
situation that the proposed research seeks to rectify. Theoretical models show
that the distance separating an animal or its propulsor from the ground is most
important in determining the effect of a surface on the system. The research
will systematically determine how different shapes of the body and of propulsors
of fish affect the performance of typical species near and distant from
horizontal surfaces (representing the bottom) and vertical surfaces
(representing sides, weeds beds, and branching corals). The result will provide
a comprehensive descriptive mechanical model for fish interactions with rigid
surfaces which will be used to understand and interpret distributions of fish in
different habitats and microhabitats. In addition to obtaining fundamental new
knowledge on fish biology, it is essential to recognize that modern animal
management, including fish and aquatic habitats, seeks to base its practices on
first principles population and community structure models. The proposed
research addresses the latter. Therefore, the research is expected to contribute
to a variety of applications. For example, the research is expected to provide
design principles for physical structures that would attract different types of
fish, refining the design of artificial reefs, rehabilitation or protection of
shoreline development, and selection of sites for underwater parks. In addition,
the research will show how surfaces affect performance of bethic fish. Studies
such as these have contributed to the design of fishing gear, and the research
is anticipated to suggest novel designs for gear selective for fish species
based on form.