* 8701333
* The Structure, Dynamics and Functions of Avian and Bovine   Pancreatic Polypeptides in Solution by Nuclear Magnetic     Resonance Spectroscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,03/31/1989
* Michael Bogusky, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly O'Neal Moorer
* 03/31/1989
* USD 31,950.00

The Structure, Dynamics and Functions of Avian and Bovine Pancreatic
Polypeptides in Solution by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy: This award
recommendation is made under the U.S.-Industrialized Countries Program for the
Exchange of Scientists and Engineers, 1987/1988 Competition. The program is
designed to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research
at research institutions in the industrialized countries of Western Europe as
well as Japan, Australia and New Zealand. Exchange awards provide opportunities
for the conduct of joint research and the utilization of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. Awards
are selected on the basis of scientific criteria relevant to his/her field of
science, the prospective potential of the applicants for professional growth, as
well as criteria relevant to the furthering of international cooperation in
science and engineering. The program is particularly directed to scientists and
engineers who are embarking on their resesearch careers. This research project
is concerned with the role of polypeptide hormones and how they mediate the
metabolic activities of different cells in multicellular organisms. A key to
understanding the biological properties of hormonal proteins, both in normal and
abnormal metabolism, is their detailed molecular structure and dynamics. The
general objective of the proposed research is to characterize the structure,
dynamics and function of avian pancreatic polypeptide (APP) and bovine
pancreatic polypeptide (BPP) in solution by modern nuclear magnetic resonance
techniques (NMR) The project is under the direction of Dr. Michael J. Bogusky,
Department of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104-6323, and Professor C. M. Dobson, Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory,
University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QR, England. This award
recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international travel,
local travel abroad, stipend, dependents allowance, if applicable, language
training, if required, and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S.
home institution.