* 8702584
* Imaging Ca2+, Membrane Potential and Exocytosis in Mast Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1991
* Clare Fewtrell, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 12/31/1991
* USD 298,990.00

Aggregation of receptors for immunoglobulin E in the plasma membrane of mast
cells leads to an increase in cytoplasmic Ca2+ and the subsequent exocytosis of
secretory granule contents. However, the biochemical and physiological
mechanisms involved in these responses in individual cells are still poorly
understood. In this proposal quantitative digital image-enhanced fluorescence
microscopy will be used to image cytoplasmic free ionized calcium, membrane
potential and exocytosis in individual mast cells. A number of approaches will
be used to determine the physiological basis for the stochastic variations
observed in the individual Ca2+ responses of tumor mast cells to antigen
stimulation. The relative contributions of Ca2+ influx and release of Ca2+ from
intracellular stores to these responses will also be assessed. The possibility
that localized increases and transient gradients of Ca2+ are generated in
response to stimulation of a discrete region of the plasma membrane will be
explored. The fluorescent indicator fura-2 and other fluorescent probes will be
used in these studies to measure changes in membrane potential and exocytotic
responses of individual cells. These experiments will be important in
understanding the ionic mechanisms involved in secretion.