* 8702600
* Evolutionary Programming and Neural Computation             (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/1987,05/31/1990
* Michael Conrad, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce
* 05/31/1990
* USD 128,500.00

The goal of evolutionary programming is to develop systems which learn how to
perform critical computing tasks through a variation and selection algorithm.
The appproach taken in this research is based on the recognition that some
structural organizations are well-suited to learning through evolution, while
others are not. A system that achieves evolvability by simulating the structure-
fashion relations that facilitate evolution in biological systems has been
developed. Currently the system consists of simulated networks of dynamic
neurons whose input-output behavior is controlled by membrane proteins. The
variation and selection learning algorithm acts on the distribution of proteins.
The organization is well-suited to evolution because improvement can always be
achieved through single, reasonably likely application of the variation
operator. The continuous dynamics displayed by the neurons also enhances the
generalization capability of the system. The system is called a molecular design
since it was inspired by biophysical and biochemical properties of neurons.
However, the new efforts will be concerned with virtual implementations that
would be useful in and of themselves and which could provide some insight into
natural information processing. Specific objectives are: to incorporate richer
nonlinear and cell automation dynamics, to add a memory manipulation capability,
to implement the system as a preprocessor for high-level vision and process
control tasks, and to create systems capable of long-term evolutionary
improvement by applying the variation and selection operators to the dynamics.