* 8702525
* Genetics of Spontaneous Mutagenesis in Saccharomyces        Cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Leona Samson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1988
* USD 125,000.00

This proposal aims at laying a genetic foundation for analysis of the fidelity
of DNA replication in yeast. The proposed experiments will begin with the
isolation and structural characterization of the mut7 gene. The gene is defined
by one allele (mut7-1) that causes temperature-sensitive growth and a five-fold
increase in the frequency of spontaneous mutation. Preliminary attempts to
isolate this gene by complementation have led to the isolation of another gene,
smu-7, which can suppress the lethal effect of mut7-1 at high temperature. This
gene will be further characterized, and the regulation of both genes will be
studied. The genetic alteration in the mut7-1 will also be determined. Other
mutations with a mutator phenotype will be isolated using a mutant yeast strain
that takes up and incorporates base analogues into DNA. These mutations will be
identified by selecting for (increased) reversion of auxotrophic markers. As
yet, relatively little is known about the enzymes that replicate chromosomal DNA
in eukaryotic organisms. Extensive investigation of DNA synthesis in E. coli and
other prokaryotes has shown that the frequency of errors during replication is
remarkably low. This is due to "proof reading" by the DNA polymerase and by DNA
repair enzymes; both can detect differences (mis-matches) between the new and
old strands of DNA. The proposed study will begin a detailed analysis of genes
whose products appear to effect repair of mismatched DNA. Because some repair
functions in bacteria are intimately involved with the DNA replication, it is
likely that the proposed work will lead to a better understanding of replication
in yeast and in other eukaryotes.