* 8702332
* REU:  LTER:  Organisms in the Agricultural Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1993
* Michael Klug, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 02/28/1993
* USD 2,319,395.00

This project will initiate a long-term integrated study of interactions among
organisms in agricultural ecosystems. The general goal is to test the hypothesis
that management based on ecological concepts can effectively substitute for
reliance on chemical subsidies in production-level agronomy. By imposing a range
of management treatments on a series of experimental plots specific hypotheses
will be tested that follow from the general hypothesis that nutrient subsidies
can be minimized by manipulating plant-microbe interactions; that herbicide
subsidies can be minimized by manipulating crop-weed interactions; and that
pesticide subsidies can be minimized by manipulating plant- insect-pathogen-
vertebrate interactions. Primary experimental treatments are designed to alter
radically the controls on population-level interactions in agronomic systems.
This will allow the testing of hypotheses about how long-term interactions among
populations affect system- wide attributes such as nutrient availability,
herbivory and pathogenesis, plant competition, and systemswide carbon allocation
and nutrient/pesticide outputs. Treatments will include four main species-levels
with two management levels nested within each: conventional corn/soybean
cultivation (moldboard plowed vs. no-till), organic-based, low-input
corn/soybean/cover cultivation (minimum chemical input vs.zero chemical input);
short-rotation Populus (woody biomass) cultivation (above ground allocation vs.
belowground allocation); and native successional vegetation (historically-tilled
vs. never-tilled). These treatments will be established within the same general
area, and the development of these systems will be followed indefinitely.
Selected satellite sites in other portions of the landscape will also be
examined to formulate a basis for addressing landscape-level questions in later
phases of the project. Many would assert that the future of modern agriculture
demands a basic, mechanism-level understanding of the ecology of production-
level cropping systems. This endeavor requires a multidisciplinary, long-term
approach at a site that is relevant to North American agronomy and that can
provide the logistical support and administrative infrastructure to facilitate
this type of major research effort. The project team for this research is
excellent comprising a broad and appropriate array of expertise and very
productive records of past performance. Institutional facilities are excellent
at both the main campus and at the Kellogg Biological Station (KBS) field site.
Institutional commitment to the project is substantial, both as direct support
and in kind. It is expected that this project will rapidly establish itself as
an invaluable collaborator within the extant family of related projects and that
it will provide an instructive suite of comparisons for work on unmanaged,
natural ecosystems. A large number of other related research projects will
continue to be conducted at the KBS and will both benefit from and lend strength
to this new work. It is recommended that this new, five-year continuing award be
made as requested.