* 8702157
* Cellular Basis for Growth and Tissue Differentiation Patterns of Plant Stems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1991
* Roger Meicenheimer, Miami University
* Continuing grant
* Kevin L. Thompson
* 08/31/1991
* USD 168,374.00

The objectives of Dr. Meicenheimer's proposal are: 1. Develop an empirical model
for flax stem growth and tissue differentiation in terms of spatial domains of
relative elemental rates of cellular processes within the stem axis. 2. Compare
this model with existing cellular models for root growth and tissue
differentiation. 3. Test the hypothesis that two classes of substances (leaf
dependent and leaf independent) regulate flax stem tissue patterns. Flax plants
will be grown under uniform environmental conditions which give rise to steady
state growth of stems. Computer aided analyses of high resolution scanning
electron micrographs and serial transverse light microscopy sections of the stem
will be used to construct empirical models of the cellular basis for growth and
tissue differentiation of the stem axis. Chemical treatments which interfere
with specific endogenous hormone levels within the stem will be used to alter
the normal cellular processes within the stem axes. Models developed for
chemically treated and untreated stems will be compared in tests of the working
hypothesis. Patterns of external morphology and internal tisue anatomy of plant
stem and root axes are created through the concerted processes of division and
expansion of populations of cells initially comprising the apical meristems of
these organs. The spatial domains of such cellular processes have been fairly
well characterized for plant roots but we lack similar information for plant
stems. This proposal addresses this lack.