* 8702264
* Advanced Geostatistical Studies at the Centre de            Geostatistique, Ecole des Mines de Paris
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Shahrokh Rouhani, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly O'Neal Moorer
* 02/28/1989
* USD 59,794.00

Advanced Geostatistical Studies at the Centre de Geostatistique, Ecole des Mines
de Paris: This award recommendation is made under the U.S.-Industrialized
Countries Program for the Exchange of Scientists and Engineers, 1987/1988
Competition. The program is designed to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct long-term research at research institutions in the industrialized
countries of Western Europe as well as Japan, Australia and New Zealand.
Exchange awards provide opportunities for the conduct of joint research and the
utilization of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions in foreign countries. Awards are selected on the basis of scientific
criteria relevant to his/her field of science, the prospective potential of the
applicants for professional growth, as well as criteria relevant to the
furthering of international cooperation in science and engineering. The program
is particularly directed to scientists and engineers who are embarking on their
research careers. This research project aims at incorporating the disjunctive
kriging into the variance reduction analysis (a geostatistical sampling scheme
developed by the proposer). This expansion enables the program to identify the
optimal sequence of sampling points for random variables with any distribution.
It will be attempted to expand this algorithm to the time-space domain to be
applicable to most physical processes in water science. The project is under the
direction of Professor Shahrokh, Rouhani, School of Civil Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, U.S.A., and Professor Margaret
Armstrong, Ecole Nationale Superieure des Mines de Paris, 35, rue Saint-Honore,
77305 Fontainebleau, France. This award recommendation provides funds to cover,
as appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents
allowance, if applicable, language training, if required, and a flat
administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.