* 8702331
* Long-Term Ecological Research at Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1993
* Timothy Fahey, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1993
* USD 2,200,412.00

This award will initiate a Long-Term Ecological Research project at Hubbard
Brook Experimental Forest, New Hampshire. The overall goal of the research is a
better understanding of the response of northern hardwood-conifer watersheds to
large-scale disturbance, particularly with regard to (i) vegetation structure,
composition and productivity; (ii) dynamics of dead organic matter; (iii)
atmosphere-terrestrial-aquatic linkages; and (iv) heterotroph population
dynamics. The research will be carried out on sites with contrasting disturbance
history using experimental, survey, and long-term monitoring studies. It will
provide valuable information on long-term ecosystem responses to disturbance,
information needed by society to assess the effects of management and policy on
the integrity of forest ecosystems. Specifically, the research will examine (1)
vegetation processes including neighborhood competition and gap-phase succession
at different stages of development, and biomass and nutrient accumulation in the
early stages of succession; (2) organic matter processing in streams and soils,
decomposition of bole wood, and the formation and disruption of organic debris
dams; (3) biogeochemical processes including wet and dry deposition, stream
outflow, hydrologic modeling and hillslope hydrology, and construction of
internal ionic budgets; and (4) population dynamics of breeding birds,
phytophagous insects and a pathogenic fungus, and the nutritional ecology of
whitetailed deer. The multi-investigator, multi-institutional research team
assembled for this project will bring to bear a truly formidable array of
expertise and accumulative record of past productivity. The team combines the
abilities of both older and younger scientists to great advantage. Facilities at
the Hubbard Brook site are excellent for the project and will be augmented by
significant resources available at the cooperating institutions. The USDA/Forest
Service will continue to play a key role as steward for the site, collaborator
in the science, and provider of large amounts of project support in kind. This
is genuinely a multi-talented effort. The Program recommends that the first year
of funding be awarded for this five-year continuing project.