* 8702425
* Applications of Category Theory to Computer Science
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1991
* Charles Wells, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1991
* USD 88,862.00

Develop and extend the concepts of sketch and categorical theory as a tool for
the specification and precise description of data types and the syntax and
semantics of computer languages. The sketch gives a formal finite specification
of a data type or language construct, or of a whole language. Categorical
semantics includes: initial algebra semantics, greatly generalizing the work of
Goguen; the categorical theory generated by the sketch, which encapsulates the
whole language implied by a sketched specification; and models in the
categorical sense as functors. Specific tasks will include: (a) Using FS
sketches with multiple initial algebras as models for data types with overflow.
(b) Using sketches to specify a functional programming language, which will
involve understanding (c) the correct place in the hierarchy of types of
sketches and theories for such descriptions, and (d) the correct abstract
semantics and its connection with computable semantics. (e) Understand how the
recursive definition of data types can be sketched. (f) Understand the way
functions as first class objects and the resulting cartesian closed category
interacts with the use of sketched specifications and with the semantics. (g)
Formulate the correct definition of "environment" in this context. (h) Analyze
an existing functional programming language using these techniques. (i) Develop
a prototype implementation of a categorical computer language.