* 8702620
* Mathematical Sciences: Investigations in Statistical        Decision Theory, Bayesian Analysis, Probability and         Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Shanti Gupta, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1991
* USD 670,404.00

This team will work in four areas: decision theory, Bayesian analysis,
probability, and computation. The decision- theoretic problems to be considered
include multivariate estimation, the development of estimated loss methodology,
ranking and selection for both classical and hierarchical Bayesian models,
sequential decision problems and adaptive estimation and testing. Problems in
Bayesian analysis that will be addressed include the development of robust
Bayesian methods for testing of precise hypotheses, hierarchical Baysian
analysis, density and function estimation, and the development of noninformative
priors. Within probability theory and sequential analysis, problems to be
considered include study of branching diffusions, investigation of one-
dimensional Gibbs states, sequential methods in survival analysis, and certain
problems in distribution theory. Finally, the computational problems to be
considered include Bayesian calculation via quadrature, Monte Carlo, and
approximations, generation of random variables, and related problems of density
simulation. This research team will work on a broad spectrum of problems in
statistics and probability, the solutions to which will provide more efficient
and more comprehensive methods for producing information, extracting information
from data and making informed decisions. Overcoming computational problems is a
requirement for progress on some of these fronts.