* 8702064
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Nonstandard Analysis to Measure Theory, Potential Theory, and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Peter Loeb, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1989
* USD 44,500.00

Professor Loeb is one of the world's leading experts in the applications of the
fundamental foundational concept in mathematics called nonstandard analysis.
This construct, first introduced by logicians, is an ingenious rigorous
development of the classical concepts of infinitesimally large and small
numbers. Nonstandard analysis, therefore, is a mathematical vindication of
Leibnitz' philosophical viewpoint in his invention of the calculus. Professor
Loeb is the leading practitioner in the use of nonstandard methods to prove
"standard" results in a broad range of mathematical analysis and applications.
Loeb's work in nonstandard measure theory and nonstandard measure theory and
nonstandard probability theory has led to important contributions to probability
theory, mathematical physics, and mathematical economics. The notion of Loeb
measure, introduced by the principal investigator, has become a standard tool in
probability theory, stochastic analysis, and potential theory. The current
proposal by Professor Loeb has two parts. First, he proposes to combine his
nonstandard integration theory with nonstandard convex hulls. Applications are
envisaged to Banach spaces and Banach space valued stochastic processes.
Secondly, he proposes to continue his work on the concept of ideal (Loeb)
boundary, developed for very general potential theories. This research promises
to have important implications for classical potential theory.