* 8702154
* Role of Myosin in Intestinal Brush Border Function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Thomas Keller, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 07/31/1991
* USD 190,000.00

The role of myosin in the structure and function of brush borders isolated from
intestinal and colonic epithelial cells will be investigated. In the brush
border cytoskeleton, myosin is associated with two structural domains: one
comprising the terminal web where it crosslinks the microvillus core bundles of
actin filaments, and the other a contractile ring of actin filaments that
surrounds the terminal web. Two subsets of myosin are differentially extractable
from the brush border: one that is involved in terminal web contraction and one
that is not. The aim of this research is to determine the molecular basis for
the two subsets. The possiblity that more than one isozyme of myosin is
expressed in the brush border, and the relationship between myosin isozymes and
the subsets of myosin will be investigated. The localization of each of the
subsets of myosin with respect to the two major structural domains of the
terminal web will also be determined. Because the circumferential ring is
organized long before the interroolet region during embryogenesis, the findings
on myosin isozyme expression and subset localization will be related to the
normal sequence of intestinal development. Finally, the stable structural
association of one myosin subset indicates the likelihood that it interacts with
more than actin in the cytoskeleton. Proteins that bind myosin in the brush
border will be identified and localized. The results of this research may
indicate that myosin plays more than one role in brush border function and that
a specific myosin performs a specific function within a single cytoskeletal
system. This adds new significance to the general observation that cytoskeletal
proteins are frequently encoded by multigene families.