* 8702236
* Mathematical Sciences: Research Problems in Stochastic      Control and Numerical Approximation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Pao Liu Chow, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1989
* USD 42,000.00

The following topics will be investigated: (1) Some Singular Stochastic Control
Problems: Two problems: One is concerned with the analysis of a class of
singular control problems in several dimensions, and the second pertains to a
adapted version of singular stochastic control in one dimension. (2) Impulse
Control Problems: Two novel applications of impulse control theory to optimal
maintenance and sequential scheduling problems will be studied. (3) Ergodic
Control Problems with a class of stochastic control of diffusion with jumps with
a long- term average criterion. The emphasis is on the study of the associated
invariant measure. (4) Numerical Analysis of Stochastic Control Problems:
Numerical algorithm for solving a class of singular control problems in several
dimensions. Numerical approximation of some Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations.
(5) Some Problems in Stochastic Distributed- Parameter Sytems: The investigators
plan to study the solution of an infinite-dimensional H.J.B. equation arising
from optimal control of a non-linear stochastic distributed system. The
stability and asymptotic behavior of such a system with possible degeneracy will
be investigated. This research is part of control theory with potential
applications in engineering and computer science.