* 8702564
* AEROCE Primary Network Operations Group (PNOG)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1991
* Van Chisholm, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/28/1991
* USD 1,180,530.00

Over the past 10-15 years atmospheric chemistry has evolved from a young
research discipline devoted primarily to local problems of urban pollution and
air quality to a mature science concerned with the hemispheric to global scale
cycling of a wide variety of chemical species. To a large extent this change has
resulted from an increasing realization that human activities can cause chemical
disturbances to the natural troposphere on scales far beyond local concerns.
Well-known examples include changes in the regional-to-global concentrations of
certain nitrogen compounds, lead and other heavy metals, artificial
radionuclides, a number of synthetic organic substances, certain acid-forming
species, carbon dioxide and methane. These chemical changes in the atmosphere
can often extend to the earth's soils, oceans, and biota far from the original
source region. They can result in alterations in the earth's climate, changes in
vital nutrient cycles, and impact significantly on the public health and quality
of life on earth. The Atmosphere/Ocean Chemistry Experiment (AEROCE) will be a
coordinated multi-institutional atmospheric and marine chemistry research
project centered in the North Atlantic region. The ultimate goal of the AEROCE
project will be the development of a predictive capability for the continentally
derived species observed in the marine troposphere over the North Atlantic. The
selection of sites and the measurement protocol in AEROCE has been developed
jointly by modelers and field experimentalists. The AEROCE Primary Network
Operations Group (PNOG) is located at the Center for Atmospheric Chemistry
Studies, Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island. This group
will establish Primary Network sites in the North Atlantic Ocean at the
following locations: Daniels Head, Bermuda; Mace Head, Ireland; Ragged Point,
Barbados; and Izania, Tenerife. These sites will be high quality state-of-the-
art atmospheric sampling stations with facilities to support a wide range of
atmospheric chemistry measurements. Aerosol, gas, and precipitation samples will
be collected at these sites and will follow the sampling protocol as outlined in
the AEROCE Overview. The PNOG will construct and operate the sampling stations.
Each station will have a triplet rain collector and six aerosol/trace gas
collection systems for obtaining continuous daily grab samples. Flask samples
for certain trace gases will also be collected twice a week. Other gases
analyzed by on-site techniques will have essentially a continuous record. The
group will have an on-site technician with technical expertise at each site. The
group will receive samples and data from the Primary Network stations and will
redistribute the materials as required by AEROCE investigators. The Bermuda-West
(Daniels Head) site will be operational in August, 1988 and the Mace Head,
Ireland site will be operational in May, 1988.