* 8702916
* The Chemical Effects of High Intensity Ultrasound
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1987,04/30/1990
* Kenneth Suslick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 04/30/1990
* USD 236,755.00

The chemical effects of ultrasound have significance in the areas of bulk liquid
processing, in technologies related to emulsification (e.g. pharmaceuticals and
cosmetics), in processes for solvent degassing, and solid dispersion (e.g. fume
scrubbers). Although the chemical effects of ultrasound have been recognized for
more than 50 years, understanding of the nature and range of sonochemistry
remains quite limited. The principal mechanism involves acoustic cavitation: the
creation, expansion, and implosive collapse of small vapor vacuoles in the
liquid. The rapid compression in this cycle proces intense local heating and
thus creates high energy chemistry in a cold, condensed medium. By using
comparative rate thermometry, it has recently been determined that the effective
temperature reached during cavitational collapse is 5200 Kelvin with heating and
cooling rates of two billion degrees per second| The proposed research will deal
with the chemical effects of ultrasound on both homogeneous liquids and on
heteerogeneous (liquid-solid) systems. In the homogeneous area, special emphasis
will be placed on sonoluminescence of non-aqueous liquids and on organometallic
systems. Examples of homogeneous sonocatalysis with rate enhancements of one
million have been developed and will continue; as well as developing further
analogies to bomb reactions and metal vapor chemistry. In heterogeneous systems,
the effect of cavitation near surfaces on particle morphology, surface
structure, and both stoichiometric and catalytic reactivity will be explored.
Already, a 100,000 enhancement of catalytic activity of Ni due to the removal of
a passivating oxide coating has been discovered. A wide range of surface
analysis techniques, especially SEM and Auger electron spectroscopy, will be
used in this work.