* 8702336
* Ecological Research on the Luquillo Experimental Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Robert Waide, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1989
* USD 150,000.00

The Luquillo Experimental Forest is a National Forest and a Biosphere Reserve
and contains several research natural areas within its 11,231 ha. area. The goal
of this proposed research is to initiate studies of disturbance regime and
forest structure and dynamics in a landscape perspective. Primary research
questions address the relative importance of different disturbance types within
major life zones and the interactions of the biota in restoring ecosystem
productivity after disturbance. Research components comprise the: examination of
pattern, frequency, and intensity of disturbance; measurement of environmental
properties expected to vary with disturbance size, age, and origin; estimation
biological properties expected to vary with environmental properties; and
assessment of system properties that emerge from the effects of disturbance
pattern and frequency on the interaction of environment and biota. Standard
measurements (e.g. meteorology and basic research site description) will be
conducted. Existing data sets will be incorporated into a comprehensive data
management system to support data reduction and synthesis. Strong institutional
commitments exist from the University of Puerto Rico and the Institute of
Tropical Forestry, U.S. Forest Service, whose personnel will collaborate in the
conduct of the work. Facilities and accommodations provided to the project group
are first-rate. The Ecosystem Studies Program recommends that this award be made
and expects that excellent results will be achieved.