* 8702371
* Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras and Operator Theory on Hilbert Space
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Norberto Salinas, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* William Y. Velez
* 12/31/1990
* USD 364,902.00

Operator theory is a central discipline in Modern Analysis. Its origins lie in
the study of mathematical physics and partial differential equations in the
early twentieth century. Thus, it was seen that numerous physical problems in
the theory of equilibria, vibration, quantum theory, etc. could be studied
productively via the integral equations that model the phenomena. So it has
been, that from the fertile minds of Hilbert, von Neumann, and other giants that
the subject of operator theory has grown to a central position in such
investigations, and in core mathematics as well. Also central to Modern Analysis
is the related discipline of operator algebras in which one studies collections
of operators simultaneously. As the mathematical construct which best transfers
the concepts of probability, measure theory, topology, and more recently
geometry to noncommutative contexts, operator algebras relate to a rich,
effective, and important array of applications. Professors Bunce, Paschke,
Salinas, and Upmeier are all leaders in the areas of operator theory and
operator algebras, and their research group at Kansas is one of the strongest
and most versatile at any university in the United States. Collectively, this
group covers a broad span of these disciplines. Professor Bunce has been a major
contributor to the C*-algebra version of the Stone-Weierstrass theorem, to
abstract operator theory proper, and to applications in systems theory.
Professor Salinas has made important contributions to C*-algebraic K-theory
applied to single operator theory and several complex variables. Professor
Paschke has made fundamental contributions to the study of concrete C*-algebras
in the context of noncommutative algebraic topology. Professor Upmeier has a
deep and penetrating understanding of bounded symmetric domains. He has been a
major figure in the study of Toeplitz and Hankel operators on these domains. In
the current proposal, Bunce will study dilation problems in operator theory,
Bishop's theorem, and operator means and inequalities. Paschke will work on
C*-algebras associated with discrete groups and will pursue problems dealing
with irrational rotation C*-algebras. Salinas will continue his research on the
joint behavior of n-tuples of operaors, gaining insight into the interplay
between the spectral and C*-algebraic properties of the canonical n-tuple for
classes of kernel functions. Upmeier will investigate a symbol calculus and
index theory for multivariable Toeplitz operaors on pseudoconvex domains in
complex n-space. He will also study non-type I Toeplitz C*-algebras related to
automorphic functions and quantum mechanics. There are three postdoctoral
mathematicians working with this group in a mentorial relationship. Their
interests spread across Lie group C*-algebras, symplectic geometry, singular
foliations, holomorphic curves in the Grassmanian, and noncommutative
integration.