* 8702629
* Successional Processes in Taiga Forests of Interior Alaska:  A Long-Term Ecological Research Program for Study of       Controls of Subarctic Forest Development
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1993
* Leslie Viereck, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1993
* USD 2,555,481.00

This Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) project will examine controls over
ecosystem structure and function in the boreal forest of interior Alaska. A
combination of experiments and observations will be used to document the
changing nature of ecosystem controls during primary succession on river
floodplains and during post-fire secondary succession in the uplands. The
central hypothesis of the project is that the pattern of succession is
determined primarily by initial site character- istics and by the life history
traits of component species and that the rate of successional change is then
determined by vegetation-caused change in environment and ecosystem function.
The following aspects will be emphasized: (1) vegetation change and demographic
controls, (2) vegetation-caused changes in resources and standing crops of
biomass and nutrients, (3) controls over nutrient supply, (4) the role of
herbivores as consumers and modifiers of succession, and (5) the role of
invertebrates and microbes as regulators of organic decomposition and nutrient
remineralization processes. This new research project builds upon a past record
of major research accomplishments and productivity stemming from the site upon
which the new project will be based. New research themes are derived from past
observations and experimental results spanning a period of more than a dozen
years of work. The project will provide an integration of sound fundamental
ecological research with opportunities to have substantial impact upon the
stewardship and management of vast tracts of renewable natural resources. The
primary research team and project leadership are of proven high quality in their
own right, and the total effort will be further strengthened by the use of
outside consulting expertise in certain specialty areas. Facilities provided by
the University of Alaska are excellent. Additional facilities provided by the
USDA/Forest Service will further enhance the work as will other support in kind
from that source. It is reasonably expected that the output from this extreme of
the forested environment will provide a valuable comparison base for other
similar work being conducted on temperate forest ecosystems. In a similar
fashion it is expected - and documented for its earliest phases - that this
project will easily integrate itself into the network of similar ongoing
projects in a major contributory role. The Ecosystem Studies Program recommends
that funding be made available for the first year of this five-year continuing
award.