* 8702333
* On Landscape Development and Ecological Processes in a       Tide-dominated Barrier-Lagoon Complex
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1993
* Linda Blum, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 02/28/1993
* USD 2,314,043.00

A long-term ecological research program will be conducted on the barrier-
estuarine system on the Atlantic coast of Virginia. This 1,000-km2 system has
developed during the period of Holocene sea level rise. This project is designed
to incorporate a wide domain of scales of time and space. The interrelationships
of secular climate change, sea-level change, island movement, and marsh growth
and development will be studied with data from dated sediment cores. The
interrelationships of the current climatic environment, stochastic climatic
disturbances and surficial landscape processes such as plant and animal
succession will be studied with data from remotely-sensed imagery, field and
laboratory experimentation, and direct field observation of population
distributions and processes such as decomposition and element cycling. A system
of three coupled models, including a biogeochemical process model, a succession
model and a landscape model, will be used both to guide and to synthesize
studies of processes occurring on different scales of time and space. This
research undertaking will be conducted by a truly remarkable interdisciplinary
research group each member of which is an outstanding scientist in his own
right. The group is organized in a completely integrated and collaborative
fashion and a major synergism should result. The University of Virginia will
provide excellent on-campus facilities for the work which will be a department-
level centerpiece commanding a significant allocation of new support resources.
The Nature Conservancy, owners of the research site, will participate in the
support of the project by both direct and in-kind avenues in addition to
assuming all costs for site integrity and security. The organization of the
total project team is extraordinary. The project and scientific group come fully
prepared at the outset to assume a leadership position within the family of
concurrent similar research efforts at the landscape scale. Plans are already
being implemented for several kinds of collaborative efforts in areas of science
and technology appropriate and important to the achievement of major progress.
In addition to the obvious characteristics of high quality fundamental
ecological research this project will offer the opportunity to affect the
management of critical and fragile natural resources of the coastal zone. The
Ecosystem Studies Program recommends that funding be made available for the
first year of this five-year continuing award.