* 8702562
* Meteorology of Transport and Deposition Over the North      Atlantic
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1991
* John Merrill, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/28/1991
* USD 285,711.00

Over the past 10-15 years atmospheric chemistry has evolved from a young
research discipline devoted primarily to local problems of urban pollution and
air quality to a mature science concerned with the hemispheric to global scale
cycling of a wide variety of chemical species. To a large extent this change has
resulted from an increasing realization that human activities can cause chemical
disturbances to the natural troposphere on scales far beyond local concerns.
Well-known examples include changes in the regional-to-global concentrations of
certain nitrogen compounds, lead and other heavy metals, artificial
radionuclides, a number of synthetic organic substances, certain acid-forming
species, carbon dioxide and methane. These chemical changes in the atmosphere
can often extend to the earth's soils, oceans, and biota far from the original
source region. They can result in alterations in the earth's climate, changes in
vital nutrient cycles, and impact significantly on the public health and quality
of life on earth. The Atmosphere/Ocean Chemistry Experiment (AEROCE) will be a
coordinated multi-institutional atmospheric and marine chemistry research
project centered in the North Atlantic region. The ultimate goal of the AEROCE
project will be the development of a predictive capability for the continentally
derived species observed in the marine troposphere over the North Atlantic. The
selection of sites and the measurement protocol in AEROCE has been developed
jointly by modelers and field experimentalists. This project is to be a
meteorological research and support element of the Network Studies portion of
the AEROCE effort. The specific objectives of this research element are: the
determination of the height and structure of the atmospheric boundary layer at
each site using routinely observed meteorological sounding data; understanding
the large scale transport processes at each site for the duration of Network
sampling using isentropic trajectory analysis techniques; and assessment of the
rates of wet removal over the North Atlantic by compiling a basin-wide rainfall
climatology for the region.