* 8702693
* Mathematical Sciences: Traveling Wave Solutions of Reaction Diffusion Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 11/30/1990
* USD 56,652.00

Reaction-diffusion equations arise as models in many areas of Mathematical
Biology and Chemistry. A feature common to many of these systems is the
existence of traveling wave solutions. These correspond to solutions which
appear to be traveling with constant shape and velocity. The objective of this
project is to develop new techniques for proving the existence and stability of
traveling wave solutions. There are two basic steps in the program outlined in
this project. The first consists of developing general methods for proving the
existence and stability of traveling wave solutions. A basic ingredient for
these methods is the Conley index, a relatively recent tool developed by the
late Professor Charles Conley in 1977-1978. The second part consists of
applications of the basic theory. Specific applications to be considered are the
existence and stability of traveling wave solutions arising from ecology and
combustion, and the existence of radially symmetric solutions of semilinear
elliptic systems. This last problem is closely related to the question of the
existence of traveling wave solutions. The project presented by Professor Terman
contains several sub- projects related to various potential connections of this
mathematical theory to other scientific problems. Professor Terman is a young
talented mathematician who has already established his leading position in this
area of research.