* 8702298
* Hormonal Regulation of Pregnancy and Its Interruption in theDjungarian Hamster
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Paul Terranova, University of Kansas Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 09/30/1991
* USD 154,920.00

This study proposes to evaluate the changes in the serum levels of progesterone,
etradiol, LH, FSH and prolactin during the estrous cycle of the Djungarian
hamster during pregnancy and during a pregnancy block induced by mating with 2
males. The first experiment will elucidate the gonadotropic hormones during the
estrous cycle with focus on the events surrounding ovulation, since this is the
only short cycle rodent known that does not exhibit an increase in serum levels
of progesterone on proestrus. The second experiment ascertains the gonadotropin
and steroid changes in sera on proestrus associated with mating to a single male
(normal pregnancy). Hormonal patterns will also be determined in early
pregnancy. In addition the effects of mating to a single male on the number of
ova shed and the timing of ovulation will be determined. The third experiment
will ascertain the effects of mating females with 2 males on hormonal patterns.
The double mating (with 2 males) causes a pregnancy block even though ovulation
and behavioral estrus return 4 days later (no pseudopregnancy or prolonged cycle
is observed). A histological assessment of the morphology of the corpora lutea
and classification (staging) of follicles during the cycle, early pregnancy and
pregnancy block will be assessed in order to characterize the luteal-follicular
shift associated with the pregnancy block and subsequent return to estrus. These
studies will provide insight into the effects of mating with one or two (or no)
males on hormonal patterns and thus allow the development of a hypothesis as to
the hormonal mechanisms associated with the pregnancy blockage.