* 8702481
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Environmental            Biogeochemistry of Selected Estuaries, State of Ceara,      Northeastern Brazil
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Henri Gaudette, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1990
* USD 22,628.00

This award supports the participation of Prof. Henri E. Gaudette and colleagues
of the University of New Hampshire in a program of cooperative research with
Prof. Jader Onofre de Morais and others of the Laboratory of Marine Sciences of
the Federal University of Ceara. They are collaborating in an analysis of
nutrient and metal dynamics in the estuarine systems near the city of Fortaleza,
Brazil. While the data will be of immediate benefit in the management of the
biogeochemistry of this rapidly growing area of Brazil, the results of this
project will also contribute to a broader understanding of the chemical dynamics
of tropical estuarine systems in general. The river estuaries to be studied--
those of the Coco, Ceara, and Pacoti rivers in the state of Ceara--are the major
sources of land-based influence, both natural and human-produced, on the near-
shore environment in the most heavily populated part of the State. The
investigations to be conducted will determine the levels of anthropogenic impact
on the three estuarine systems and the near shore environment, and will provide
a data base useful for understanding and regulating possible long-term
biological effects. The investigators have already been working together on some
of these problems, with support from NSF, and this project is an extension of
that effort. Overall, the project will utilize the analytical expertise of the
U.S. investigators with the experimental experience of their Brazilian
counterparts, and will help to delineate the role of estuaries in the coastal
ecology of this and similar regions, and add to our knowledge of the
biogeochemical dynamics of tropical estuaries.