* 8702278
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Theoretical Studies of   the Electronic Structure of Molecules
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1989
* William Lester Jr, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1989
* USD 9,196.00

This award supports the participation of Dr. William A. Lester of the University
of California, Berkeley, in a program of cooperative research with Dr. Carlton
A. Taft of the Brazilian Center of Physics Research in Rio de Janeiro, aimed at
investigating the electronic structure, bonding, and other properties of
molecules. The electronic properties to be investigated include electronic
structure, equilibrium geometry, barriers to rearrangement, and dissociation
energies. The consequent improved understanding of molecular properties will be
of interest to workers in the fields of chemistry, physics, and biology. This
project will make use of the complementary theoretical capabilities of the U.S.
and Brazilian groups. The U.S. group has pioneered the development of the
quantum Monte Carlo method to determine the energy and other properties of atoms
and molecules. In addition, this group has performed calculations of electronic
properties using the more approximate, but less expensive, multiconfiguration
Hartree-Fock method for larger systems. The Brazilian group focuses on larger
systems using Hartree-Fock and generalized valence-bond methods. Thus, methods
to deal with various types of molecular systems, as appropriate, are available.
In addition to the purely scientific benefit, the collaboration will be
beneficial to both groups by providing exposure to very different systems and
methods for which the theoretical and computational requirements have previously
dictated the need for alternative methods.