* 8702209
* Dehydrodiconiferyl Glucosides and the Control of Plant Cell Division
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Andrew Binns, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 01/31/1991
* USD 259,500.00

Several naturally occurring isomers of dehydrodiconiferyl glucosides (DCGs) can
substitute for cytokinin in tobacco pith and leaf cell division bioassays. These
DCGs have been found in Vinca rosea and Nicotiana tabacum. In rapidly growing
crown gall tumors and non- transformed tissues the DGCs are found in micromolar
concentrations whereas in quiescent pith tissues their levels are one hundred
fold reduced. These results suggest that cytokinin may exert control of cell
division by regulating the accumulation and/or availability of DCGs. The
objectives of the proposed work are to: 1) determine the timing and biochemical
basis of DCG accumulation after cytokinin treatment of quiescent tissues, 2)
determine whether adenylate cytokinins are required for DCG accumulation or vice
versa, and 3) initiate studies on the uptake and metabolism of DCGs. The
stimulatory effects of the plant hormones auxin and cytokinin on cell division
have been known for many years. However, the mechanisms by which these hormones
exert their control is not known. Dr. Binns has evidence that implicates
dehydrodeconiferyl glucosides in the cell division response to the hormone
cytokinin. If this link proves to be a causal one it will provide the first
meaningful physiological link between the hormonal signal (cytokinin) and the
cellular response (cell division).