* 8702277
* A Hardware Prototype of the FFP Machine:  A Cooperative     Research Project with Washington University
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Gyula Mago, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Foster
* 02/28/1989
* USD 273,811.00

The Formal Functional Programming (FFP) machine is a novel computer architecture
that has the potential of combining high performance with programming ease and
flexibility. It is a direct implementation of a reduction model of computation.
Program decomposition, task allocation, synchronization and scheduling are
efficiently automated in the FFP machine, and therefore are removed from the
programmer's concern. The objective of this research is to demonstrate that such
a functional programming machine can be implemented in practical logic by
designing and constructing an advanced prototype. The prototype will be a small-
grain highly parallel computer that is built primarily from many copies of two
building blocks: L-cells and T-cells. System software will be developed and the
completed prototype will be evaluated. To help accomplish this objective, the
resources of the Microelectronic Systems Laboratory will be utilized. This is a
collaborative effort with Charles Molnar of Washington University. The program
director considers the FFP machine to be a truly novel computer. Professor Mago
is a leading authority in functional programming, and consequently is highly
qualified to design and evaluate this machine. Co-principal investigator Vernon
Chi has an excellent record in hardware-construction projects. Collaborator
Charles Molnar at Washington University is well known for his expertise in
asynchronous logic; hence, his efforts on a parallel grant from NSF will be
supportive to this research. The program director strongly recommends funding
this proposal.