* 8702563
* Trace Elements in the Atmosphere Over the North Atlantic:   Concentrations, Sources, and Fluxes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1987,06/30/1992
* Richard Arimoto, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 06/30/1992
* USD 675,600.00

Over the past 10-15 years atmospheric chemistry has evolved from a young
research discipline devoted primarily to local problems of urban pollution and
air quality to a mature science concerned with the hemispheric to global scale
cycling of a wide variety of chemical species. To a large extent this change has
resulted from an increasing realization that human activities can cause chemical
disturbances to the natural troposphere on scales far beyond local concerns.
Well-known examples include changes in the regional-to-global concentrations of
certain nitrogen compounds, lead and other heavy metals, artificial
radionuclides, a number of synthetic organic substances, certain acid-forming
species, carbon dioxide and methane. These chemical changes in the atmosphere
can often extend to the earth's soils, oceans, and biota far from the original
source region. They can result in alterations in the earth's climate, changes in
vital nutrient cycles, and impact significantly on the public health and quality
of life on earth. The Atmosphere/Ocean Chemistry Experiment (AEROCE) will be a
coordinated multi-institutional atmospheric and marine chemistry research
project centered in the North Atlantic region. The ultimate goal of the AEROCE
project will be the development of a predictive capability for the continentally
derived species observed in the marine troposphere over the North Atlantic. The
selection of sites and the measurement protocol in AEROCE has been developed
jointly by modelers and field experimentalists. This AEROCE research element
will be concerned with studying trace elements in the atmosphere over the North
Atlantic by measuring in atmospheric samples from the AEROCE Network sites.
These data will be used to develop a chemical climatology for the atmosphere
over the North Atlantic, i.e., a description of the mean concentrations of the
trace elements and the temporal and areal variability of the means. Particular
emphasis will be placed on assessing how physical, chemical, and biological
processes in the atmosphere and oceans affect the concentrations and fluxes of
trace elements. The transport of dust and the scavenging of dust by rain will be
investigated to understand how the chemistry and air-sea exchange of mineral
dust is coupled to the geochemical cycling of other substances. Improved
estimates of the distribution and flux of atmospheric sea-salt will be made by
considering combinations of variables that affect sea-salt production. Chemical
tracers will be used to delineate the concentrations of certain elements and the
biological productivity of the waters bordering the sampling sites.