* 8702088
* Molecular Activation of Plant Cells by Rhizobium
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Thomas Jacobs, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/1991
* USD 243,000.00

Dr. Jacobs proposes to isolate, characterize and begin a developmental analysis
of plant genes activated by Rhizobium. This includes obtaining cDNA clones for
any genes which exhibit transcriptional induction at the earliest stages of
Rhizobium infection. Using heterologous probes from well-characterized plant
systems, he will also obtain cDNA clones for defined genes which are expected to
play a role in root dedifferentiation and nodule meristem induction. Genes
expected to be activated by Rhizobium infection include those encoding cell
division functions and cytoskeletal elements such as actin, tubulin and
extensin. Recovered clones will be analyzed in several ways. First, clones will
be confirmed by Northern analysis to assure the presumed developmental relevance
of their cognate genes. Next, the cDNA clones will be restriction mapped and
subcloned into plasmid vectors. These subclones will be used for analysis of the
activation of their cognate genes, as influenced by mutant bacterial and host
plant genotypes, by cell-free extracts of activated rhizobia and by abiotic
factors such as calcium and nitrogen availability during inoculation. Dr. Jacobs
has begun a molecular analysis of the plant genes during the Rhizobium/legume
symbiosis. This symbiotic interaction is important in a practical way for the
assimilation of nitrogen by the plant but also can be a useful model for
differential plant gene expression during organogenesis.