* 8702947
* US-Australia Joint Seminar/Workshop on the Cytoskeleton: ItsFormation and Role in the Growth, Differentiation and Structure of Wool and Hair; Adelaide, Australia; Dec. 1987
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1988
* Robert Goldman, Northwestern University Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 08/31/1988
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support the travel of eight United States scientists to a
workshop on the cytoskeleton and its formation and role in the growth,
differentiation and structure of wool and hair. The workshop will be held in
Adelaide, Australia, December 7-11, 1987. Dr. Robert D. Goldman, Northwestern
University School of Medicine, and Dr. Tung-Tien H. Sun, New York University
School of Medicine, are the U.S. organizers planning the workshop with Dr.
George E. Rogers, University of Adelaide, and other Australian members of the
Committee. The purpose of the workshop is to assess the use of hair and wool
growth as a model system for studying the structure and function of the major
intermediate filament (IF) proteins, in particular the keratins. Intermediate
filament proteins are major components of the cytoskeletal system of all
mammalian cell systems and keratins are the most well characterized of all of
the intermediate filament proteins. Discussed at the workshop will be the
structure and function of the cytoplasmic keratins and the newly described
complexes of keratin-like proteins within the nuclear matrix, the lamins, as
well as the microbiology of the keratin system including the characterization
and regulation of the genes encoding these proteins. The result of the workshop
will be an increased awareness of the scientific activities going on in the
countries represented and greater possibilities for collaborative research
between the participants. This meeting will bring together for the first time
Australian keratin experts with investigators from the U.S. having expertise on
the cellular and molecular aspects of the cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells. The
Australian Government Department of Science has already approved and funded
support for the Australian participants. The NSF Program Director for
Developmental Biology has recommended this activity at a high priority level.