* 8702176
* Some Problems on Encoders and Channels in Information       Theory and Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1991
* John Kieffer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/1991
* USD 222,175.00

The principal investigator (PI) proposes to examine two problems in the course
of his research. One of these problems involves determining the maximum amount
of compression that can be achieved in a message so that it can be reliably
transmitted over a communication system. The research will focus on the little
understood situation in which the characteristics of both the system and the
message- generating device vary with time. The second problem that the PI
proposes to explore involves determining the performance of procedures employing
feedback for coding sequential data. At present, the only general method for
comparing two such procedures is to test to see which of them yields the smaller
error. Testing can be eliminated through the use of a formula for the error
produced by a general feedback procedure. The search for such a formula is
included in the proposed investigation. More specifically, the principal
investigator proposes to address communications problems including proving
coding theorems for nonstationary communication channels having a variable-
length structure, the calculation of the decoding error arising in linear
filtering the output sequence of a feedback encoding scheme, and the
determination of the optimal average rate at which a nonstationary information
source can be encoded via a general class of variable-length source encoder.