* 8702051
* Mutational Studies of Nervous System Development
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Monte Westerfield, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly O'Neal Moorer
* 12/31/1988
* USD 26,967.00

Mutational Studies of Nervous System Development: This award recommendation is
made under the U.S.-Industrialized Countries Program for the Exchange of
Scientists and Engineers, 1987/1988 Competition. The program is designed to
enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research at research
institutions in the industrialized countries of Western Europe as well as Japan,
Australia and New Zealand. Exchange awards provide opportunities for the conduct
of joint research and the utilization of unique or complementary facilities,
expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. Awards are selected
on the basis of scientific criteria relevant to his/her field of science, the
prospective potential of the applicants for professional growth, as well as
criteria relevant to the furthering of international cooperation in science and
engineering. The program is particularly directed to scientists and engineers
who are embarking on their research careers. This research will address the
study of the mechanisms by which genes control the early development, structure
and function of the nervous system of a vertebrate. Specifically, the work will
attempt to develop new procedures for creating mutations by the insertion of
foreign DNA sequences into zebrafish genome by injecting plasmids into eggs or
young embryos. The project is under the direction of Professor Monte
Westerfield, Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon
97403, U.S.A., and Professor John Nicholls, Cell Biology Section, Biocenter,
University of Basel, Klingerbergstrasse 70, Basel Switzerland. This award
recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international travel,
local travel abroad, stipend, dependents allowance, if applicable, language
training, if required, and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S.
home institution.