* 8702293
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research on the Polymerization of Olefins from the Gas Phase
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,04/30/1991
* Robert Laurence, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 04/30/1991
* USD 19,984.00

This award supports the participation of Prof. William C. Conner, Jr., of the
University of Massachusetts, in a program of cooperative research with Prof.
Mario G. Chiovetta of the Institute of Technological Development for the
Chemical Industry (INTEC), Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe,
Argentina, aimed at experimentally determining the changes in the morphology of
catalysts used for olefin polymerization, and at developing models for the
energy and mass transport processes that occur during polymerization. The
physical understanding and the capability for process quantification that will
result from this study will be used as a basis for representing the
polymerization reaction and calculating the dependence of polymer production and
properties on the process conditions and the changing catalysts morphology.
Ultimately, this knowledge should lead to improvement of production efficiency
and yield. The production of such polyolefins as polypropylene, polyethylene,
and elastomers and copolymers of ethylene-propylene is of great commercial
interest. The slurry, bulk, or gas-phase processes by which different
polyolefins are produced depend on the catalysts used as well as process
conditions, in particular those conditions which determine the dynamics of the
catalyst breakdown. In order to improve yield of polyolefins in such newer
processes as that using the gas phase, the investigators seek to obtain a
detailed understanding of the breakdown mechanism by developing an experimental
data base as required to define the sequence of events occurring in the
breakdown of initial catalyst particles. They will use the data base to develop
a definition of the fragmentation process in terms of the sequence of events
generating the changes in the morphology of the solid particles and, finally,
they will develop a mathematical model to represent the phenomena taking place
during the entire process. In this work, University of Massachusetts' experience
in performing polymerization experiments will be combined with expertise at
INTEC in the modeling and simulation of heterogeneous polymerization processes,
and overall benefit should be realized by the polymer industries of both
countries.