* 8702479
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research on Reactivity at Charged   Interfaces in Aqueous Media
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1991
* Laurence Romsted, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1991
* USD 23,570.00

This award supports the participation of Prof. Clifford A. Bunton of the
University of California, Santa Barbara, and Prof. Laurence S. Romsted, of
Rutgers University, in a program of cooperative research with Prof. Frank Quina
of the University of Sao Paulo and Prof. Faruk J. Nome of the Federal University
of Santa Catarina, aimed at determining the range of applicability of the
Pseudophase Ion Exchange (PIE) model for certain effects in chemical reactions.
Enhanced understanding of this model can be expected to lead to further advances
in the chemistry of surface reactions. The PIE model, which describes the effect
of ionic amphiphiles on the rates and equilibria of thermal surface reactions,
fails in some cases probably because of certain assumptions about the structures
and electrical properties of the surfaces on which the reaction takes place. All
four research groups involved in this study are actively exploring surface
charge density effects on counterion bonding and reactivity, and in various
systems. Their complementary expertise will be used to study the limits of the
PIE model. Each investigator will define a set of experiments using the systems
in which he is expert, and test the model in these systems. Based upon the
results of these experiments, improved models for the effect of aqueous
interfaces on reactions and equilibria will be developed. The synergy to be
exploited here is excellent and will result in considerable mutual benefit to
the Brazilian and U.S. investigators.