* 8702200
* Workshop:  Opportunities and Research Needs of Adhesion     Science and Technology; Stanford University, Stanford, CA;  February 26-27, 1987
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Gerald Fuller, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1988
* USD 47,295.00

This proposal describes a two day Workshop on Adhesion Science and Technology to
be co-directed by Professor Gerald G. Fuller of Stanford University and Dr.
Kashmiri L. Mittal of IBM corporation. It will be held on the 26th and 27th of
February, 1987 at Stanford University. This workshop will serve as a forum
through which the range of technologies which are impacted by adhesion and
coating properties can be appreciated. The subject matter will contain
sufficient technical dept ot enable attendees from academic research and NSF to
assess the most critical outstanding issues in this field and the areas in which
they could most likely particpate and support. The speakers will primarily be
chosen from industrial laboratories and will introduce specific applications of
adhesion technologies as well as discuss current theories and experimental
methods. The applications will include examples from microelectronics, including
optoelectric circuits, mass storage media, composite materials, tribology
protective coatings. The presentations and summaries of each discussion session
will be published in workshop proceedings. The workshop is supported by a number
of NSF/ENG programs, including Thermodynamics and Transport Phenomena, Materials
Engineering and Processing, Tribology, and Solid and Geo- mechanics. Therefore,
the final workshop program will reflect the interests of these programs. (Note:
The date of the workshop will probably be delayed until May or June, 1987).