* 8702541
* Ultrafast Dynamics and Spectroscopy of Photosystem I        Subunits at Low Temperatures
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,09/30/1989
* Edward Castner, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly O'Neal Moorer
* 09/30/1989
* USD 32,618.00

Ultrafast Dynamics and Spectroscopy of Photosystem I Subunits at Low
Temperatures This award recommendation is made under the U.S.-Industrialized
Countries Program for the Exchange of Scientists and Engineers, 1987/1988
Competition. The program is designed to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct long-term research at research institutions in the industrialized
countries of Western Europe as well as Japan, Australia, and New Zealand.
Exchange awards provide opportunities for the conduct of joint research and the
utilization of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions in foreign countries. Awards are selected on the basis of scientific
criteria relevant to his/her field of science, the prospective potential of the
applicants for professional growth, as well as criteria relevant to the
furthering of international cooperation in science and engineering. The program
is particularly directed to scientists and engineers who are embarking on their
research careers. This research project will use subpicosecond laser
spectroscopy to study optical coherence dephasing in two different kinds of
molecular systems. The first project will be to measure the rates of excitation
transfer between chlorophyll A "antenna" molecules to the reaction center core
pigment of the green plant P700 subunit of Photosystem I. The second project
will be to measure the excited state dephasing or large organic molecules as a
function of solvent and temperature at extremely low temperatures. The project
is under the direction of Dr. Edward W. Castner, Jr., Department of Chemistry,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, U.S.A., and Professor D.A. Wiersma,
Laboratory of Physical Chemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 16, 9747
AG, Groningen, The Netherlands. This award recommendation provides funds to
cover, as appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad, stipend,
dependents allowance, if applicable, language training, if required, and a flat
administrative allowance of $250 or the U.S. home institution.