* 8702822
* Equipment for Research in Experimental Elementary Particle  Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* James Cronin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1991
* USD 3,202,672.00

The primary goal of this research is to search for photons from
extraterrestrial point sources in our galaxy. The investigators from the
University of Chicago will build a very large array of detectors (scintillators)
at ground level distributed on a lattice covering an area of about 100,000
square meters. This detector array will surround the existing Fly's Eye cosmic
ray device at Dugway, Utah. The new ground level scintillator array will operate
in coincidence with a second array of scintillators to be built by physicists
from the University of Michigan. The Michigan array will be buried about 10 feet
underground where nearly all but cosmic ray muons are filtered out by the earth.
The presence of signals in the ground level array and the absence of muons in
the underground array will be used to identify incident primary cosmic ray
photons. During the past few years, several groups reported evidence for the
observation of extensive cosmic ray showers from point sources in our galaxy.
Also, the high muon content of these showers is larger than expected for
incident photons. However, these works are of limited statistical significance.
The new combined Chicago-Michigan detector will be a factor of five to ten times
more sensitive than those used in previous investigations. This new detector
system is expected to resolve the questions of whether there are cosmic ray
particles with "point like" origins and whether such particles, if they exist,
are photons or a new type of particle giving muon rich showers. The research
encompasses two fields of physics. Namely, those of astrophysics and elementary
particle physics. Astrophysics studies such questions as the origins and
structure of the universe and elementary particle physics studies the basic
building blocks of the universe and the forces between them. These two fields
are intimately connected to one another. Also, the data is collected and
analyzed using highly complex and sophisticated apparatus and techniques.