* 8702388
* The LHRH System and Reproductive Function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Joan King, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 01/31/1991
* USD 285,001.00

The plan here is to develop an in vivo model to study the regulation of
synthesis and secretion of hormones by the hypothalamus, the interacting region
of the brain that regulates many of the growth and reproductive functions of the
pituitary gland. The regulation of the hormone (LHRH) controlling the release of
pituitary luteinizing hormone (regulates many aspects of gonad function and the
reproductive cycle) is the particular focus of this research effort. The model
will allow examination of the neural connections and transmission of neurally
derived hormones throughout the circulation from the hypothalamus to the
pituitary gland. The experiments involve electron microscopy with computer-
assisted image enhancement and immunological staining techniques to identify the
secretory neurons in the hypothalamus. Companion experiments will employ
specific pharmacological agents and electrical stimulations to modify synthesis
and secretion. A most critical set of experiments deal with the regulation of
the hormones involved in the ovulatory surge in female rats. Another set of
studies focuses on the LHRH secreting neurons in normal and castrated male and
female rats to evaluate acute and chronic alterations in LHRH synthesis and
secretion in androgen and estrogen deprived animals. The results of this
research should lead to new understandings of how the brain controls
reproductive functions. The techniques to be used are novel and will be useful
to others studying any aspect of the neural control of pituitary gland function.