* 8702728
* The Genetic Control of Developmental Decisions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Robin Denell, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1990
* USD 300,000.00

Drosophila melanogaster has been the preeminent experimental system for studies
of the genetic control of developmental fate. Studies of this organism have
shown the importance of two gene clusters, the bithorax complex (BX-C) and the
Antennapedia complex (ANT-C), in controlling determinative decisions. However,
flies are evolutionarily very advanced insects, and at present we have little
basis to evaluate which features of Drosophila development represent fundamental
mechanisms and which are specialized adaptations of this taxon. An integrated
developmental genetic and molecular analysis of the control of developmental
fate in a more primitive insect, the red flour beetle Tribolium casteaneum is
proposed. Preliminary studies have already identified a homeotic complex (HOM-C)
which appears to represent the juxtaposed equivalent of the ANT-C and BX-C, and
have generated more than 25 new mutations affecting this complex. Future studies
will use an available balancer chromosome and HOM-C deficiencies to saturate the
complex with lethal and visible mutations; such a high resolution genetic
analysis heretofore has been inconceivable outside of Drosophila. The phenotypes
of these mutations at all stages of the life cycle will be described, with
special emphasis on variants associated with lethality. Further, molecular
studies to determine the organization of the HOM-C and its constituent genes,
and to describe the temporal and spatial specificities of their expression will
be done. The sequences in the complex will be cloned by homology to Drosphila
sequences. Drosophila melanogaster is the most sophisticated experimental system
available for the study of genetic control of development. But until an equally
powerful but different eukaryotic organism can also be studied, it is difficult
to know whether the developmental mechanisms uncovered in Drosophila can be
generalized to all eukaryotic systems. Dr. Denell and his associates will
develop such a system in Tribolium castaneum, the red flour beetle.