* 8702815
* Workshop on High Speed Optical Processes and Opto-ElectronicDevices Based on Compound Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1988
* Pallab Bhattacharya, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sarah A. Clark
* 05/31/1988
* USD 25,000.00

Optoelectronics has progressed to the stage of being practical for some
applications. These include communications, storage, and certain signal
processing techniques. These developments depend critically upon a well
integrated research approach including materials, devices, and systems
considerations. This is expected to be even more important for future
developments in the area, particularly those relating to the controversial area
of optical computing. The central issue of materials will be addressed,
particularly the technical properties, availability to researchers, and new
directions with perspective of the lightwave technology area. A second issue to
be addressed is that of systems architecture. This is becoming increasingly
important as lightwave systems increase in emphasis and as highly precise
technology developments allows the finer aspects of systems principles to not
only be tested but to be implemented. The most obvious is that of coherent
communications. Also, however, are computational architectures, neural adaptive
architectures, and the entire area of nonlinear systems. The workshop will
provide guidance for future planning of the lightwave technology program, and
will provide a forum for dicussion of issues relevant to the quantum electronics
field generally. The attendance of foreign specialists will allow a broader
perspective and a view of the efforts of other countries in this area. It is
expected that closer collaboration among university researchers will be
discussed.