* 8702512
* Neuronal Differentiation in the Peripheral Nervous System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Gabrielle Leblanc, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steven C. McLoon
* 07/31/1990
* USD 149,060.00

All of the neurons of the autonomic nervous system and most peripheral sensory
neurons arise from the neural crest. The neural crest is a transitory structure
which appears on the dorsal surface of the neural tube shortly after neurulation
in vertebrate embryos. Neural crest cells migrate away from the neural tube
along well-defined pathways to their final sites where they give rise to a
variety of differentiated cell types. The differentiation of a neural crest cell
into an autonomic neuron involves the acquisition of a specific neurotransmitter
phenotype, which differs for different anatomical classes of peripheral neurons.
A developing neuron's choice of neurotransmitter is critical, since in order to
establish a functional synapse with its target tissue, the neuron must
synthesize a neurotransmitter which is appropriate to the receptors expressed by
that target tissue. The long-term goal of Dr. Leblanc's research is to elucidate
some of the mechanisms which govern neurotransmitter choice in developing
neurons. In this project, the investigator will examine the differentiation of
cholinergic properties in developing avian neural crest cells. Dr. Leblanc will
study (1) the differentiation of choline acetyltransferase (CAT) activity in
neural crest cells in vitro, (2) the differentiation of CAT immunoreactivity in
cranial neural crest cells in vivo, (3) the role of the cranial environment in
directing cholinergic differentiation in developing neural crest cells, and (4)
the effect of the trunk migratory environment on neurotransmitter expression in
spinal motor neurons. Dr. Leblanc is a well-trained developmental
neurobiologist, skilled in the use of tissue culture and transplantation
techniques. The results of this research will provide new and important
information on the acquisition of neurotransmitter phenotype in developing
neurons.