* 8702206
* Studies on the Specificity of Pancreatic Polypeptide        Binding (Including Partial Chemical Characterization of SuchSites)
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/1987,10/31/1991
* Robert Hazelwood, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 10/31/1991
* USD 165,900.00

Dr. Hazelwood discovered a putative "new" hormone in the pancreas of chickens
and other vertebrates and tentatively named it APP (for avian pancreatic
polypeptide). This polypeptide subsequently has been localized in the pancreata
of all vertebrates studied, including man, as well as in the nervous system in
those organisms which do not possess a pancreas (insects, etc.). Original
studies indicated a profound effect on carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. Within
the last 10 years a growing awareness has developed that a family of
structurally similar PPs reside in different parts of the body. Thus PP is
restricted to the pancreas, PYY is largely restricted to the large intestine and
colon, and NPY appears to be abundantly distributed in the brain and peripheral
nervous system. Recent findings have indicated a powerful effect of APP on
certain functions of the stomach, pancreas and intestinal structures. Despite
these positive findings the molecular basis of PP action, the common denominator
interrelating all of these diverse actions of the polypeptide with each other,
has not been determined. Recently Hazelwood has found that APP binds (interacts)
with cell membranes prepared from chicken brain more avidly than with membranes
prepared from any other tissue. Such findings indicate that the brain may be a
"target site" for APP action. Before progressing to the complexities of APP and
functional brain processes, it is desirable- if not essential- to characterize
these binding sites and to learn as much as possible about factors which alter
these sites in number as well as ability to bind circulating APP particularly in
relation to other tissues where a APP and PP have been shown to have specific
actions. Studies will be undertaken to characterize the chemical requirements
for binding APP to brain and liver membranes. Attempts to manipulate these sites
physiologically also will be carried out. Finally, Hazelwood plans to establish
the specificity of the binding of PP-like molecules to these sites by comparing
the NPY, PYY and APP binding affinities. It is expected that a critical and
meaningful understanding of the fundamental action and significance of PP in
vertebrates will result.