* 8702982
* Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* David Pitts, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/1990
* USD 19,274.00

Operator algebras is a central discipline in Modern Analysis which has
important historical and current applications. It arose in the early decades of
this century in connection with establishing a mathematical framework for
quantum mechanics. This pioneering work, associated with the names of von
Neumann and Murray, and referred to as the noncommutative analog of probability
theory and of measure theory, treated selfadjoint algebras of operators. In
recent years, again in connection with applications in physics as well as in
engineering and operator theory, mathematicians have turned their attention to
the theory of non-selfadjoint operator algebras. This study is in its infancy,
and the structure theory of such algebras is being intensively investigated.
Professor Pitts is a young mathematical analyst whose research career is off to
a stunning start. He recently completed his doctoral dissertation on the
structure of certain types of non-selfadjoint operator algebras called nest
algebras, studying them as subalgebras of von Neumann (selfadjoint) algebras. In
this work he obtained several new results on factorization problems and
connections with K- theory of these algebras. In the current proposal, Professor
Pitts plans to continue his successful research activity by investigating
difficult and long outstanding problems concerning similarity and connectedness
questions in nest algebras.