* 8702092
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research on Grain Boundary Phenomena in Oriented Bicrystals Subjected to High Tempature Fatigue
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1990
* Julia Weertman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1990
* USD 7,750.00

This award supports the participation of Julia R. Weertman of Northwestern
University in a program of joint research with Jose G. Cabanas of the Instituto
Polytecnico Nacional of Mexico with the goal of improving our understanding of
fatigue in metals and alloys. The experience of the Northwestern University
research group in the study of micro-damage at grain boundaries, in the growth
of bicrystalline materials for these studies, and in techniques for high-
temperature fatiguing, will be combined with the experience at the Mexican
institution in scanning and transmission electron microscopy. Single or
bicrystalline copper will be grown, cut in predetermined orientations, and
fatigued, at Northwestern. Selected-area channeling studies using a scanning
electron microscope, and other analyses using transmission electron microscopy,
will be performed at the Instituto Polytecnico Nacional to study the
interdependence in fatigued material of grain boundary migration and sliding,
cavitation, and dislocation structure in the region near where cavitation
occurs. From these measurements light should be thrown on the relationship
between cavities and dislocation structure, on the migration of grain
boundaries, and the dynamics of void growth. Fatigue in metals and alloys, and
the relationship of fatigue failure to microscopic voids and other defects in
materials particularly as they occur at grain boundaries, are of increasing
importance as more is asked of modern materials. In order to facilitate the
performance of controlled experiments on grain-boundary effects, "model grain
boundaries" which are isolated from properly oriented bicrystals, may be used.
After fatiguing under controlled conditions, scanning electron microscopy
channeling studies of crystalline orientation and perfection and transmission
electron microscope investigation of the boundaries themselves can give an
indication of the motion of grain boundaries and the relationship of this motion
to micro-defects related to the fatigue. The Northwestern University principal
investigator is an expert in the growth and orientation of such bicrystals while
the Mexican collaborator has complementary expertise in specialized electron
microscopy. This research should help answer certain fundamental questions
regarding intergranular damage produced by high-temperature fatigue, and thereby
contribute to the development of materials suitable for high-stress use in high-
temperature environments.