* 8702365
* Mathematical Sciences: Analytic and Geometric Function      Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* B. Alan Taylor, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1990
* USD 329,356.00

Work on this project will concentrate on problems arising in the theory of
several complex variables, pluripotential theory, mapping properties in several
variables, characteristic classes and with the rigidity of compact minimal
surfaces in spheres. Investigations into the stability of solutions and the
Dirichlet problem for the complex Monge-Ampere operator will be carried out.
These include determining the class of plurisubharmonic functions which make up
the correct domain for this operator. Stability questions center on the
dependence of solutions on both boundary data and the inhomogenous part of the
operator. The extent to which solutions converge when these related elements
converge is still open. Questions regarding mapping functions derive from
earlier results which show that high enough infinitesimal boundary contact of
holomorphic maps forces the map to be biholomorphic. Work will be done on
natural extensions of this work to find n- point Pick-Nevanlinna inequalities in
several variables and to establish multivariate rigidity conditions on maps
whose linear part is the identity. Studies of minimal surfaces and surfaces of
constant mean curvature are necessarily linked to the understanding of harmonic
maps. Recent work has shown that the set of conformal structures of fixed
topological type that can be realized as embedded minimal surfaces in the three-
sphere is compact. Minimally immersed surfaces are finite in number. Work will
be done in establishing whether or not this can be reduced to uniqueness. This
research has application to nonlinear partial differential equations,
differential geometry and higher dimensional potential theory.