* 8702142
* Membrane Events Following Hormone Binding to the LH         Receptor
* BIO,DCB
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Deborah Roess, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 12/31/1988
* USD 75,000.00

Luteinizing hormone (LH) and chorionic gonadotropin regulate the secretion of
progesterone from the corpus luteum. Sheep luteal cells will be used for
studying physical events accompanying human chorionic gonadotropin or ovine
luteinizing hormone binding to the luteinizing hormone receptor. The goals of
this research are to study luteinizing hormone receptor aggregation,
distribution, and molecular motions on sheep luteal cells during the luteal
phase of the estrous cycle and to study how the physical behavior of the
receptor is affected by its interactions with the hormones. First, LH receptor
aggregation will be examined on viable cells before and after hormone binding
using fluorescence energy transfer and measurements of LH receptor rotational
motions. Receptor distribution will be examined using computer-enhanced low
light microscopy and electron microscopy. Second, the roles of the subunits of
the hormones and of their associated carbohydrates in modifying lateral and
rotational motions of hormone-occupied LH receptors will be determined. Third,
cytoskeletal interactions with the LH receptor before and after hormone binding
will be characterized. Finally, interactions of the hormone-occupied LH receptor
with other luteal cell membrane proteins will be examined. Progesterone
secretion from the corpus luteum is required to maintain uterine conditions for
embryonic development in early pregnancy. LH and chorionic gonadotropin regulate
progesterone secretion, but much remains to be learned about their cellular
mechanisms of action. The proposed biophysical characterization of hormone-
occupied receptors on the membranes of luteal cells and an analysis of the
interactions of the hormone-receptor complex with other plasma membrane
constituents is a first step in understanding the mechanisms by which these
hormones regulate luteal cell function.