* 8702349
* Molecular Dynamics Studies of Human Leukocyte Elastase
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1989
* Richard Engh, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly O'Neal Moorer
* 02/28/1989
* USD 27,102.00

Molecular Dynamics Studies of Human Leukocyte Elastase This award
recommendation is made under the U.S.-Industrialized Countries Program for the
Exchange of Scientists and Engineers, 1987/1988 Competition. The program is
designed to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research
at research institutions in the industrialized countries of Western Europe as
well as Japan, Australia, and New Zealand. Exchange awards provide opportunities
for the conduct of joint research and the utilization of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. Awards
are selected on the basis of scientific criteria relevant to his/her field of
science, the prospective potential of the applicants for professional growth, as
well as criteria relevant to the furthering of international cooperation in
science and engineering. The program is particularly directed to scientists and
engineers who are embarking on their research careers. In this research project
molecular modelling and simulation techniques will be used in conjunction with
X-ray diffraction and NMR data to determine macromolecular structures. Work will
concentrate on serine proteases, a class of enzymes containing a serine residue
at an active site which serves to cleave the peptide bond. These enzymes are a
research emphasis of the Max-Planck-Institute for Biochemistry. The project is
under the direction of Dr. Richard A. Engh, Department of Chemistry, The
University of Chicago, 5735 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago IL 60637, U.S.A., and
Dr. Robert Huber, Max-Planck-Institut fur Biochemie, 8033, Martinsried by
Munchen, Federal Republic of Germany. This award recommendation provides funds
to cover, as appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad, stipend,
dependents allowance, if applicable, language training, if required, and a flat
administrative allowance of $250 or the U.S. home institution.