* 8702712
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research on Multidimensional        Tunneling in Heavy Ion Transfer, Fusion and Fission
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* John Rasmussen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1990
* USD 5,423.00

This award supports the participation of Prof. John O. Rasmussen of the
University of California, Berkeley in a program of cooperative research with
Prof. Raul Donangelo and others at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, and
Prof. Mahir Hussein of the University of Sao Paulo. In this project, two-
dimensional calculations of tunneling processes in heavy ion transfer, fission,
and fusion will be performed. These calculations, which represent a significant
extension of earlier one-dimensional work, should lead to an increased
understanding of the role played by tunneling processes in heavy-ion nuclear
reactions. Earlier collaborative research projects of these groups, supported by
the National Science Foundation, resulted in an understanding of heavy-ion
scattering and neutron transfer processes that was reported in several
publications. However, as the simpler questions about these processes have been
answered, and as improved computational facilities are now available, it has
become both necessary and possible to extend the initial one-dimensional
analyses to two dimensions, and particularly to study the role of tunneling in
these reactions. Second-order multidimensional effects, such as those arising
from the molecular cranking inertia, should also be included. The Brazilian
collaborators have already developed and tested multidimensional computer codes
which incorporate some, but not all, of the effects required; the U.S.
investigators are developing additional codes themselves and, in addition, have
access to some codes developed at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. In addition,
more substantial computer facilities are available at Berkeley than in Brazil.
Therefore, the joint extension of the Brazilian codes, the incorporation of the
LBL codes, and the performance of the computations at Berkeley represents an
efficient collaboration which should result in a greater understanding of
nuclear processes in general.