* 8702148
* Electronic Structure of Pristine and Highly Doped           Conducting Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1987,03/31/1991
* Miklos Kertesz, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/1991
* USD 124,670.00

The proposed research is problem oriented: they aim to understand at
microscopic level, and thereby gain more control over, the chemical factors
which influence the structure and electronic structure of highly doped (well-
conducting) and pristine (semiconducting) conjugated polymers. Their low-
dimensional nature causes very large electron-proton interactions and nuclear
rearrangements, which lie at the core of electron-proton interactions and
nuclear rearrangements, which lie at the core of their unusual electrical and
optical properties. Since no quantum mechanical method exists now which can
treat the total energy and the band structure of these systems simultaneously, a
pragmatic approach is chosen. They combine full geometry optimizations (at ab
initio level or at semi-empirical self- consistent-field, SCF, level for the
large unit cell systems) with subsequent energy band calculations using
appropriate non- SCF semi-empirical methods. The energy gaps in these systems
are due to the nuclear rearrangements and pertubations caused by chemical
substitutions. A broad range of polymers will be studied to find good candidates
for very small band gap systems. The Peierls active distortion modes leading to
semiconducting gaps in ladder-type polymers have been subject to controversy.
Calculations will determine which of these modes leads to the largest energy
gain. In the highly doped conducting polymers the location and orientation of
dopants will be determined by total energy optimizations. Ab initio calculations
will determine the dopant-polymer hybridization and the interchain hopping
interaction. The quantitative aspects of bond length equalization upon doping,
including the asymetry between donars and acceptors will be determined in
conjunction with a new cis-trans isomerization mechanism. The popular
qualitative concept of quinoid vs. aromatic forms, which is fundamental in the
theory of these polymers, will be put on a quantitative basis through full
geometry optimizations. A systematic search for novel groups of compounds with
small energy gaps and with two or more energetically close nuclear
configurations will be attempted.