* 8702326
* Mathematical Sciences: Automorphic Forms on GL(r) and the   Metaplectic Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Daniel Bump, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann K. Boyle
* 11/30/1989
* USD 40,550.00

This research will focus on the theory of automorphic forms on the metaplectic
groups. It will attempt to show that L- functions associated with Dirichlet
characters of order n occur as Fourier coefficients of Eisenstein series on the
n-fold covers of GL(n). This result would have applications to analytic number
theory and to the formulation of the proper generalization of Waldspurger's
theorem. It will further attempt to show that the Euler product associated with
an automorphic form on the n-fold cover of SL(r) is the Rankin-Selberg
convolution of the form with a theta function on the n-fold cover of GL(n). Also
it will attempt to show that the Fourier coefficients of an Eisenstein series on
the n-fold cover of GL(r+1) are Rankin-Selberg convolutions of the form with
theta functions on the n-fold cover of GL(n-1). Also Bump will investigate
automorphic forms and L- functions on the exceptional group G2. Finally work
will be done on the higher convolutions of nonramified Whittaker functions on
GL(r,R) from the point of view of generalized Barnes' lemmas and generalized
hypergeometric series. This research is in the area of automorphic forms, a
branch of number theory wherein number theoretic functions are encoded into
complex analytic functions allowing the deep tools of analysis to come to bear
on the number theory problems. This idea is generalized in many ways and has
proved to be a fundamental tool in many areas. Multivariable generalizations are
the focus of this research and Bump is a leader in this direction. The results
of this research will prove to be very exciting.