* 8702769
* Workshop on the Ecology of Tropical Forest Plants; Bangi,   Malaysia; 1987
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Kamaljit Bawa, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 12/31/1988
* USD 5,500.00

The reproductive ecology of tropical forest plants is unique in several
respects. These plants typically occur in low densities. Pollination is almost
exclusively by animals. Seed-dispersal in a vast majority of species involves a
wide variety of birds and mammals as vectors. Seeds, before and after dispersal,
suffer heavy mortality from animals and pathogens. Thus, a key to understanding
the structure and dynamics of tropical forest ecosystems is adequate information
about the nature of interactions between plants and their pollinators, seed
dispersers and seed predators. Such information is also vital for resolving many
issues related to regeneration, management and conservation of tropical forest
resources. Much of the past work in reproductive ecology of tropical forest
plants has been undertaken in central and south american forests and south-east
Asian forests. These studies have shown important differences in the seasonality
of reproduction as well as in the nature of plant-animal interactions, but,
neither these differences nor their significance have been generally
highlighted. It is therefore proposed to hold an international workshop to bring
together researchers from different parts of the world for a comprehensive
review of the subject. The workshop will explore advances in basic research and
their application to the conservation and management of tropical forest
resources. Funds are requested to support the travel of U.S. scientists to this
workshop on the Reproductive Ecology of Tropical Forest Plants to be held at
Bangi, Malaysia from 8 to 12 June, 1987. The workshop will be organized under
the auspices of the Man and Biosphere (M A B) Program of UNESCO and the Decade
of the Tropics Program of the International Union of Biological Sciences
(IUBS),in collaboration with the Malaysian M A B National Committee. The M A B
program of the UNESCO, IUBS and several other international agencies have
already committed substantial financial support for the workshop. The funds
received from NSF will enable U.S. participants to present their work, exchange
ideas and information with their colleagues from other parts of the world and
enable them to visit several field sites in Malaysia.