* 8702182
* Biochemical and Molecular Characterization of The Gliadin   Multigene Family:  Endosperm-Specific Nuclear Binding       Factors
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Thomas Okita, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Thomas E. Brady
* 06/30/1991
* USD 265,000.00

The gliadins, the prolamines of wheat, are the predominant proteins of
endosperm tissue. Two gliadin genomic clones from common and diploid wheat have
been isolated and their structures determined. Present studies now show that
there are endosperm-specific nuclear factors that bind specifically to a gliadin
promoter element conserved in several endosperm genes which Dr. Okita has termed
the "CACA" box. In this grant he proposes to study the exact DNA sequence
binding domain of the "CACA" and other gliadin-promoter binding activities by
gel retardation, Southwestrn blotting, and DNase I footprinting assays. The
effect of these DNA binding activities on transcription will be evaluated in
vivo by electroporation of gliadin gene constructs complexed with the DNA
binding activities into protoplasts of monocot suspension cultures or endosperm
cells and/or by employing a heterologous in vitro transcription assay. The
"CACA" binding factor will be extensively purified utilizing FPLC and DNA
affinity chromatography. With the purified binding factor, antibody probes can
be obtained to evaluate the tissue-specificity and developmental pattern of
accumulation of the factor and eventually to mediated the isolation and
molecular characterization of its gene. These studies will contribute to an
understanding of how specific plant genes are controlled during plant
development, and a determination of the molecular events which are responsible
for this control. The gliadin genes are a highly polymorphic family of proteins,
which as the major endosperm storage protein of wheat, are largely responsible
for the nutritional quality of this crop.