* 8702104
* Spontaneous Mutation in Neurospora
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1991
* David Stadler, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1991
* USD 270,000.00

Stadler proposes to study the rate at which reccessive lethal mutations arise
in neurospora. Neurospora is an ideal organism for this type of investigation
since it is coencytic (i.e., multinucleate). Previous studies that used a
variety of other organisms have suffered from the appearance of rare variants
that outgrow other members of the culture and thus make it difficult to
establish true growth and mutation rates. The presence of the lethal mutations
can be detected by screening the offspring of uninucleate asexual spores
(conidia). The use of appropriately marked laboratory stains will facilitate the
somewhat tedious process of screening. He will also examine mutations that give
rise to drug resistance, which can be detected by selective techniques. For the
latter, wild isolates of the fungus can be used. Stadler hopes that some of
these drug resistance mutations will result from insertion of a transposable
element, and has devised an appropriate scheme to recover the element if
observed. There are a variety of known causes for heritable alterations
(mutations) in the genomes of all organisms. These include errors committed
during the replication of normal DNA, as well as damage resulting from exposure
to chemicals (natural and man-made) and radiation. In the last few years, a
great deal has been learned about the effects of exposure to relatively high
levels of chemicals and radiation. However, the extrapolation of this data to
form conclusions about the effects of exposure to the low levels likely to be
encountered under natural conditions has been a subject of considerable
controversy. The proposed work, by providing information about rates of
spontaneous mutation will help to remedy this situation, and may help to
evaluate the relative importance of the natural causes of mutation mentioned
above.