* 8702993
* Studies of the Kinematics and Thermodynamics of Convection  Initiation and Microburst Downdrafts in CINDE
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Alfred Rodi, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/1990
* USD 196,600.00

This research involves support for participation of scientists from the
University of Wyoming in the Convective INiation and Downburst Experiment
(CINDE) to be conducted near Denver, Colorado in the summer of 1987. CINDE
represents a collaborative effort between the National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and
university scientists and has the two goals of investigating the kinematics and
thermodynamics of the initiation of storms by boundary layer convergence lines
and the reasons for initiation of microburst downdrafts. In order to maximize
available resources, the CINDE is being held in conjunction with two other field
experiments: the Federal Aviation Administration's Terminal Doppler Weather
Radar Experiment and the NOAA sponsored Denver AWIPS-90 Risk Reduction and
Requirement Evaluation. The exact timing and location of the initiation of deep
convection is of great value for a variety of purposes including improved
prediction of rainfall amounts, public warnings of severe weather, timing of
space craft launches and landings, etc. The hazard to aircraft posed by
microbursts has been well established, but reasons for formation and maintenance
of these intense downdrafts is not completely understood. Improved knowledge of
this phenomenon, will contribute to better prediction and detection methods.