* 8702295
* Cytoplasmic and Nuclear Cap-binding Proteins
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Robert Rhoads, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly O'Neal Moorer
* 01/31/1989
* USD 8,516.00

Cytoplasmic and Nuclear Cap-binding Proteins: This award recommendation is made
under the U.S.-Industrialized Countries Program for the Exchange of Scientists
and Engineers, 1987/1988 Competition. The program is designed to enable U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research at research institutions
in the industrialized countries of Western Europe as well as Japan, Australia
and New Zealand. Exchange awards provide opportunities for the conduct of joint
research and the utilization of unique or complementary facilities, expertise
and experimental conditions in foreign countries. Awards are selected on the
basis of scientific criteria relevant to his/her field of science, the
propsective potential of the applicants for professional growth, as well as
criteria relevant to the furthering of international cooperation in science and
engineering. The program is particularly directed to scientists and engineers
who are embarking on their research careers. This research project involves two
interrelated studies. One is to determine which amino acid residues are present
in the active site of cap-binding protein (CBP). The second project will be to
devise assays for, and identify an activity in the cell nucleus which recognizes
the cap during the process of mRNA splicing. The project is under the direction
of Professor Robert E. Rhoades, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Kentucky, Kinkead Hall, East Wing, Lexington, KY 40506-0571, U.S.A., and
professor Ernst Kuechler, Institute for Biochemistry, University of Vienna,
A-1090 Wien IX, Wahringerstrasse 17, Vienna, Austria. This award recommendation
provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international travel, local travel
abroad, stipend, dependents allowance, if applicable, language training, if
required, and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home
institution.