* 8702902
* Taurine Transport in Reptilian Kidney: An Integrative       Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1991
* Siribhinya Benyajati, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 05/31/1991
* USD 190,677.00

Dr. Benyajati plans to study the mechanisms for the reabsorption of taurine, and
aminosulfonic acid, by primative vertebrate kidneys. Taurine biosynthesis in
vertebrates is extremely slow so most of the taurine that concentrates in brain
and heart tissue is of dietary origin. Dietary taurine has been shown to be
essential for the maintenance of normal cardiac rhythms in mammals and birds and
is thought to be important in the maintenance of normal membrane potentials in
the nerve cells of the brain and central nervous system. In sharks, taurine is
used to regulate intracellular osmotic pressure rather than maintain membrane
functions. Both shark and rat kidneys have special beta-amino acid transport
systems for recovering and maintaining adequate blood levels of this important
compound. Dr. Benyajati will employ several techniques to achieve an
understanding of taurine transport and reabsorption by reptilian kidneys.
Studies with these kidneys are important because of the intermediate position in
terms of the evolution of birds and mammals from lower vertebrates. These
studies include the microperfusion of isolated kidney tubles to judge uptake in
simulated flow-through studies with intact kidneys to measure the in vivo
performance under various physiological conditions. The results will give
important information on the regulation of the membrane transport of this
interesting group of important amino acids.