* 8702394
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Optimization of Real-Time Hydrothermal System Operation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* William W-G. Yeh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/1991
* USD 62,081.00

The objective of this two-year U.S.-China research project on optimization of
real-time hydrothermal system operation between William Yeh, University of
California at Los Angeles and Shiquan Hua, Nanjing Institute of Hydrology and
Water Resources, Chinese Ministry of Water Resources and Electric Power is to
develop and test an optimization model for efficient power generation in both
thermal and hydropower plants. The UCLA group has developed a mathematical model
and computer program to study factors and characteristics of the efficient
operation of individual power systems. In cooperation with the Nanjing Research
Institute group, the model would be studied at a small hydrothermal power system
in Guizhou and Sichuan Provinces in Southwest China. U.S. and Chinese
investigators will determine jointly the characteristics, relationships and
constraints for the hydrothermal system. The Chinese researchers will collect
and form the data from the power plant's operating experience; a computer
program will be developed and tested at UCLA and at Nanjing; and the
optimization model will be tested at field power plants in China. This project
is related to the U.S.-China Program's objectives of promoting mutually
benefical research to advance scientific knowledge through the combined efforts
and abilities of Chinese and American scientists. The joint project will result
in a new computerized optimization model which could assist with more efficient
operation of hydro and thermal systems in the U.S. and China. Significant
benefits such as reduction in fossil fuel consumption and investment required
for power plant expansion can be accrued through utilization of this model. The
field test site in China is also significant. Opportunities for operations
research in the U.S. have been limited. U.S. utilities have made private
efforts, but these have been incomplete due to lack of interest and time. Thus,
this project offers a unique opportunity to fully test and develop a model at a
comparable field site in China.