* 8702212
* Differentiation of the Interstitial Cell Line in Hydrozoan Planulae
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Vicki Martin, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1990
* USD 172,000.00

Dr. Martin will examine the development and differentiation of undifferentiated
cells, interstitial cells, during embryogenesis in a marine hydrozoan,
Halocordyl disticha. Hydrozoan planulae contain a population of interstitial
cells which either divide to maintain the I- cell population or differentiate
into ganglionic nerve cells or nematocytes. Embryos treated with colchicine or
hydroxyurea have either no or reduced numbers of I cells respectively. Five
major aspects of I- cell behaviour in larval tissues will be analyzed: 1) the
dynamics of larval stem cell repopulation in epithelial planulae; 2) the
involvement of I-cells and their derivatives in metamorphosis; 3) a
determination if larval I-cells exhibit restrictions in their developmental
potential with time; 4) an examination of the stem cell properties and
developmental potential of a larval population of hydroxyurea resistant
interstitial cells; and 5) a comparison of the larval I-cell population to the
adult I-cell population. Pieces of different treated or aged control embryos
will be grafted to epithelial planulae and removed at various times after
grafting for analysis. The general problem approached by this research is how
the spatial pattern of differentiated cells is established during embryogenesis
and how such an organization is carried over and maintained in the adult state.
Dr. Martin is studying cellular commitment, proliferation and differentiation of
a manipulatable population of stem cells in a marine hydrozoan as a model.