* 8702588
* Mathematical Sciences: IVHS and Geometry of Irregular       Surfaces of General Type
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Igor Reider, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Judith S. Sunley
* 11/30/1989
* USD 27,400.00

This reseach is concerned with investigating the geometry of the Infinitesimal
Variation of Hodge structure (IVHS) for irregular surfaces of general type which
is motivated by the Torelli type problems. The specific objective of the
research is to give a cohomology data on a surface which is sufficient to
reconstruct a surface itself. By stating precisely what such a cohomology data
should be and relating it to the the usual IVHS, one can infer sufficient
conditions for the generic Global Torelli Theorem for certain irregular surfaces
of general type, one of the main motivations of the research. The "heart" of the
research is a new method of relating IVHS to the geometry of a surface. The
essence of the method is to interpret part of the data of IVHS as a set of
equations defining the zero-locus of a holomorphic 1-form on a surface. This
method itself is an important part of the research: it not only enables one to
resolve the specific objectives described above, but also is an effective
mechanism which ties together three important aspects of study of an algebraic
surface: IVHS of a surface; vector bundles of rank 2 on a surface; and effective
0-cycles on a surface. This research is in the general area of complex algebraic
geometry. It uses algebraic and analytic tools to obtain information on
geometric objects. It is an extremely important branch of mathematics, and
Reider shows potential to add significantly to knowledge in the field.