* 8702012
* Stereoselectivity in Electron Transfer
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,05/31/1991
* A. Graham Lappin, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 05/31/1991
* USD 229,710.00

The study of stereoselectivity in electron transfer reactions between metal ion
complexes in solution has significance, in that it may yield valuable
information about the binding and the selectivity of proteins with various
degrees of specificity. Potential utilization of the results of this research is
in the such areas as design and manufacture of pharmaceuticals, in agricultural,
and in food chemistry. Asymmetric induction in electron transfer processes is an
important probe of mechanism, giving information on the interactions between
reactant molecules. In previous work a variety of factors which influence the
extent and nature of this stereoselectivity have been discovered. This work,
will be extended, both in breadth and depth, by detailed kinetic and mechanistic
studies designed to increase understanding of the fundamental processes involved
in the chiral induction. A number of new areas are specifically targeted for
study: outer-sphere reactions between similarily charged complexes where the
interactions are weak, reactions involving metalloproteins where
stereoselectivity ought to be substantial, and inner-sphere electron transfer
reactions where stereoselectivity should be enhanced. In addition,
investigations of stereoselectivity in redox reactions between metal ion
complexes and nonmetallic substrates will be carried out. The results of these
studies will be applied to the design of novel optically active metal ion
complex oxidants and reductants which show enhanced stereoselectivity. Emphasis
is placed on the synthesis of chiral ligand systems which bind
stereospecifically to metal ions, preventing racemization even in labile
oxidation states. The resolution of the problems involved requires a combination
of reagent synthesis and the use of a variety of physical techniques; stopped-
flow kinetics, circular dichroism, chromatography and N.M.R.