* 8702056
* US - Philippines Cooperative Research: Tolerance of SelectedMaize Genotypes to Nutritional Problems Related to Soil     Acidity
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1990
* Ulysses Jones, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1990
* USD 29,952.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Drs. Susan U. Wallace and Ulysses S.
Jones, Department of Agronomy and Soils, Clemson University, to pursue with Dr.
Henry P. Samonte, Institute of Plant Breeding, University of the Philippines at
Los Ba~os (UPLB), for a period of 24 months, a program of research on the
tolerance of selected maize genotypes to nutritional problems related to soil
acidity. The maize genotypes will be selected from the field screening program
at UPLB where they will be evaluated for growth, yield, and nutritional status
on three diverse acid soils of the Philippines. Nutritional factors related to
plant adaptation will be identified, and the differential ability of the maize
genotypes to modify root zone acidity will be determined. It has been estimated
that nearly one half of the world's nonirrigated arable land area consists of
acid soils. In strongly acid soils, plant growth may be limited by one or more
of several mineral stresses, including deficiencies of phosphorus, calcium, and
magnesium, and excesses of hydrogen ions, manganese, and aluminum. One approach
to overcoming acid soil infertility is chemical treatment with such antacids as
lime and supplementation of minerals. Another approach, more suitable in the
less affluent countries, is to identify plant genotypes which adapt to soil
acidity. In this project, the collaborators will identify such maize genotypes
as well as plant traits associated with adaptation to one or more of these acid
soils. Germ plasm containing these adaptive traits will be used by physiologists
and geneticists for further study. The U.S. and Philippine collaborators are
highly respected scientists who have successfully collaborated in the past. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists
and engineers and their counterparts in developing countries through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.