* 8703500
* Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations of    Mathematical Physics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1989
* Gregory Eskin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1989
* USD 59,530.00

Work will be done on problems of partial differential equations arising from
models of diverse physical phenomena. The work focuses on linear differential
operators of three primary types. The first goal will to expand on earler
successes in studying isospectral Schrodinger operators with periodic potentials
(if you know that two operators have the same spectrum, how are they related?).
Techniques should be applicable to general self-adjoint elliptic operators with
periodic coefficients. Given that the spectrum is known for an operator acting
on smooth functions on a torus which is a fundamental domain for the period
lattice, the investigators want to determine characteristics of the operator's
coefficients. Two important cases worthy of study will be that of the Laplace-
Beltrami operator and the hamiltonian for an electron moving in a magnetic field
through a lattice of ions which produce the potential. A second thrust will
concentrate on initial-value problems for hyperbolic equations defined in
domains with corners. The principal investigators succeeded in providing
conditions along the "edge" for smooth solutions of elliptic equations to exist.
In the hyperbolic setting singularities not only occur where hypersurfaces meet
but they also propagate in some complex manner. In particular, gliding rays are
reflected and transmitted at the edge giving rise to cones of rays. One of the
long-term goals of this work will be to provide justification to some
conjectures from the theory of diffraction. A final area involved concerns
approximation in solid state physics. The source of this work lies in the study
of the Laplace-Beltrami operator. In a setting of exceeding small length scale
one arrives at wave packets satisfying the time-dependent Schrodinger equation
up to a precise order. These packets follow trajectories of a hamiltonian. At
least that is customarily assumed. Part of this effort will be directed to a
careful analysis of the entire model.