* 8703434
* Theory of Solids
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1987,03/31/1990
* Walter Kohn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/1990
* USD 284,200.00

Professor Kohn's proposal is for theoretical research in the physics of solids.
Principal emphasis will be on density functional theory and surface physics. A.
Density functional theory (DFT) He plans to build on recent contributions by his
group to DFT of excited states and of time dependent processes. In view of the
very wide practical use of DFT for groundstate properties, a thorough
exploration of the possibilities offered by DFT for the calculation of excited
state properties and of time dependent phenomena (e.g. linear response theory)
will be undertaken. B. Surface Physics He shall extend his studies of the
electronic structure of metal surfaces by detailed consideration of an "exactly"
soluble model system: a jellium positive background sphere of radius R with N
interacting electrons. He plans to calculate and compare the energy and density
by DFT, hypernetted chain theory and quantum chemical methods. A second major
interest is in the dynamics of inelastic scattering of atoms from surfaces, with
the emission or absorption of phonons. Here he plans to build on completed model
calculations in two limits: adiabatic and anti-adiabatic corresponding to
incident velocities fast or slow relative to characteristic speeds of the target
atoms. His aim is a consistent and comprehensive theory. Other potential
projects are Landau theory of semi-infinite systems and electronic structure of
quasicrystals.