* 8703019
* U.S.-Brazil Research-Oriented Workshop on the Physical      Oceanography of Brazil; August, 1987; Durham, New Hampshire
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Wendell Brown, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1988
* USD 9,650.00

This award supports the organization and local costs of a Brazilian- American
workshop on the physical oceanography of Brazil, to be held at the University of
New Hamsphire in August, 1987. The workshop was organized by Dr. Wendell S.
Brown of the University of New Hampshire in collaboration with Dr. Affonso
Mascarenhas Jr., of the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil. In addition to making
possible an enhanced understanding of Brazilian physical oceanography, the
workshop will enable Brazilian and American researchers in this field to become
mutually acquainted and develop a strategy for future collaborative research.
Improved knowledge of the circulation along the margin of Brazil would
considerably enhance our understanding of the role of the South Atlantic in the
global scheme of interaction between the oceans and the atmosphere. Various
phenomena of global significance, such as equatorial dynamics, surface and
subsurface boundary currents, deep water/shelf interaction, Amazon River
outflow/shelf flow interaction, and estuarine dynamics, occur in this area.
However, the task of understanding the kinematics, dynamics, and thermodynamics
of this crucial portion of the global ocean is so large that international
collaboration is required. This workshop will be a first step in stimulating and
defining the areas of such collaborative effort, and therefore is an important
step in improving our understanding of the geosphere as a whole.