* 8703726
* Correlations and Fluctuations in Hadronic Multiplicity      Distributions (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1991
* Chia Shih, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Boris J. Kayser
* 11/30/1991
* USD 69,910.00

The production of strongly interacting particles (hadrons) will be studied
theoretically. The Principal Investigator will: (1) Classify essential
mechanisms that contribute significantly to the observed stochasticity of soft
hadron production at very high collision energy; (2) Analyze the event-by-event
fluctuations of hadron production to conclude whether there is a tendency of
phase transition in prehadronic matter produced at very high energy; (3) Study
the influence of local correlations such as clustering and the quantum
mechanical Bose-Einstein effect on the characteristics of the many-body system;
(4) Extrapolate partial coherence reflected in hadronic multiplicity
distributions to the SSC Tev region to estimate the range of multiplicity
fluctuation; (5) Clarify the similarities and differences between the
phenomenology of QCD soft hadron distributions and QED photon distributions,
specifically due to charge conservation and the isospin degree of freedom, and
(6) Establish the existence of the subPoisson distribution as a consequence of
the nonlinear hadronic production mechanism. This work, to be carried out by a
highly-regarded elementary particle theorist, is very important to our
understanding of the most common occurrences in the production of hadrons in
elementary particle collisions.