* 8703126
* Microphysical Studies of Precipitation Using the Advanced,  Polarimetric DFVLR Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* None   DATA NOT AVAILABLE, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/1989
* USD 122,700.00

The polarization characteristics of electromagnetic energy scattered from cloud
and precipitation particles (hydrometeors) are dependent, among other factors,
on the polarization of the incident radiation and the shape, size and phase
(water/ice) of the hydrometeors. With polarimetric radar the polarization of the
transmitted energy is controlled and the polarization characteristics of the
energy scattered back to the radar are accurately measured. While still in its
infancy, polarimetric radar techniques hold great promise for providing improved
measurements of rainfall, and the shape, orientation, phase and spectra of
hydrometeors. The most advanced polarimetric radar in the world is owned and
operated by the Deutsche Forschung und Versuchanstalt fur Luft und Raumfahrt
(DFVLR) in Oberpfaffenhofen, FDR. This research focuses on using the (DFVLR)
radar in conjunction with research aircraft from DFVLR and the National Center
for Atmospheric Research and numerical models in a microphysical study of
springtime convective and wintertime stratiform clouds. The convective cloud
studies will emphasize cloud particle characteristics during the early
development of precipitation and also the characteristics of precipitation
particles and the role they play in the formation of downdrafts. The stratiform
study will concentrate on the ability of polarization techniques to distinguish
between different types of ice and liquid water particles.