* 8703537
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Variational Problems and   Related PDE Questions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Leon Simon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* James Glazebrook
* 12/31/1990
* USD 294,500.00

Leon Simon and Brian White will study problems relating to regularity and
singularity of minimal surfaces and extrema of other geometric variational
problems. Simon's research will proceed in three broad directions. The first of
these involves problems relating to the singular set of minimal surfaces. The
second concerns entire and exterior solutions of the minimal surface equation
for the graph of a function. The final topic involves Willmore-type functionals.
The basic questions regarding singular sets of minimal surfaces are concerned
with the behaviour of such surfaces on approach to a singular point. Simon has
already obtained strong results in the case where the singularity is isolated
and will now investigate more general situations. The investigations of the
minimal surface equation will center around the asymptotic behaviour of entire
and exterior solutions. Here the emphasis will be on investigations in a high
dimensional setting. The Willmore functional is a certain average of the mean
curvature. The questions here relate to minimizing this functional over surfaces
of a certain genus. White will investigate the dimension of the singular set of
area minimizing integral currents. This may lead to the discovery of such sets
of fractional dimension. A related problem is to find conditions under which
almost every boundary gives rise to regular area minimizing disks. He will also
investigate the existence of compact minimal submanifolds in Riemannian
manifolds. One direction of research will involve an investigation of how many
embedded minimal submanifolds exist.