* 8703059
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research on the Theory of Disordered Systems (Applied Mathematics)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Abel Klein, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1991
* USD 14,853.00

This award provides support for the participation of Professor Abel Klein of the
University of California, Irvine in a program of cooperative research with
Professor J. Fernando Perez of the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil. The research
will deal with extensions to our knowledge of random Schrodinger operators, a
topic of relevance to the quantum-mechanical description of matter, and in
particular to the motion of electrons in disordered systems. This project builds
on the research of Prof. Klein currently supported by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences of NSF. At first the Anderson model for the motion of
quantum- mechanical particles on imperfect lattices will be extended to two and
three dimensions. Such an extension would facilitate the description of both
conduction and optical properties of quantum-mechanical systems. Subsequently,
the Wegner model for such motion--an alternative to Anderson's, which can also
describe extended states--will be used to investigate the properties of such
states in disordered systems. The collaboration between Professors Klein and
Perez, which is already of some six years' duration, has led to numerous joint
publications in the field of mathematical physics, and the research now proposed
should benefit all physicists and engineers who are seeking to understand the
phenomena of conduction in very small systems.