* 8703890
* Indicator Probe Methods of Measuring Turbulent Micromixing
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Herbert Toor, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1989
* USD 114,000.00

Research Summary: The diffusion process occurring at small scales of turbulence
is probed by forcing instantaneous diffusion controlled chemical reactions to
drive indicator reactions. The resulting reactions, whose rates are controlled
by turbulent micromixing, cause color changes which are measured with a fiber
optic light probe. The theoretical relationship between the light absorption and
micromixing is validated by varying the chemical species and their concentration
levels. Measurement at one reactant concentration ratio yields the intensity of
segregation, a measure of the micromixing, while measurements at various
reactant ratios gives a more detailed measure of micromixing in terms of a
tracer probability density function. Additionally, the position of a visible
color border itself contains micromixing information because the visible cut-off
point of the eye corresponds to a certain color intensity. Consequently, the
exciting possibility is explored that visual observation alone can be used to
determine such an elusive quality as intensity of segregation.
Uniqueness/Innovation: The theoretical underpinning for this work, the use of a
fiber optic light probe with an indicator and the technique of using the
location of a visual border to obtain micromixing information are all unique and
novel. Significance: Micromixing is vitally important in processes as diverse as
reaction injection molding, combustion, chemical lasers and reactor design for
fast chemical reactions. The common characteristics of these technologies which
depend upon reactive mixing is that the rate at which chemical reactants are
brought together at the molecular level controls or strongly affects the
process. Measurement of micromixing in the conventional manner with an inert
tracer is not only difficult because of the need to measure fluctuations around
the mean, but unreliable in principle because a tracer probe measures an average
concentration over a finite probe volume. Hence part of the signal is always
lost. An important characteristic of this novel indicator probe method is that
it is not limited by probe resolution; it is capable of capturing the entire
signal. This ability to measure micromixing in liquids can have an important
impact on the understanding of turbulent micromixing. Furthermore, rational
design with reactive mixing is now severely limited by lack of knowledge of the
micromixing in the industrial situations. In most cases, knowledge of the
intensity of segregation would allow such design and the ability to measure this
quantity in industry with a simple, inexpensive, visual experiment can
significantly improve design capability in the diverse processes which depend
upon reactive mixing.