* 8703828
* Specificity of Ubiquitin-Dependent Proteases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Keith Wilkinson, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/1991
* USD 200,000.00

The long term goal of this research is to define the specificity, mechanism and
physiological significance of the ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation system
of eucaryotic cells. This soluble multi-enzyme system has been best
characterized from reticulocytes where it appears to play a role in the
degradation of abnormal proteins and intracellular organelles during maturation.
The objective of this proposal is to provide a basic biochemical description of
the protease(s) of the system and the metabolism of conjugated proteins by these
proteases. Ubiquitin is conjugated to a large number of proteins in the cell by
the formation of an isoamide bond between the carboxyl-terminus of ubiquitin and
the amino groups of the target proteins. It is these conjugates which are
thought to be substrates for the proteases of the system. Understanding of the
proteolytic mechanisms has been hampered by the lack of pure, defined
substrates. This has slowed the development of assays and, therefore, the
purification of the proteases. The proposed work will address this problem by
synthesizing and characterizing a number of these conjugates using the carboxyl-
terminal acyl azide of ubiquitin. These substrates will be used to purify and
characterize the components of the proteases, as well as to determine the
specificity and architecture of the multi-enzyme complex which catalyzes these
reactions. Additionally, the nature of the ATP requirement for proteolytic
action will be examined. The knowledge gained from these studies should form the
basis for the design of specific inhibitors of this system, as well as for the
cloning and genetic manipulation of the component peptides of the system.