* 8703541
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Combinatorial Investigations    Arising From Theoretical Computer Science
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1990
* Michael Saks, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Bernard McDonald
* 05/31/1990
* USD 43,200.00

This award supports the research of Professor Michael Saks at Rutgers, the
State University of New Jersey in New Brunswick. It is a twenty four month
standard grant made by the Algebra and Number Theory Program in the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the Theoretical Computer Science Program in the
Division of Computer Research. Professor Saks is a young mathematician who has
burst onto the scene with his very important results which lie on the border
between combinatorics and theoretical computer science. His work in the recent
past dealt with existence theorems on partially ordered sets that were motivated
by problems in the theory of searching and sorting algorithms. Some of his
results were spectacular. In his current proposal he moves even more toward
problems in combinatorics whose origin lies in computer science. He plans to
analysize certain questions in distributed computing: the performance of tasks
by a set of individual processors acting independently and communicating over
some network. A critical issue for such distributed systems is reliabililty,
that is, to design the system so that it still works even when some of the
computers are faulty. This important research will undoubtably pay rich
dividends.