* 8703710
* Pragmatic Approaches to Reasoning Under Uncertainty         (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Edward Shortliffe, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolita D. Middleton
* 01/31/1991
* USD 458,269.00

This research investigates pragmatic approaches to computer-based probabilistic
reasoning systems. In the past, artificial intelligence researchers have often
avoided probability theory for reasoning with uncertainty because of a common
perception that the application of probability theory is invariably associated
with a commitment to intractable algorithms and inordinate knowledge-acquisition
time. The development of efficient algorithmic and assessment techniques would
allow investigators to apply a theoretically justified model of belief
entailment to complex problems. As a result, the goals in this research are (1)
to develop techniques for using knowledge about problem-solving tradeoffs to
optimize dynamically the value of computer performance to the user, (2) to
construct efficient algorithms for probabilistic reasoning, and (3) to
investigate pragmatic techniques for the elicitation of knowledge from experts.
Two existing diagnostic systems are testbeds for this research, which is
directly applicable to many areas of science and engineering. Although the
techniques of artificial intelligence are being used to provide decision support
tools ("expert systems") in a variety of settings within science, technology,
and industry, several fundamental research problems remain. One significant
concern is the lack of well-developed methods for dealing with the uncertainty
that characterizes many problem-solving tasks. For example, in medicine or
geological exploration, experts must infer the state of the process they are
investigating (e.g., a patient's disease or a possible mineral deposit) by
interpreting indirect measurements that generally provide only partial support
for hypotheses. Most available tools deal with such uncertainty by using ad hoc
methods whose applicability and limitations are poorly understood. By developing
practical methods for using formal probability theory in such systems, this
research replaces ad hoc techniques with approaches for which the underlying
assumptions and limitations can be demonstrated analytically and considered
during system construction and use.