* 8703659
* Design and Prototype Implementation of Robotic Palletizationand Depalletization in a Flexible Manufacturing System
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1990
* Bala Ram, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1990
* USD 190,900.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was established
to provide support to strengthen the research environments and capabilities of
predominantly minority institutions that have substantial minority student
enrollments. Eligible institutions must also have graduate programs in science
or programs in engineering. Funding is provided for faculty research in fields
of science and engineering supported by the Foundation and for the acquisition
of research instrumentation. North Carolina A&amp;T State University will use
RIMI support to study how efficient material handling contributes to the
successful operation of an automated factory system. Although several
researchers have addressed the issue of selecting patterns, sizes and methods
for stacking uniform cartons on pallets, most have ignored the practical aspects
of automated palletization, such as robot motion economy and safety. This study
will generalize the work of Puls and Tanchoco to deal with non-uniform size
cartons. A prototype palletizing station will be constructed using an IBM 7545
robot to demonstrate the applicability of the proposed methodology. The
Foundation has supported this project because North Carolina A&amp;T State has
perhaps the only accredited industrial engineering program at a predominantly
minority institution. Students in this program will have opportunities to
participate in meritorious applied and basic engineering research.