* 8703959
* Scanning Electron Microscope Studies:  Heavy Metal Distribu-tion in Biological, Chemical, and Geological Systems
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Frederick Shaw, CUNY City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1990
* USD 215,000.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was
established to provide support to strengthen the research environments and
capabilities of predominantly minority institutions or institutions that have
substantial minority student populations. Eligible institutions must also have
graduate programs in science or programs in engineering. Funding is provided for
faculty research in fields of science and engineering supported by the
Foundation and for the acquisition of research instrumentation. Lehman College
will use RIMI support to acquire a scanning electron microscope to perform
studies on heavy metal distribution in biological, chemical, and geological
systems. Scientists have gathered considerable information on heavy metal
pollution. This study will add to this base of knowledge by examining the
subcellular structural responses to metallic pollutants and by assessing the
possibility of drawing correlations between the effects of these metals in
simple but dissimilar cell types. The investigators on one study will use
flameless atomic absorption spectrophotometry initially to determine the
incorporation of selected heavy metals in two test organisms: Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and chlorella vulgaris. Other studies will focus on topics such as
toxicity on freshwater lake algae and controlled environmental systematics
problems for plants. The principal investigator has a long history of research
publications and has a commendable record as a university administrator. The
Foundation has supported this project because the participation of minorities in
meritorious biological research on plants will be enhanced significantly at an
urban university.