* 8703566
* Reinforcement-Learning Connectionist Systems                (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Ronald Williams, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Joyce
* 11/30/1989
* USD 155,000.00

Networks of neuron-like processing units, called connectionist systems, have
interesting computational properties making them attractive for both
psychological modeling and potential application in artificial intelligence.
Recent research has led to some promising algorithms for learning in such
networks. This project advances such research by developing a mathematically
well-founded approach to the design of algorithms for the particular problem of
reinforcement learning in connectionist networks of stochastic units. Particular
algorithms are developed for learning problems having an important temporal
component, such as control problems with feedback delays of unknown duration or
problems involving recognition or production of time-varying signals. These
algorithms are required to admit a suitable on-line implementation, in which the
learning occurs within the operating system. In addition to making advances in
the theory of such algorithms, this project involves implementing the more
promising candidates and evaluating their performance in simulation experiments.
Primary criteria for evaluation are learning efficiency and suspectibility to
convergence to suboptimal states. In addition, this project explores the
applicability of such algorithms to specific problems in artificial intelligence
and robotics through the study of suitably scaled-down versions of these
problems. Such problems include speech recognition and adaptive sensorimotor
control.