* 8703355
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Stochastic Calculus  of Variations and Skorohod's Integral to Stochastic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Daniel Ocone, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 11/30/1989
* USD 34,000.00

The investigator intends to do research on two topics using the methods of the
stochastic calculus of variations. The first topic concerns the analysis of
"acausal" stochastic differential equations driven by Brownian motion. Recently,
Nualart and Pardoux used the stochastic calculus of variations to develop a
calculus for the Skorokhod integral, which is an integral with respect to
Brownian motion for integrands not necessarily adapted to the past of the
Brownian motion. This should allow one to study equations containing "acausal"
features, that is exhibiting dependence not only on the past but also on the
future. Professor Ocone intends to undertake research in this direction. The
second topic concerns the analysis of the probability distributions of solutions
of stochastic partial differential equations. This study has implications for
nonlinear filtering theory. In this project the investigator wishes to continue
the line of investigation that leads to a study of regularity of densities for
linear functionals on solutions to stochastic partial differential equations. He
will also study the nonlinear filtering problem, and attempt to relate Wiener
space gradients of conditional distributions of nonlinear filters to the issue
of finite dimensional computability of filters. This is a theoretical work where
computability is characterized by the existence of certain finite dimensional
stochastic differential equation that governs certain conditional expectations.
There is a possibility that the investigator can relate computability to certain
rank conditions for Frechet derivatives of certain maps. This research belongs
to a larger research effort on stochastic differential equations and filtering
problems that is now an active area in applied probability.