* 8703492
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research in the Synthesis and       Structures of Tellurium and Selenium Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1990
* Edward Meyers, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1990
* USD 15,650.00

This award supports the participation of Drs. Ralph Zingaro and Edward Meyers of
Texas A&M University in collaborative research with Drs. N. Petragnani and J.
Comasseto of the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil. The focus of their joint
effort is the characterization of physico- chemical properties of new tellurium
(Te) and selenium (Se) compounds which have been synthesized by the two groups.
Both groups have well established programs in this unusual area of
organometallic chemistry, and their prior collaboration has been very
productive. In particular, the Brazilian group has expertise in synthesis of
Se/Te organometallics and the development of general synthetic routes for
various classes of such materials. The U.S. group, in addition to their
experience in synthesis, has expertise and state of the art instrumentation for
spectroscopic characterization and single crystal x-ray structural determination
of new compounds. This complementary expertise devoted to an area of mutual
interest has resulted in very fruitful collaboration in the past which can be
expected to continue. Organometallic chemistry has become an increasingly
important field because of the potential uses of such compounds as electronic
materials. The principle investigators in this collaboration have contributed
substantially to our knowledge of Se and Te organometallic compounds, which
should prove to be important for the development of new methods for the
preparation of novel electronic materials.