* 8703572
* Mathematical Sciences: Analysis of the Quasi-Regular        Representation of Lie Groups and Index Theory on Non-CompactManifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Jeffrey Fox, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1989
* USD 27,800.00

One of the most fundamental developments in modern science has been the theory
of quantum mechanics. The attempt to understand both the physics and the
underlying mathematics has led directly to current frontiers in two important
areas of Modern Analysis, representation theory and operator algebras.
Representation theory is a means of exploiting the inherent physical symmetries,
while the concept of operator algebras was invented to provide the correct
framework for quantization. Recently, there has been a great expansion in our
understanding of the mathematics underlying quantization. This has come from
deep interactions between physical ideas and mathematical constructs. In
particular, representation theory and operator algebras have been brought
together recently in a powerful theory that centers around the celebrated
Atiyah-Singer index theorem. Professor Fox is a young researcher who has
mastered the broad range of mathematics necessary to contribute to this field.
He is an expert in representation theory, operator algebras, and index theory.
He proposes to develop an index theorem for noncompact manifolds that
generalizes Connes' extension of the Atiyah-Singer index theorem for compact
manifolds. This index theorem would be used to study the discrete spectrum of
the quasi-regular representation of a semi-simple Lie group acting on a locally
symmetric space of finite volume. In addition to its intrinsic interest in
representation theory and operator algebras, a solution to this problem would
lead to a better understanding of the various facets of quantization. The
investigator's prior work, in part collaborative, has laid a solid foundation
for undertaking this study.