* 8703697
* Investigation of Enzyme Catalysis: Mechanism at the Levels  of Subunit Function and the Chemical Transformation
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Michael Dunn, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 06/30/1991
* USD 239,609.00

This project explores the relationship betweeen the catalytic activities and the
physical, chemical, and structural properties of enzymes. Four aspects of enzyme
catalysis will be studied: (1) The nature of the weak and strong chemical
bonding interactions which catalyze covalent transformations in the reacting
substrate. (2) The influence of allosteric effectors on the activation energies
of enzyme-catalyzed processes. (3) The interrelation between enzyme
conformational change and catalysis. (4) Metabolite transfer mechanistic in
bienzyme complexes which catalyze sequential steps in a metabolic pathway. To
investigate these phenomena, four enzyme systems are selected for detailed
mechanistic studies: (1) the liver alcohol dehydrogenases from human and horse
liver, (2) the bienzyme, PLP-requiring tryptophan synthase from E. coli, (3) the
PLP requiring cystathionine gamma-synthase from E. coli, and (4) aldehyde
dehydrogenase from sheep liver. The project emphasizes the use of rapid kinetic
techniques (especially rapid scanning and single wavelength stopped-flow UV-
visible spectroscopy) to study these systems. Other techniques of importance to
the project include stopped-flow fluorescence spectroscopy 1H and 31P FT NMR,
UV-visible microspectrophotometry of enzyme crystals and chemical modification
of enzyme side chain residues. These techniques will be used to detect and
identify chemical intermediates in catalysis, to search for conformational
changes linked to catalysis, and to examine the influence of allosteric
effectors on the interconversion of chemical intermediates on the catalytic
path. These studies are expected to significantly advance our understanding of
some of the least well understood aspects of enzyme catalysis.