* 8703546
* Mathematical Sciences: Weighted norm inequalities and       applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Richard Wheeden, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1989
* USD 70,127.00

Work will continue on weighted norm inequalities for various classical
operators and operators related to orthogonal polynomial expansions.
Applications of these inequalities to differential equations will also be
examined. The norm inequalities to be considered concern fractional integrals,
Sobolev interpolation inequalities, Fourier transforms, weighted Hardy and
Lebesgue product spaces, n-dimensional Hardy's inequality, Littlewood-Paley
functions and Hilbert transforms. The basic problem in all these situations is
that of understanding the character of the weight functions for which weighted
norm inequalities hold. The operators related to orthogonal polynomial
expansions are Cesaro sum operators and transplantation operators for Hermite
and Laguerre polynomials. Weak and strong type norm inequalities will be proved
by obtaining accurate kernel estimates. Applications to differential equations
concern the regularity of solutions of degenerate elliptic equations. In case
the degeneracy is governed by two weight functions, the problems include
estimates of the Green function and norm inequalities for the potentials
associated with it. With equal weights, the problem is how the weight affects
the smoothness of the solutions when the coefficients are assumed to have some
smoothness. A local version of Harnack's inequality will also be investigated
for equations whose coefficients are not smooth and degenerate differently in
different directions.