* 8703569
* Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Robert Friedman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann K. Boyle
* 12/31/1990
* USD 415,700.00

Professor Pinkham will study the m-regularity of smooth varieties in projective
space via generic projection, and also the equations of canonical curves.
Professor Friedman will continue to investigate Donaldson's new invariants for
smooth 4- manifolds, especially elliptic surfaces and their blow-ups. The
associate Principle Investigator Professor Morrison will study the slopes of
effective divisors on the moduli space of stable curves, the stability of
projective varieties via its state polytopes and the volume of simplices in
spaces of constant curvature in terms of its dihedral angles along codimension
two faces. The post doctoral assistant Dr. Cutkosky will study the birational
geometry of threefolds concentrating on the analysis of the divisorial
contraction of extremal rays. Finally the post doctoral assistant Dr. O'Grady
will study the Kodaira dimension of the moduli space of polarized K3 surfaces of
large degree. All of these topics are intermingled facets of the subject of
algebraic geometry, the study of the geometric objects obtained as solution sets
of systems of polynomial equations. The concentration in this proposal is on the
geometric and topological aspects of these objects. This is an especially
important area of modern mathematics with widespread applications. There is a
rich mixture of young and mature investigators on this grant which will give the
research an extra strength through their communication. There is a lot of
promise in this research, much of which will surely be realized.