* 8703530
* Expedited Award: Laser Incising for Improved Lumber Drying  and Chemical Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1987,08/31/1988
* Frederick Kamke, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1988
* USD 29,259.00

Technical Summary: This exploratory project proposes to develop a novel
technique that will increase the effective permeability of wood for improved
drying and chemical treatment. The process involves a high-energy pulsed-laser
system that will generate very small holes in the tangential and radial surfaces
of green lumber. This process is referred to as laser incising. The primary
objectives are: 1) Establish a set of operating parameters for a 150 continuous-
watt CO2 laser in order to precisely generate incisions of controlled diameter
and depth, 2) Compare the drying rate of incised lumber to non-incised lumber,
3) Compare the quality of dried lumber which has been incised with dried lumber
that has not been incised, and 4) Evaluate the potential of the laser incising
technique for a commercial process. Innovation/Novelty: This proposal is
innovative because of the unique application of laser technology to secondary
wood processing. To date, processing wood with a laser has been limited to
cutting operations, in which the economic feasibility has been marginal due to
slow cutting speeds. Since laser incising involves the removal of only a small
amount of wood substance, much higher processing rates are possible. In contrast
to conventional incising processes, laser incising would not likely reduce
strength properties or greatly reduce the surface appearance. If incising is
performed prior to drying green lumber, a technique that has not been
considered, then increased drying rates and improved lumber quality may result.