* 8703912
* NorthWestNet--A Northwest Regional Network
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/1987,03/31/1991
* Richard Markwood, Western Interstate Comm High Ed
* Continuing Grant
* Priscilla Jane Huston
* 03/31/1991
* USD 1,816,224.00

The Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education (WICHE) and the
Northwest Academic Planning Forum propose to establish NorthWestNet, a regional
network comprising the states of Alaska, Idaho, Montana, North Dakota, Oregon
and WAshington. (The schools include: University of Washington, University of
Oregon, Oregon State University, Oregon Graduate Center, Washington Sate
University, University of Idaho, Montana State University, University of Alaska,
and the North Dakota State Board of Higher Education). They also propose to
establish the Northwest Academic Computing Consortium (NWACC) to administer
NorthWestNet and other activities which will enhance supercomputer access and
the environment for academic scientific computing in the region. the
NorthWestNet regional network would thus provide access to supercomputer
resources and national data bases and provide intercommunication with other
researchers in other regions by virtue of a link from the region to the NSFNet
which connects the six NSF supercomputer centers. The Foundation is requested to
support the plan by funding necessary equipment and communication facilities for
three years. The participating institutions will provide research training, and
technical support of the project as well as space, utilities and other resources
as required. NorthWestNet, with linkage to NSFNet which interconnects all of the
NSF supercomputer centers, would improve the capability of scientists and
engineers at these and future research institutions in the northwest area to
access and utilize all supercomputers resources, to encourage intercampus
cooperation, and to provide for the development of a community of scholars that
extends beyond campus or state boundaries. Thus this regional network is
essential for gaining effective and robust infrastructure for cooperative
research.