* 8703169
* Mathematical Sciences: Monodromy Preserving Deformation on  Z2
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* John Palmer, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 02/28/1990
* USD 31,200.00

The two dimensional Ising model is a mathematical model for magnetic spins on a
lattice which interact by nearest neighbor coupling. There is a vast literature
in physics concerning the behavior of statistical systems near critical points
(phase transitions), but there are few models in which it is possible to verify
the conjectured behavior analytically. The importance of the Ising model is that
it is a notable exception (in two dimensions). There, one has sufficient
knowledge of the spin correlations to examine some of the more detailed
conjectures about critical phenomena. This is of importance for statistical
mechanics, quantum field theory, and the mathematical theories upon which the
analysis rests. Professor Palmer is an expert on solvable models, such as the
Ising model, in statistical mechanics. He is in the forefront in exploiting the
relevant infinite dimensional group theory and algebraic geometry that has been
so successful in these physical applications. In prior work he introduced a
family of lattice models which are mathematical generalizations of the Ising
model. In the current project he proposes to prove scaling hypotheses that rely
upon prior work on infinite spin groups. He is also investigating the
possibility of interpreting a certain invariance in the Ising model as the
manifestation of a gauge group acting of the determinant bundle associated with
a family of finite difference operators. This could clarify the appearance of
conformal symmetry in solvable lattice models.