* 8703420
* Travel on Versailles Project on Advanced Materials and      Standards (Materials Research)
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Lyle Schwartz, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
* Interagency Agreement
* David Nelson
* 07/31/1988
* USD 12,000.00

Support is provided for a number of U.S. scientists to participate in the
International Meetings of the Versailles Project on Advanced Materials and
Standards (VAMAS). VAMAS was initiated at the Economic Summit of Heads of State
in 1982 in Versailles. At the meeting, VAMAS was one of eighteen technical
activities established to provide the framework for the stimulation of the world
economy. The main thrust of VAMAS is to establish a valid scientific basis for
reliable and internationally acceptable measurement of the characteristics and
performance of such material. Such activity is required because new materials
typically respond to conventional characterization measurements in unanticipated
ways. This response is traceable to the novel structures and resulting superior
performance of these materials. The scientific basis for satisfactory prediction
of the response of these materials frequently does not exist. Development of the
scientific background necessary for such prediction is important to the
development of materials science as well as to the incorporation of such
materials in articles of international trade. Thus, the involvement of academic
and industrial participants is increasingly important. In response to these
general needs, VAMAS has established scientific and technical activity in the
following areas: Wear, Surface Chemical Analysis, Ceramics, Polymer Blends,
Polymer Composites, Superconducting and Cryogenic Structural Materials
Databanks, Creep Crack Growth, Efficient Test Procedures for Polymer Properties,
and Low Cycle Fatigue. Support for this international activity is jointly
recommended by the Division of Materials Research and the Division of
International Programs.