* 8703506
* Metabolic Regulation of Chloroplastic Respiration of        Carbohydrates
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1991
* Martin Gibbs, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1991
* USD 180,000.00

The primary focus of this research is the retention of photosynthetic activity
during extended photosynthesis and during dark intervals. The biological test
materials are isolated spinach and Chlamydomonas chloroplasts and the parent
tissues. The carbon dioxide fixing capability of the isolated intact spinach
chloroplast falls off during photosynthesis after approximately 2-40 minutes,
even though a functional electron transport chain and activity of stromal
enzymes of the Calvin cycle are maintained. Chloroplasts kept in the dark for
10-20 minutes also lose their subsequent photosynthetic carbon dioxide fixing
activity. Addition of a complex between magnesium ions and ATP or a
chloroplastic respirable substrate to the external medium during photosynthesis
or during the dark phase prior to photosynthesis allows retention of
photosynthetic activity. Other nucleotides will not substitute for ATP nor do
non-respirable chloroplastic substrates function in this capacity. Similarly,
pre-treatment of the darkended spinach leaf results in an inactivation of the
carbon dioxide fixing capacity. The level of inactivation seems to depend upon
the nutritional status (perhaps carbohydrate content) of the leaf. Inactivation
is extremely pH dependent as is senescence of the chloroplast. The basic events
that result in the loss of photosynthetic carbon dioxide fixation will be
elucidated as well as the underlying principles of the protective mechanisms.
This research should provide substantial information supporting the concept that
the retention of chloroplastic carbon dioxide fixing activity is dependent upon
extrachloroplastic events such as cellular respiration and, to a limited extent,
on chloroplastic respiration. Separation of the chloroplast from these events
leads to its rapid irreversible destruction unless the organelle is protected by
the products of respiration generated in the mitochondrion or within the
organelle by starch break-down. The linkage of chloroplastic competency with
other cellular events will add a basic component to our understanding of stress
physiology, i.e. water status, temperature, ionic balance and other factors.