* 8703768
* Iterative Substructuring Methods for Elliptic Problems      and Related Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Olof Widlund, New York University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 12/31/1989
* USD 143,495.00

This project continues to work on iterative substructuring methods. These are
iterative methods for large linear systems of algebraic equations which arise
when elliptic problems are discretized by finite elements or finite differences.
The region of the problem is divided into subregions (substructures) and the
problems on the subregions are solved repeatedly while using a preconditioned
conjugate gradient algorithm to satisfy the continuity requirements across the
curves or surfaces that divide the region. Main current research issues are the
extension of these algorithms to nonconforming finite elements, mixed methods,
etc., and the development of new algorithms, particularly in three dimensions.
This program will combine theoretical work with systematic numerical experiments
using both model problems and industrial finite element codes. The best of these
algorithms often represent an improvement over previously known methods on the
uni processors and they hold considerable promise for multi processor systems.
In addition, new algorithms for certain queuing network problems will be
developed. Kolmogorov's balance equations are generated and the goal is to
compute the steady state probability distribution in terms of the null element
of the corresponding very large, sparse, nonsymmetric matrix. The basic idea,
which has proven quite successful in a number of cases, is to use suitably
chosen nearby decomposable problems as preconditioners. These algorithms will be
further developed, the theory will be refined to try to explain the interesting
distribution of the singular values of the iteration matrices and an attempt
will be made to extend the applicability of methods to new classes of problems.
This research addresses new and faster methods for solving large systems of
linear equations, a computational task that is fundamental to many scientific
and engineering problems.