* 8703328
* Hemoglobins in Mollusc/Bacteria Symbioses
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Jonathan Wittenberg, Yeshiva University, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1989
* USD 80,000.00

Clams and mussels living in environments where hydrogen sulfide and oxygen
coexist in disequilibrium frequently lack (or essentially lack) both mouth and
guts and rely for their carbon nutrition on symbiotic bacteria housed in the
modified gill. The bacteria derive energy by oxidizing hydrogen sulfide and
fixing carbon dioxide into organic compounds which serve as food for the clam.
The prototype of these symbiont-dependent animals is the giant white clam
collected by the deep submersible Alvin, from the Galapagos hydrothermal vents
on the floor of the Pacific Ocean. Similar but accessible species living in the
mud of mangrove swamps are being studied in this project. Specialized cells
(bacteriocytes) in the gills of these clams house the symbiotic bacteria and
also contain hemoglobin at great concentration. It is being determined how the
hemoglobin carries both oxygen and hydrogen sulfide from the sea water across
the cytoplasm of the cell to the symbiotic bacteria. The primary aim is to
reconstruct the molecular mechanism of hemoglobin-mediated oxygen delivery to
the intracellular symbiont. It is proposed that the same molecular mechanism
which delivers oxygen to bacteria in the clam gill serves also in the
economically important root modules of soybeans and other legumes, and in the
human heart. In the soybean root nodule, leghemoglobin delivers oxygen to
intracelluar bacteria, Rhizobium, which fix nitrogen from the atmosphere and
supply it the plant. These plants do not require nitrogen fertilizer. Myglobin
in the human heart delivers oxygen to intracellular mitochondria, enabling them
to make ATP, the fuel of muscle contraction, rapidly enough to meet the work
load of the heart.