* 8703790
* Fluorinated Ring and Acyclic Compounds of Groups 15 and 16 -Their Syntheses and Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1987,09/30/1990
* Jean'ne Shreeve, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* John B. Hunt
* 09/30/1990
* USD 197,000.00

Further research on the preparation and properties of fluorine compounds is
important because the presence of one or more fluorine atoms or fluorinated
groups in molecules has a marked effect on the chemical and physical properties
as well as on the biological activity of these materials. The substitution of
fluorine for other atoms in a compound often leads to profound increases in
resistance to thermal degradation or decomposition in water. These drastic
differences in properties are seen in comparing polyethylene, which does not
contain fluorine, to teflon, which does contain fluorine. The research will
involve the syntheses and characterization of a wide variety of fluorine-
containing nitrogen, sulfur and phosphorus compounds in an effort to either
modify characteristics of previously known compounds or to develop entirely new
families of compounds that may have many applications, e.g., as thermally and
hydrolytically stable polymers, as plant growth inhibitors, as muscle relaxants,
or as anticonvulsants, in addition to providing much useful basic information
when fluorinated and nonfluorinated analogs are studied concurrently. This study
will provide other researchers with information about thermodynamic and kinetic
stabilities, properties, structures and bonding as well as methods of synthesis
of a diverse collection of compound types. All new materials will be
characterized via infrared, Raman, nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectra
and elemental analyses. Many will be submitted for biological testing and some
for structural studies.