* 8703496
* Acquisition of Advanced Computing Equipment for             Experimental Materials Science
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* John Silcox, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* None
* 08/31/1991
* USD 695,000.00

The capability of modern instrumentation in materials science to provide large
quantitative arrays of experimental data is outstripping the ability of many
computer systems to analyze the data. The acquisition of this computer equipment
will provide a computing environment which will allow the full exploitation of
the capabilities of advanced instrumentation. It is designed, as well, to
provide maximally effective access of the system users to the Cornell Production
Supercomputer Facility. Anticipated use of the system includes work in ultra-
high vacuum scanning transmission electron microscopy, conventional very high
resolution transmission electron microscopy, scanning tunneling microscopy, near
field scanning optical microscopy, optical sectioning and fluorescence
microscopies, hyperthermal ion beam studies of surfaces, time resolved x-ray
diffraction, and nanosecond resolved measurements of rapid melting and
solidification. In some of the applications the advanced computing capability
will be used to extend the capabilities of standard techniques (e.g. image
enhancement in electron microscopies); in others, the computation is a critical
aspect of the development of fundamentally new experimental techniques (e.g.
near field and optical sectioning microscopies). Clearly, this capability will
significantly enhance a number of research projects supported by the Division of
Materials Research.