* 8703363
* Acquisition of a Spectrofluorometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Robert Steiner, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 02/28/1991
* USD 61,000.00

Funds have been provided for the purchase of a high performance static
spectrofluorometer for shared use by a group of investigators. The instrument
will be used for four different projects involving proteins, each of which
utilizes fluorescence as a technique. Fluorescence intensity measurements will
be used as a means of monitoring such processes as protein-protein and protein-
nucleic acid interactions, ligand-induced conformational changes, and
accessibility of fluorophors to quencher. Measurements of fluorescence
anisotropy will also be used to study protein associations and conformational
changes. Fluorescence energy transfer will be employed as a "spectroscopic
ruler" to measure the separation of sites on a protein. Studies of the above
kinds require an instrument with high sensitivity and stability, low background,
and capability of providing corrected spectra. The individual projects are
concerned with the properties and interactions of the Ca2+-binding regulatory
proteins calmodulin and troponin C, the nature of the catalytic site of papain,
the characteristics of nucleic acid-unwinding proteins, and the properties of
the topoismerase enzymes which mediate alterations in the geometry of DNA. A
central goal of molecular biology is to elucidate the structure of specific
molecules and determine how their chemical characteristics influence their
activity. One approach is fluorescence spectroscopy, which provides data about
molecular subgroups and molecule-molecule interactions. This kind of information
explains biological processes at their most basic level.