* 8703759
* A Chemical Climatology of Photochemical Oxidants Part B: Research and Training Program
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1991
* John Hall, Atlanta University Center Inc
* Continuing grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 03/31/1991
* USD 456,720.00

Current understanding of the chemistry of the lower atmosphere indicates that a
wide variety of biological and geological processes are responsible for the
release of gaseous emissions from the earth's surface into the atmosphere. These
emissions have a major impact on the chemical composition of the atmosphere and
therefore, on the overall quality of the planetary life-support system. The vast
majority of the trace gases emitted into the atmosphere are in chemically
reduced oxidation states. By contrast, materials returned to the surface from
the atmosphere, via rain or dry deposition, are highly oxidized. The link
between these reduced and oxidized species is provided by atmospheric
photochemical reactions. Thus, a chemical cycle is set up by which reduced gases
are emitted into the atmosphere photochemically oxidized and finally removed
from the atmosphere. This project is the initiation of a research/training
program at Atlanta University Center (WUC) in the rapidly growing field of
atmospheric chemistry. The program will have as its research focus, "A Study of
Chemical Trends and Processes as Related to Photochemical Oxidants." During the
next three years the photochemical species of primary interest will be O3, H2O2
(aqueous phase) and H2O2 (gas phase). To date there have been no systematic
investigations reported in the literature showing diurnal or longer term
correlations between these three key photochemical oxidants. In the short term,
this new data base should also help elucidate the transformation rates of such
environmentally important species as SO2, particularly as it relates to aqueous
phase oxidation processes. In the long term this data base should also prove
quite informative in efforts to explore correlative relationships between
photochemical oxidant levels and damage to biologically sensitive plant
communities. This project also has as a primary objective in the development of
a minority oriented training/educational program that will contribute
significantly to the number of qualified Black scientists entering the field of
chemistry.