* 8703719
* Dissertation Research:  A Study of Ethnicity on the Bonin   Islands/Ogasawara, Japan
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1988
* NONE NONE, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 11/30/1988
* USD 9,200.00

Contrary to the predictions of anthropologists and laymen, ethnic groups have
not assimilated into politically and economically dominant cultures. This
research project will look at how peoples maintain their sense of ethnic
identity in the face of pressures to change: ethnicity will be studied on the
Bonin Islands in the North Pacific. The population of these islands consists of
the politically dominant Japanese and European/American colonists who have
maintained a sense of separateness for over 100 years. The researcher predicts
that the sharing of experiences as well as a sense of group identity rather than
shared economic interests has kept the two groups separate. The research
project's focus on ethnicity represents and important area in the social
sciences that is in urgent need of clarification. Due to the unique features of
the particular population identified in the proposal, the researcher will be
able to add new dimensions to the concept used by all the social sciences. The
formation and maintenance of ethnic identity will be fruitfully analyzed within
the context of a particular historic and cultural setting. Ethnicity is emerging
as a critical national issue in both developed and developing countries
throughout the world. In South Africa, India, Israel, Canada, and the
Philippines, to mention but a few countries, ethnicity lies at the center of
cultural upheavals and threatens the stability of cultural and political
institutions. In the U.S., a similar need for refinement of the conceptual
framework of ethnicity underlies pressing social and economic problems.