* 8703411
* The Atmospheric Transport and Deposition of Major           Continental Aerosol Species Over the North Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1991
* Joseph Prospero, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 08/31/1991
* USD 509,100.00

Over the past 10-15 years atmospheric chemistry has evolved from a young
research discipline devoted primarily to local problems of urban pollution and
air quality to a mature science concerned with the hemispheric to global scale
cycling of a wide variety of chemical species. To a large extent this change has
resulted from an increasing realization that human activities can cause chemical
disturbances to the natural troposphere on scales far beyond local concerns.
Well-known examples include changes in the regional-to-global concentrations of
certain nitrogen compounds, lead and other heavy metals, artificial
radionuclides, a number of synthetic organic substances, certain acid-forming
species, carbon dioxide and methane. These chemical changes in the atmosphere
can often extend to the earth's soils, oceans, and biota far from the original
source region. They can result in alterations in the earth's climate, changes in
vital nutrient cycles, and impact significantly on the public health and quality
of life on earth. The Atmosphere/Ocean Chemistry Experiment (AEROCE) will be a
coordinated multi-institutional atmospheric and marine chemistry research
project centered in the North Atlantic region. The ultimate goal of the AEROCE
project will be the development of a predictive capability for the continentally
derived species observed in the marine troposphere over the North Atlantic. The
selection of sites and the measurement protocol in AEROCE has been developed
jointly by modelers and field experimentalists. This AEROCE element will include
a chemical study of aerosol and precipitation samples collected in the AEROCE
network which will consist of four stations: Barbados; Bermuda-West; Mace Head,
Ireland; Izania, Tenerife. The principal objectives are: (1) to characterize the
major continentally-derived aerosol species and some related minor species that
are present over the North Atlantic Ocean; (2) to study the temporal and areal
variability in the concentration of these species in air; (3) to measure the
concentration of these same species in precipitation; (4) on the basis of the
concentration of these species in the air and in precipitation, to estimate the
rate of deposition to the ocean; (5) in the case of selected trace metals, to
measure the dissolved (or soluble fraction).