* 8703592
* Processing Recursion in Database Management Systems         (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Yannis Ioannidis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* MICHELE R. JOHNSON
* 01/31/1991
* USD 218,369.00

This research investigates query processing and optimization in a deductive
database system. The most important computational challenges that arise in such
a system are due to the presence of recursively defined relations, i.e., those
defined by recursive Horn clauses. We will extend known algebraic models and use
them to study recursion. We will implement several processing algorithms for
recursion and compare their performance while varying the values of several
important database parameters. We will also develop query optimization
algorithms that take into account the important processing algorithms and, using
realistic estimates for intermediate result sizes, suggest the most effective
access plan for the query concerned. Our implementation effort will be supported
by the investigation of several theoretical issues that arise regarding
recursion in database systems, such as maintaining materialized relations that
are defined recursively, characterizing uniformly bounded recursion, and
characterizing equivalence of nonlinear and linear Horn clauses. The importance
of this research is that it leads to improvements in database management
systems, allowing them to answer more complicated kinds of inquiries
automatically. These enhanced database management systems are needed to
effectively support new application areas, such as Computer Assisted
Design/Manufacturing and knowledge based reasoning systems in artificial
intelligence.