* 8703980
* Inelastic Light Scattering Studies of Quantum-Layered       Semiconductors and Metallic (Superconducting)               Microstructures
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,10/31/1990
* Ratnasingham Sooryakumar, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/1990
* USD 195,000.00

Modulated microstructures offer unique systems to investigate electronic and
vibrational behavior under reduced dimensions. In this program, Raman and
Brillouin scattering methods will be applied to a broad range of such
semiconducting and metallic systems. Resonant Brillouin scattering experiments
on semiconductor quantum layers focusses on elucidating the complex, yet
important, valence subband structure. Quantitative estimates for several
fundamental electron and lattice parameters of these ultra thin layers will be
realized. Research on zinc arsenide epilayers, including structures grown on
indium phosphide, that are a new and novel class of superlattices, provides
exciting prospects for fundamental results. This thrust is also expected to have
a significant impact on device applications, as for example long wavelength
photonic devices. Interest in metallic superlattices is, primarily,
understanding effects of structural anisotropy and tunable coherence lengths on
electronic excitations in normal and superconducting states. The overall program
also provides valuable structural and optical characterization that are valuable
for improved fabrication of novel modulated systems.