* 8703841
* A Genetic Study of Inbreeding in Finland
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1990
* Lynn Jorde, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1990
* USD 81,658.00

This grant allows Dr. Jorde and his collaborators to continue their analysis of
Finnish population records which cover the period from the seventeenth through
the twentieth centuries. These data are valuable not only for what they show
about population distribution and the social class of individuals but because of
the information they provide about marriage partners. It is possible for example
to determine the distance between mates' birthplace. This allows population
movement over time to be determined. What is even more interesting is the fact
that marriages between close relatives can also be tracked. For example when
first cousins wished to marry, a royal dispensation was required and these were
recorded and saved. The project has three goals: 1: to determine spatial and
temporal variation in inbreeding rates based on royal dispensation records; 2:
to search for the causal variables which determine the spatial and temporal
variation in inbreeding rates. A number of specific hypotheses will be tested;
3: to compare inbreeding patterns with spatial variation in the frequencies of
autosomal recessive diseases. This research is important because it will shed
additional light on the determinants of human breeding patterns. It will also
help to explicate the relationship between inbreeding and recessive diseases.
Finland has very high frequencies of at least 26 recessive diseases which are
extremely rare elsewhere. By examining inbreeding in Finland one can help
determine whether this disease distribution is due to founder effect, genetic
drift or to inbreeding.