* 8703016
* Polyhedral Oligometallasilsesquioxanes as Models for        Silica-Supported Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Frank Feher, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* John B. Hunt
* 11/30/1990
* USD 182,050.00

Silica, a porous solid material made by purifying and melting sand, is used
widely as a solid support for industrial catalysts. Such catalysts often consist
of metal atoms or metal-containing molecules partially buried in the silicon-
oxygen framework at the silica surface. In work preliminary to that proposed
here molecules based on the silicon-oxygen framework, but soluble in organic
solvents, were synthesized. Metal adducts of these molecules are expected to be
excellent models of the silica-based catalysts, with the advantage that they can
be studied by a variety of techniques to which surface catalysts are not
amenable. The studies should lead to a more profound understanding of silica-
based catalysts and provide information needed for the rational design of better
catalysts. The aim of our research is to develop a new class of transition-
metal-containing siloxane macromolecules, called polyhedral
oligometallasilsequioxanes(POMSS), that can be used to model reaction processes
that occur on silica-supported metal-oxide catalysts. The proposed research is
focussed on three major areas: 1) Synthesis and Reactivity Studies of Ti and Zr-
Containing POMSS: By examining the reactivity of Ti and Zr- containing POMSS
with substrates such as carbon monoxide, hydrogen, oxygen, ethylene, acetylene,
etc., it is proposed to "finger-print" the inherent chemical reactivity of these
interesting new complexes. 2) Reactivity Studies of V-Containing POMSS:
V-containing POMSS will be used to gain access to reactive intermediates that
are believed to be involved in VO(OR)3-catalyzed oxidations of hydrocarbons by
alkyl hydroperoxides and hydrogen peroxide. 3) Synthesis of POMSS Containing
Group VII and VIII Transition-Metals: Several synthetic approaches to POMSS
containing late transition-metals will be used in efforts to develop the
trisilanol ligand into a general ligand that can be used as a silica model with
virtually any transition-metal.