* 8703621
* Laser Processing of Diamond and Boron Nitride Epitaxial     Layers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1988,04/30/1992
* Jagannadham Kasichainula, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 04/30/1992
* USD 282,260.00

This research supported by the National Science Foundation under the Materials
Processing Joint Initiative. The objective of the research program is to study
the epitaxial growth of thin film diamond and boron nitride using laser-induced
photolytic and pyrolytic methods. The thin films are metastable at room
temperature and atmospheric pressure, thereby requiring non- equilibrium methods
to grow them. Pulsed laser irradiation introduces heating and transient atomic
excitations locally to form the metastable phases. The materials will be grown
epitaxially on magnesium oxide and silicon carbide on silicon substrates, where
there are sets of major lattice planes which match those of the thin films. The
diamond films will be doped during in-situ laser chemical vapor deposition by
introducing dopant gases into the growth chamber. The emphasis in the research
will be on the fundamental aspects of epitaxial growth, to include analysis of
the formation of defects, and the effects of distribution of elastic strains and
interfacial stresses. The thin films will be characterized using high-resolution
and analytical transmission electron microscopy, Rutherford Backscattering
Spectroscopy, Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy, Scanning Auger Electron
Spectroscopy, Electron Spectroscopic Chemical Analysis, and Raman and infrared
spectroscopy techniques will be used to characterize the chemical composition
and the bonding characteristics. Some of the films will be evaluated for
mechanical and electrical properties. Diamond and boron nitride are the hardest
of all materials known to man, and are useful in applications such as cutting
tools and wear resistant coatings. Other useful properties of diamond include
high dielectric strength, chemical inertness, optical transparency, large band
gap, high electrical resistivity, and high thermal conductivity. These
properties make the material potentially useful for semiconductor devices for
operation in high temperature and high radiation environments.