* 8703922
* Workshop On:  Dynamics of Soil Organic Matter in Tropical   Ecosystem; University of Hawaii; 1988
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1990
* David Coleman, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 07/31/1990
* USD 80,300.00

This support is for an ecology workshop at the University of Hawaii on tropical
soil. The theme for the workshop is "Dynamics of Soil Organic Matter in Tropical
Ecosystems." A panel of experts consisting of 25-30 scientists with interest in
tropical soils will be assembled for 5 days of discussions and field trips. The
objective is to provide an opportunity for U.S. and international scientists to
assess the state-of-the-art research on tropical soil organic matter, to
identify research needs to refine procedures for the study of dynamic processes
involved in organic matter turnover, and to develop protocols for international,
collaborative research efforts. The outputs will be a workshop proceedings and a
state-of-the-art monograph. NSF will be the primary sponsor of this workshop.
However, several projects supported by the Renewable Natural Resources Division
of the Bureau for Science &amp; Technology, U.S. Agency for International
Development, have expressed a keen interest in participating in this event and
co-sponsoring the workshop by bringing to the workshop key experts in the
subject area and supporting participants from developing countries. These
projects are: NifTAL (Nitrogen Fixation in Tropical Agricultural Legumes),
IBSNAT (International Benchmark Sites Network for Agrotechnology Transfer), SMSS
(Soil Management Support Services), TropSoils (a name mark for Soil Management
Collaborative Research Support Program), and TSMM (Technology of Soil Moisture
Management). This cooperation will help to produce a truly international book
from the workshop, which will be scheduled in summer or fall, 1988.