* 8703746
* An Integrated Task Approach to Expert Systems for Fault     Diagnosis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Balakrishnan Chandrasekaran, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/1990
* USD 110,000.00

The proposed work is a novel approach to designing automated control mechanisms
that use not only plant sensors but also product quality to activate and adjust
these control mechanisms. The overall objective is to develop an expert system
framework based on the integration of computational strategies for these two
tasks. The system will finally be tested on real industrial chemical process
installations. Technological improvements and enhanced data collection methods
have made chemical plants more operationally complex and have provided a large
amount of information for a plant operator to interpret. Potential benefits
exist in increasing the role of process control computers to aid the operator in
diagnosing equipment failures, instrumentation problems and process
abnormalities. Knowledge-based approaches can capture an important layer of
human problem solving which is present in the operation of chemical plants. An
expert system can potentially make available, at all times, a known level of
knowledge and decision-making ability concerning the operation of the plant and
therefore, can function as an intelligent consultant to the operator. The PIs
plan to build upon previous experience in other areas (medicine and nuclear
power plants) to develop a knowledge- based operator assist system that mirrors
the human expert's approach to the problem. This includes modelling uncertainty,
i.e. processing qualitative knowledge as well as quantitative algorithm
development.