* 8703247
* Mathematical Sciences: The Mathematics of Reacting and      Diffusing Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1987,09/01/1988
* Paul Fife, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Bernard McDonald
* 09/01/1988
* USD 71,447.00

The proposed projects involve mathematical analysis and modeling in the fields
of electro-chemistry, two-phase media and flame theory. The common tie among
these problems is that they all deal with diffusive and/or convective transport,
and interactive processes such as chemical reactions. There are many
electrophoretic techniques commonly used to separate charged particles in
solution. They all give rise to mathematical models in need of qualitative
analysis. The specific projects proposed here have to do with the steady-state
and transient behavior of models in isotachophoresis and isoelectric focussing
(possibly also continuous flow electrophoresis). In the study of the statics and
dynamics of two-phase continua, phase field models of various kinds are emerging
as physically suggestive and numerically convenient approaches. Part of the
proposal is to extend the previous analyses of these models, by the PI and
Caginalp, in the directions of (1) higher (than second) order models, which will
be closer in some sense to the underlying discrete lattice theories, (2) taking
into account the interaction of the material with boundaries, and (3) stability
considerations. To fully understand and model combustion in flames, the
important chemical reactions should be known, as well as the extent of their
participation in the combustion process. Along with this , a knowledge of the
concentrations of the reactants, hence of the reaction rates and the ( at least
approximate) flame speed, is desirable. The PI has very recently developed a
strategy for obtaining this knowledge, using known reaction networks and rate
constant data, ans successfully applied it to lean hydrogen-oxygen flames. The
method needs further development and implementation with simple computer
routines. It is proposed to investigate aspects of some nonstandard problems.
This project falls into the general area of research on mathematical theory of
reaction - diffusion phenomena. This theory attempts to explain in mathematical
terms the phenomena of combustion, electrophoresis, flame propagation and
diffusion of chemicals in a solution. It is a very active area of research
nowadays.