* 8703485
* Free Radical and Photochemical Reactions of OrganophosphorusSystems
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Wesley Bentrude, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 11/30/1990
* USD 204,500.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports research
by Prof. W. Bentrude, which aims at elucidating mechanisms in chemical reactions
of organophosphorus systems with free radicals as reaction intermediates. This
work is important for two reasons: (1) It will provide understanding of the
step- by-step processes by which certain phosphorus-containing organic molecules
react to generate unpaired-electron-intermediates (free radicals) when excited
by light absorption and other energizing events; and (2) many of these reactions
may be used as synthetic methods for preparation of sensitive compounds. Studies
of both free radical and photochemical reactions of organophosphorus molecules
are planned. Both new investigations and new aspects of reactions discovered in
the previous grant period will be pursued. A major theme is the design and
investigation of reaction systems in which true biradicals or biradical-like
electronic excited states react with tricovalent phosphorus in intra- or
intermolecular processes. Mechanistic, exploratory new-reaction, and synthetic
aspects of these systems are to be examined. Reactants included in this work are
photoexcited alkenes, alkynes, allenes, carbonyls, and thiocarbonyls, along with
biradicals from Norrish Type I photocleavage reactions and the photolyses of azo
compounds. In addition, new reactions in which intact phosphoranyl radicals are
trapped will be studied. The mechanistic aspects and synthetic applications of
the intramolecular photo-Arbuzov reaction of benzyl phosphites, newly discovered
in Bentrude's laboratory, will be explored. Also to be thoroughly studied is the
photosolvolysis of benzyl phosphites in the presence of alcohols. Its mechanism
and generality using other chromophores and leaving groups will be assessed.