* 8703722
* Molecular Genetics of Extracellular Polysaccharide          Synthesis in Erwinia Stewartii
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1987,09/30/1991
* David Coplin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 09/30/1991
* USD 227,500.00

Erwinia stewartii causes both a leaf blight and vascular wilt of field and sweet
corn. The long term goal of our research is to understand how E. stewartii
damages plants. The primary mechanism of pathogenicity of this bacterium is
production of extracellular polysaccharide (EPS) that occludes the xylem vessels
and causes the plant to wilt. When the bacterium grows in the intercellular
spaces of young leaves, it produces a symptom called "watersoaking" (Wts) that
is due to the loss of cell membrane semipermeability and the resulting
accumulation of fluids in the tissue. The cause of Wts is not known but recent
genetic evidence from our lab suggests that a polysaccharide may be involved. We
have discovered a large region of the E. stewartii chromosome that is involved
in synthesis of EPS (cpsA-D) and have also identified a positive regulatory
gene, rcsA, that is required for expression of the cps locus. Mutations in
cpsC-D and rcsA both result in loss of Wts ability. Since polysaccharide
synthesis and overall pathogenicity in E. stewartii appear to be coordinately
regulated by rcsA, we are proposing to study the regulation of EPS synthesis and
the organization of cps genes in this bacterium as a model of pathogenicity gene
expression. Specific objectives are: l) Use cps::lac gene fusions to determine
external signals such as nutrition and temperature that affect regulation of EPS
synthesis. 2) Characterize genes that regulate transcription of cps operons. 3)
Compare the nucleotide sequence of rcsA genes from E. stewartii and E. coli. 4)
Determine if EPS synthesis is regulated by lon proteolysis of the RcsA protein.
5) Continue genetic analysis of the cps gene cluster.