* 8703465
* Photochemical and Electrochemical Reactions of              Organometallic Molecules
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1987,04/30/1993
* Mark Wrighton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 04/30/1993
* USD 1,006,360.00

Molecular species in fluid solution, in rigid matrices, and attached to surfaces
are to be considered with the overall objectives and significance being the
correlation of electronic structure and reactivity and in establishing the
detailed pathway by which light- and electrochemically-induced reactions occur.
There are potential applications in electronic switching devices,
microelectronics, semiconductors and related electronic materials. Photochemical
and electrochemical studies of organometallic molecules in fluid solution, in
rigid media, and on surfaces are proposed. The objective of the research is to
understand chemical and physical consequences associated with changes in the
electron configuration of the metal complex. Additionally, chemical and
spectroscopic characterization of photochemically and electrochemically
generated intermediates will be carried out in order to better understand
mechanisms of photoreactions and redox processes. Specific systems to be
investigated include metal-metal bonded complexes to determine factors
influencing photosubstitution reactivity and the reactivity of coordinatively
unsaturated metal-metal bonded systems. Another class of molecules to be
investigated are mononuclear systems to establish aspects of the mechanism of
stoichiometric and catalytic reactions. The approach involves using light to
generate coordinatively unsaturated species at low temperature followed by warm
up experiments to effect thermal reactions. The remaining thrust of the research
involves synthesis of redox polymers to illustrate that reactivity of bound
organometallic subunits can be tuned by electrochemical means.