* 8703215
* Robust Stability:  System-Theoretic Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Nirmal Bose, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/1989
* USD 48,782.00

This research concerns a system-theoretic approach to determine the stability
(assessed in terms of the strict Hurwitz property) of interval polynomials (i.e.
those having coefficient uncertainties which vary independently over specified
ranges) having real or complex coefficients. The underlying procedure not only
proves the recent results of Kharitonov but, more importantly, offer
potentialities for generalization to the bivariate and, subsequently, the
multivariate cases for both continuous-time/space and discrete-time/space
dynamical systems. This research is important because multidimensional feedback
systems have been proposed for various purposes such as iterative image
processing and image restoration. Such image processing systems that contain
feedback loops are sometimes known to oscillate in space and time and these
undesirable oscillations can only be avoided if proper stability conditions are
imposed on the feedback systems, especially subject to the practical requirement
that the coefficients of the characteristic polynomial are each bounded from
above and below instead of being known with certainty. The first part of this
research will be concerned with establishing conditions to guarantee that the
zero-set of multivariate interval polynomials belong to commonly specified
polydomains of interest. Second, the scopes for adapting the system-theoretic
approach developed to handle the interval or "boxed" type of coefficient
uncertainties to the case when dependencies in the variation of the polynomial
coefficient set are allowed, will be investigated. Finally, the counterpart of
the results derived in the first and, possibly, the second phase of research
which exist in the case of more general polydomains will be investigated and
research into the stability of robust matrix polynomials will be initiated. In
summary, the aim of this research is to develop a system-theoretic approach
allowing the determination of the stability of interval polynomials (i.e. those
having coefficient uncertainties which vary over specified ranges). This
research has potential applications to image processing and restoration
techniques.