* 8703199
* U.S. Argentina Cooperative Research on Cenozoic Volcanism inthe Argentine Puna: Relation of Magmatic Source Areas to Evolving Tectonics
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1990
* Suzanne Kay, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1990
* USD 19,080.00

This award supports the participation of Dr. Suzanne M. Kay of Cornell
University in a program of cooperative research with Prof. Beatriz L. Coira of
the Universidad National de Jujuy, Argentina, aimed at relating visible changes
on the surface of the earth--collisions between adjacent "plates" reflected in
the formation of mountain ranges or plateaus, for example--to the geochemistry
of igneous rocks. Both very old and relatively young rocks from the high plateau
region of central Argentina will be analyzed for major and trace element
chemistry, and in some cases for isotopic composition, and the results will be
correlated to the processes that were involved in the uplift of the plateau and
generalized to the formation of mountain ranges and high plateaus generally. Our
understanding of the growth and evolution of the earth's crust may be improved
by studying the distribution and geochemistry of the volcanic rocks found at the
intersections of the plates which form the earth's crust, since this
geochemistry is a function of the time scale, thermal history, and structural
mechanics of the formation of the crust. The high plateau of Argentina is an
excellent location for the study of this geochemistry, due to the past
concentration but current cessation of volcanic activity there. In addition, the
area is well mapped geologically, both terrestrially and from satellites, and is
well-known to local geologists. The proposed analysis of volcanic rocks should
yield information on time scales and temperatures involved in the geological
processes of the plateau's formation, and on the evolving chemistry of crust
forming the plateau itself. Overall, the proposed study will make excellent
complementary use of the U.S. principal investigator's expertise in geochemical
analysis techniques, and the Argentine collaborator's expertise in field
petrology, and should result in obtaining a fuller understanding of the
processes that occur in the formation of mountain and high plateau regions in
general.