* 8703075
* Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic Combinatorics: Association Schemes and Related Topics
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Eiichi Bannai, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard McDonald
* 11/30/1989
* USD 52,300.00

This work is in the area of algebraic combinatorics. It includes association
schemes ((P andQ)-polynomial association schemes and more general association
schemes), distance-regular graphs, tight designs, perfect codes and spherical
designs. Emphasis will be put on the interplay of algebraic combinatorics with
the theory of orthogonal polynomials and with the representation theory of
groups. It will start the general classification problem for general commutative
association schemes of large class number. More precisely, it will collect many
examples and calculate their character tables and find as many necessary
conditions for the character table as needed for the classification. It will
also study distance-regular graphs with fixed (small) valency and generalize
such results to general commutative association schemes with small valency. It
will also study extremal configurations of (finite) sets in association schemes
and also in the sphere and other (nice) metric spaces. This research will
concentrate on combinatorial aspect of algebraic problems. The combination of
algebraic, number theoretic and analytic tools necessary to perform this
research makes the subject very attractive. Bannai is one of the top leaders in
this subject. Result of very great importance will surely result from this
project.