* 8704128
* Oncogene Activation by Retrovirus in Avian B and T Lymphoma
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Hsing-Jien Kung, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/1989
* USD 80,000.00

Oncogene activation by retroviral DNA insertion has been implicated in a variety
of neoplasms. The present application represents our continued effort to
understand the molecular mechanisms involved in the induction of chicken B and
T-lymphomas. In the past two years, we have focused on the characterization of a
novel avian T-lymphoma identified by the CoPI. This lymphoma is induced by avian
reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV) and resembles Marek's disease herpes virus
(MDV) induced T-lymphoma. We have demonstrated that insertional activation
pattern differs from that found in B-lymphomas induced by the same virus. We
have also characterized in detail the structure and expression of a provirus
involved in c-myc activation in one B-lymphoma sample. Our studies, together
with others, have revealed a number of interesting ways that retroviruses can
modulate the LTR promoter activities and their interactions with host oncogenes.
Understanding transcriptional modulation of viral LTR's and adjacent oncogenes
are not only key to our understanding of the oncogene-activation process but
also important in our appreciation of the complex eucaryotic transcriptional
machinery. This represents a major focus of the present application. In
addition, we wish to continue our investigation of possible relationships
between REV (retroviral) and MDV (herpes viral) induced T-lymphomas. In
particular, we propose to further explore the structure and significance of the
REV LTR-related sequence we have recently identified in the pathogenic MDV
genome.