* 8704478
* Software Environment Architecture and Analysis Tools
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1991
* Lori Clarke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 12/31/1991
* USD 1,729,966.00

This award provides support for a portion of the work of the Arcadia project.
Arcadia is a major, joint research effort the aim of which is to gain
fundamental understandings about desirable architectures for the integration of
software tools into environments and particularly in support of software
testing, analysis and evaluation. Arcadia is an experimental research project
which aims to gain these understandings through the creation and experimental
evaluation of an actual environment prototype--Arcadia-1. A key innovative
feature of the approach being taken by Arcadia is to consider software processes
to be items of software themselves and to view an environment as a mechanism for
specifying, compiling and interpreting these processes, using software tools and
software workers as interpretation primitives. Work at the University of
Massachusetts on the Arcadia project will focus on two important aspects of
software development environments, namely object management and analysis tools.
The object management mechanisms will be a central feature of the Arcadia
environment architecture. On the one hand, it will serve to organize and
orchestrate the myriad pieces of a software project being created and maintained
by users of an environment. In addition, it will constitute the primary
structuring and integration mechanism for the environment itself, since all the
tools and information structures comprised by an environment can and should be
viewed as objects subject to management. Analysis tools and their integration
are an important focus of Arcadia, both as a test case for the environment
architecture's extensibility and integration capabilities and as a contribution
to expanding the power and usefulness that environments offer to their users.
This project will focus on two classes of analysis tools: software testing tools
and tools for analyzing concurrent and distributed systems. Major experimental
research efforts are needed to provide basic understandings of overall software
development environments. The Arcadia project is a significant effort toward
achieving those understandings.