* 8704147
* Discrete Simulation of Numerical Control Machining of       Sculptured Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1991
* Robert Jerard, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 03/31/1991
* USD 310,959.00

The machining of sculptured surfaces with Numerical Control (NC) is a common
practice in many industries. Sculptured surfaces arise in the design of car
bodies, ship hulls, aircraft, and other applications. The problem that the
principal investigators want to solve is: given a mathematically defined
sculptured surface and a set of NC tool movements, does the shape cut by the
tool match the mathematical shape within a given tolerance? Previously, the
principal investigators have developed algorithms and data structures for
rapidly simulating the actions of a three-axis mill on a carefully chosen sample
of points on the surface. This method can guarantee tolerances at every point on
the surface both for areas where excess material remains and for areas that have
been gouged. The concept of surface discretization is a new one and poses a
series of research questions which the principal investigators intend to
address: 1) Can the simulation method, currently limited to three-axis NC
machining, be extended to five-axis NC machining without marked decrease in
efficiency? 2) Would a discretization of the surface into a triangle-based
boundary representation be more efficient or reliable than the current point-
based method? 3) Can the error information generated by the simulation be used
to make corrections to the NC program and could the discretized surface be used
as a basis for algorithms to generate NC tool paths? 4) What is the trade-off
between the spacing between points and the accuracy of the method? and 5) Can
the simulation speed be improved through parallel algorithms?