* 8704327
* US - Colombian Mathematics Conference; Bogota, Colombia;    July 27 - August 1, 1987
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,01/31/1988
* William Derrick, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1988
* USD 7,400.00

This award will support the participation of seven U.S. mathematicians in a
conference sponsored by the Colombian Mathematics Society (SCM) to be held in
late July, 1987 at the National University of Colombia, Bogota. The two purposes
of the conference will be to (1) identify topics and priorities for cooperative
research in differential equations between the U.S. and Colombian participants,
and (2) discuss the curriculum for the proposed doctoral program in mathematics
at the University. Dr. William R. Derrick, University of Montana, and several
other United States mathematicians participated in the organization of the
conference with Dr. Jaime C. Lesmes, President of SCM and several other
Colombians. Dr. Derrick and the United States participants have a successful
history of research collaboration with Latin American mathematicians. The
conference will consist of three parts: (1) a plenary session to discuss the
current state and future course of graduate studies in mathematics in Colombia,
(2) invited addresses on topics of mathematical research, and (3) research
workshops on mathematical analysis. The conference enables the United States
mathematicians to develop research questions and contacts with domestic and
foreign colleagues, and it provides the Colombians with expert advice in
developing their first doctoral program in mathematics. The research papers from
the conference will be published in the "Boletin de Matematicas", an
international journal published by the SCM.