* 8704808
* Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope with          Specialized Crystalline Orientation and Particle Analysis   Capability (Materials Research)
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1987,05/31/1989
* Wilford Hess, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Yvette Jackson
* 05/31/1989
* USD 107,600.00

A new scanning electron microscope will be purchased which will include
specialized rapid crystallite orientation and particle analysis capability
needed for on-going research programs in four major groups at Brigham Young
University. The general improvement in resolution over the present facility
would also serve well many other faculty and graduate students. The microscope
will be equipped with new low-light electron backscattering diffraction
technology recently developed at Bristol University. This technology permits
rapid crystallographic orientation of small crystals. The Materials Research
Group in the Department of Mechanical Engineering has a critical need for this
capability in order to advance a new theory of mesostructure in polycrystalline
materials which is expected to have numerous applications in predicting the
properties and optimal processing for metal and ceramic alloys. This technology
is not presently installed at any other laboratory in the United States. The
microscope will also be equipped with a state-of-the-art microchemical analysis
system capable of computer controlled multiple particle analysis of the
chemistry and morphology of crystallites and particles. The present scanning
electron microscope at BYU is limited to single particle chemical analysis with
a resolution of about 2 micrometers. The proposed system offers a four-fold
improvement in the resolution of sized and composition for multiple particle
images. In our current studies of the chemistry and morphology of carbon
deposits in catalyst pellets and pores (BYU Catalysis Laboratory) the improved
resolution and multiple-particle statistics are necessary to identify the
important mechanisms of catalyst deactivation.