* 8704863
* REG:  High Sensitivity, High Speed Streak Camera System for Intense Pulsed Ion Beam Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1989
* David Hammer, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/1989
* USD 35,000.00

This Engineering Research Equipment Grant provides funds for purchase of high
speed, high sensitivity image converter streak camera system which will be used
principally for intense ion beam research. The physics of high power pulsed
accelerating gaps and intense ion beam propagation will be investigated using
visible light emitted by accelerating or drifting ions, or light which results
from the energetic ions interacting with matter (such as a scintillator). The
streak camera system collects light intensity data as a function of position and
time with subnanosecond temporal resolution and submillimeter spatial
resolution, with sufficient sensitivity to allow several new diagnostic
techniques to be tested, and previously used ones to be improved. An example in
the former category is a technique to determine the electrostatic potential as a
function of position in an ion-beam accelerating gap using Doppler shifted
resonance absorption of tunable dye laser light by the accelerating ions. In the
latter category is an experiment to measure the electric field vs position in
the accelerating gap by coupling the streak camera to the output of a
spectrometer and monitoring the Stark shifted line profile of specially selected
ion emission lines. In that case, the intensity vs position vs time data from
the streak camera will become intensity vs wavelength vs time. Similarly, ion
transverse velocities vs position and time both in an accelerating gap and in a
propagation region can be measured by monitoring the Doppler width of
appropriate emission lines. An improved understanding of the physics of intense
ion beam sources and of propagating ion beams will come from these measurements
which will, in turn, improve the ability to customize beam sources for
particular applications in science and engineering, such as materials surface
modification and inertial confinement fusion.