* 8704178
* Enantioselective Organic Syntheses  (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1987,04/30/1991
* Gary Molander, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Showell
* 04/30/1991
* USD 175,300.00

The continuing challenge in the area of organic synthesis is to develop
synthetic reactions that have generality, yet exhibit great selectivity. Dr.
Molander has discovered a way to take an old reaction, the so-called Reformatsky
reaction, and greatly increase its usefulness in the synthesis of complex
natural products like the beta-lactam antibiotics. This project is in the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program. This will develop novel entries
into complex, enantiomerically pure organic substrates. The first aspect of the
research will explore use of samarium diiodide-induced intramolecular
Reformatsky reactions. Full development of this methodology will permit access
to syn 1,3-diols by 1,3-asymmetric induction in a carbon-carbon bond-forming
process. Facile generation of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors is one of many
important contributions that this advancement will permit. Application to
nitrogen-containing substrates is also planned, and important new routes to
pharmacologically important aminoglycoside and beta-lactam antibiotics will
result from this aspect of the study. Chemistry based upon samarium diiodide
reduction of vinyl oxiranes comprises the second aspect of the study. Allylic
alcohols generated by this process will be incorporated into several natural
products syntheses, including leukotriene B4. Another unique method for
1,3-asymmetric induction is planned, involving intramolecular Michael addition
of samarium-based Reformatsky reagents to conjugated olefins. A novel
cyclopropanation reagent, Sm/CH2I2, will be thoroughly studied to determine its
unique role in organic synthesis, utilizing allylic alcohols as substrates in
the first aspect of studies in this area. Stereocontrolled cyclizations onto
chiral epoxides constitute another proposed approach to chiral carbocycles and
heterocyclic substrates. Reactions utilizing alkynylborates and allylsilanes
will be explored to provide access to organic molecules in which up to three
contiguous stereocenters are controlled in a completely predictable fashion.
Finally, the chemistry of epoxy anions will be explored. These unique
nucleophiles may very well revolutionize the manner in which the versatile
epoxide functional group is incorporated into organic molecules.