* 8704048
* Improvement of Surface Science Research Facilities
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Zvi Weisz, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1990
* USD 285,000.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was established
to provide support to strengthen the research environments and capabilities of
predominantly minority institutions or institutions that have substantial
minority student populations. Eligible institutions must also have graduate
programs in science or programs in engineering. Funding is provided for faculty
research in fields of science and engineering supported by the Foundation and
for the acquisition of research instrumentation. The University of Puerto Rico-
Rio Piedras will use RIMI support to enhance its surface science research
facilities. The project will focus on two major areas: (1) Optical and
electrical properties of co-sputtered semiconductor and metal-insulator films.
This component will include studies of hydrogenated amorphous semiconductor
alloys, superlattices and localized gap states; and (2) Optical studies of solid
surfaces. This component will analyze the surface enhanced Raman Scattering in
granular composites and surface plasmons on rough metal surfaces. The
experimental techniques for this project will include the use of Auger electron
spectroscopy, electron energy loss spectroscopy, secondary ion mass
spectroscopy, X-ray photoemission spectroscopy, light scattering and attenuated
total reflection procedures, infrared and picosecond spectroscopy. The principal
investigator is a well trained physicist who has published over 40 articles in
refereed journals. The Foundation has supported this project because more
opportunities will be available for minorities to participate in state of the
art surface science research.