* 8704664
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  High Temperature Gel Permeation Chromatograph
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1988
* Michael Ryan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1988
* USD 35,445.00

Research Summary: This is an Engineering Research Equipment Grant. A gel
permeation chromatograph (gpc) capable of operation from ambient to 150oC is
provided by NSF. This instrument is capable of measuring the molecular weight
distribution of important crystalline polymers that are insoluble at room
temperature, such as polyethylene and polypropylene. It provides the most
efficient means that is currently available for characterizing molecular weights
of polymers. The instrument is to be used in several projects under way in this
department, including one aiming at the fractionation of crystalline polymers in
supercritical solvents. Innovation: The fractionation of crystalline polymers in
supercritical solvents, to be analyzed by means of the high temperature gpc,
represents a novel concept. The other analytical tasks outlined in the proposal
that require use of the gpc also represent novel research. Practical
Significance: The practical significance of the research which requires use of
the instrument includes the design of more efficient fractionation processes for
crystalline polymers, the development and study of polymer blends with new
physical properties, and the assessment of a new process for coal liquefaction.
More specifically, polymer fractionation of the type described might be
applicable to high pressure polyethylene processes and the purification of
isotactic polypropylene. In addition, novel and useful polymer morphologies
might be generated by precipitation from supercritical solution. The high
temperature gpc will be necessary for the analysis of the products generated in
most of the studies referred to. Recommendation: An award of $35,445 in FY 1987
is recommended, with SUNY-Buffalo providing $19,085 in matching funds.