* 8704516
* Bivalve Paleoecology:  Key to the Environmental Stratigraphyof a Pliocene Sedimentary Sequence
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* Steven Stanley, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Whitcomb
* 12/31/1988
* USD 25,000.00

In the course of previous research on patterns of biogeography, extinction, and
phyletic evolution for Western Atlantic Bivalvia during late Neogene time, I
have made extensive collections of the early Pliocene fauna of a shell pit at
Sarasota, Florida. This fauna is spectacular for its richness (more than a
thousand species of mollusks, about 180 of them bivalves) and for its excellent
state of preservation. In the course of my work, I have concluded that the
vertical sequence of facies in the pit records the transgression of a barrier-
island-lagoon complex, exemplifying Walther's Law. Transgressive sequences of
this type are rare in the stratigraphic record because rapid relative rises of
sea level usually destroy barrier island and lagoonal facies or cause them to
jump inland. I am developing a model to explain why the transgressive sequence
has been preserved at Sarasota - a model that I believe has general significance
. This proposal is for funding to support more detailed study of the
stratigraphic units in the Sarasota pit, more thorough collection of their
faunas, and full development of the stratigraphic model. Ultimately, I will also
produce a taxonomic-biogeographic monograph on the total bivalve fauna, which
represents the little-studied temporal equivalent of well-known faunas to the
north (northern Florida to Virginia: the Jackson Bluff, Duplin and Yorktown
faunas). It is crucial that the field work in Sarasota be conducted now because
the pit will soon be flooded.