* 8704458
* Social Dynamics of Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Richard Wrangham, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 01/31/1990
* USD 125,796.00

This grant provides support for two years of field research by Dr. Wrangham and
his colleagues in the Kibale Forest which is located in southern Uganda. This
area has an extremely high density of primates and the reseachers will focus
their attention on the common chimpanzee >Pan> >troglodytes>. In the two related
aspects of the study they will study the process of chimpanzee group
socialization and also examine the food calls made by these animals. To
accomplish these goals, they will make focal observations on adults encountered
within the study area. They will record both activities of individual animals
and will also note the composition of the group of which this animal is a
member. A series of such observations will allow the reconstruction of the
composition, fission and fusion of such groups. The team will also conduct focal
tree.watches on fruiting trees and this will allow them to study how different
groups and individuals share valuable limited resources. They will record
information on the ecology of the entire study area to determine both density
and distribution of resources. Finally they will record chimpanzee vocalizations
and through a combination of laboratory and situational analysis attempt to
determine the number of different calls and the purpose or meaning of each. The
goal of this study is to understand the factors which determine how chimpanzees
utilize the environment and the relationship between this strategy and group
composition. Previous research has made it clear that in different parts of
Africa these animals are organized differently and it seems likely that
environment plays a role. However no detailed studies have been conducted to
answer this question. Closely related to the question of group organization is
the issue of cooperation between individuals. Since vocalization sometimes
serves to announce the presence of food, through a study of calls, insight will,
hopefully, be gained into the kinds of cooperation which take place. This
research is important for several reasons. First it sets the context for
understanding how humans act. Secondly data collected may help to preserve these
rare animals which are endangered in many parts of Africa. Finally, because of
the participation of Ugandian students and scientists it should help strengthen
the Ugandian scientific establishment and help forge links between Ugandian and
U.S. reseachers.