* 8704133
* Establishment of a Facility for Ultrastructure and Cell     Chemistry Research
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Gus Tomlinson, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1991
* USD 280,377.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was established
to provide support to strengthen the research environments and capabilities of
predominantly minority institutions or institutions that have substantial
minority student enrollments. Eligible institutions must also have graduate
programs in science or programs in engineering. Funding is provided for faculty
research in fields of science and engineering supported by the Foundation and
for the acquisition of research instrumentation. Tennessee State University will
use RIMI support to establish an institutional facility for ultrastructural cell
chemistry research. This project will focus on acquiring technical assistance
and release time to allow the performance of meritorious research. In addition,
greater utilization of an existing electron microscopy facility will be
possible. The research capability of Tennessee State will be strengthened
specifically in the areas of cell biology and biochemistry. The principal
investigators for this work are currently conducting research in anatomical
features of cells and tissues and have published in scientific journals. The
Foundation has supported this project because the participation of minorities in
research will be increased at an urban institution that is located in an ideal
location for attracting minority constituents.