* 8704871
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Computer Cluster     Upgrade for Solution Thermodynamics and Materials Inter-    facial Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1988
* Paulette Clancy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/1988
* USD 50,000.00

An equipment grant is provided to upgrade the computer facility within the
School of Chemical Engineering at Cornell University. The VAX-Cluster will have
a significant effect on research projects in the areas of thermodynamics,
materials processing, fluid mechanics, biochemical engineering and catalysis.
The availability of the proposed equipment will be particularly significant for
the following three projects, which are likely to be the heaviest users of the
new system. In the area of thermodynamics and surface properties of fluids,
theoretical studies are concerned with the development of new equations of state
for fluids using perturbation and mean-field theories and computer simulations
which will enable the calculation of solid and fluid properties from a
molecular-level treatment. In the area of materials processing, non-equilibrium
simulations of rapidly cooled interfaces are being performed to study the
thermodynamics, structure and kinetics of the dynamic solid/melt interface
produced by laser heating, for example. In the area of fluid mechanic, studies
are being made of the flow of suspensions through branched conduits where the
size of the particles is comparable to that of the channel. In the area of
thermodynamics, the simulations are being used to investigate new phenomena for
which no experimental data exist, for example, in the study of nucleation and
small drops. The first study showing spontaneous phase separation in a pore and
the existence of a capillary critical point different from that of a bulk fluid
is now available. In the area of materials processing, the simulations provide
fundamental understanding of the detailed motion and properties of rapidly
moving solid/liquid interfaces not available elsewhere. The velocity temperature
time profile can be produced theoretically, whereas experimentally, the
instantaneous temperature is virtually inaccessible. Insight into the reasons
for increased dopant segregation coefficients at the interface is also possible
through simulation, though much less readily available through current theories
or experiment. In the area of fluid mechanics, novel models accounting for the
finite size of the particles are being developed where the asymptotic
approximations of traditional theories are no longer valid and the hydrodynamic
interactions between the particles and the wall become important. Thermodynamic
studies of surface properties are applicable to many purification and separation
processes including the removal of unwanted carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide
from natural gases, and separations for hydrocarbons including xylenes and
aromatics. The studies of pores are applicable to capillary permeability in
tight sands. Other projects are applicable to surfactant behavior. The materials
processing studies are applicable to a wide range of rapid solidification
techniques including laser annealing, laser glazing and ion implantation. The
fluid mechanics studies are a prototype for a broad range of techniques such as
filtration and chromatography. One application under study is that of cell
motion in microcirculation. The studies can also provide insight in the design
of new separation processes, e.g. enhanced oil recovery. Support is recommended
at the level of $50,000 in FY 1987 for partial support of a VAX-Cluster System.