* 8704054
* The Influence of Sensory and Morphological Characteristics  on Prey and Patch Choice by Portunid and Cancrid Crabs
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1993
* Steve Rebach, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1993
* USD 284,999.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was established
to provide support to strengthen the research environments and capabilities of
predominantly minority institutions or institutions that have substantial
minority student populations. Eligible institutions must also have graduate
programs in science or programs in engineering. Funding is provided for faculty
research in fields of science and engineering supported by the Foundation and
for the acquisition of research instrumentation. The University of Maryland -
Eastern Shore (UMES) will use RIMI support to study the influence of sensory and
morphological characteristics on the feeding habits of Portunid and Cancrid
crabs. The foraging behaviors and sensory mechanisms involved in discriminating
among prey items are poorly understood in these animals. One phase of the study
will analyze how the crabs detect prey and judge prey quality. Another phase
will examine the relationship between handling time and prey selection,
including effects of claw morphology, and microhabitat (position on the bottom),
on prey selection. Researchers at UMES will use state of the art data collecting
and analysis instrumentation to collect real time data on the behavior of three
crab species. The principal investigator has many years of research experience
with marine organisms, especially crustacea. The Foundation has supported this
project because minorities will have opportunities to participate in meritorious
marine research, and area where very few minorities choose careers.