* 8704047
* EIA: Robust Control of Systems with Parameter Uncertainty:  An Operator Theoretic Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1987,09/30/1990
* Allen Tannenbaum, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/1990
* USD 60,000.00

The general problem of robust system control consists of constructing fixed
feedback controllers for possibly unstable families of systems with parameter or
modelling uncertainty in order to stabilize the given family and in order to
meet certain performance specifications. This proposal is concerned with an
operator theoretic and functional analytic approach to this problem for
multivariable, distributed, and even possibly nonlinear plants. Specifically,
techniques will be proposed to solve the H-Infinity-optimal weighted sensitivity
problem for multivariate distributed systems, and methods will be developed for
obtaining new qualitative and quantitive results for very general multivariable
gain margin problems. Moreover, a nonlinear version of classical interpolation
theory will be considered and it should have important consequences in adaptive
and robust nonlinear control. It is expected that the proposed operator
theoretic approach should help resolve some fundamental problems in robust
design and illuminate a number of central theoretical issues in this area. In
addition, specific algorithms will be developed to implement the methods on the
computer. The general problem of robust system control consists of constructing
fixed feedback controllers for possibly unstable families of systems with
parameter or modelling uncertainty in order to stabilize the given family and in
order to meet certain performance specifications. This proposal is concerned
with an operator theoretic and functional analytic approach to this problem for
multivariable, distributed, and even possibly nonlinear plants.