* 8704015
* Training as a Correlate of Professional Development Among   Public Managers in the State Government of Kentucky
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Manindra Mohapatra, Kentucky State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1991
* USD 220,460.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was established
to provide support to strengthen the research environments and capabilities of
predominantly minority institutions or institutions that have substantial
minority student populations. Eligible institutions must also have graduate
programs in science or programs in engineering. Funding is provided for faculty
research in fields of science and engineering supported by the Foundation and
for the acquisition of research instrumentation. Kentucky State University will
use RIMI support to test four specific hypotheses that focus on the relationship
between a state government operated management awareness training program and
the professional development of public managers. The findings of this research
should shed new light on the conceptual and empirical factors that influence
relationships between management training and professional development of public
managers in an organizational setting. Evaluative research in the area of public
administration continues to emphasize the relevance of curriculum content, the
relative merits of different delivery styles, and the need for tangible linkage
between training and organizational effectiveness in the work setting. The
principal investigator is a well-trained political scientist and public
administrator who has published widely in refereed journals. The Foundation has
supported this project because minorities will have additional opportunities to
participate in meritorious research on the professional training of managers.