* 8704017
* Solution of Self-consistent Electronic Structure Equations  by a Pseudospectral Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/1987,03/31/1991
* Richard Friesner, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David M. Stanbury
* 03/31/1991
* USD 119,200.00

This project is being sponsored jointly by the Divisions of Chemistry and
Advanced Scientific Computing. Professor Friesner intends to develop new and
rapid means for carrying out quantum-mechanical calculations on molecules too
large to be treated by conventional means. The methods would be of significant
value to experimental chemists, allowing detailed quantum-mechanical treatments
of systems now accessible only to semi-empirical approximate methods. The work
involves a novel algorithm for solving self-consistent electronic structure
equations that leads to a reduction of computation time by a factor of 1.6N,
where N is the basis set size, while maintaining accuracy comparable to existing
methods. The method involves a synthesis of the usual quantum-chemical LCAO
approach with the pseudospectral method, a numerical technique used in
hydrodynamic simulations of turbulence. The efficiency of the calculations is
achieved by eliminating the vast majority of two-electron integrals and by
altering the computational scaling from a proportionality to N^4 to one of only
N^3. Accuracy in relative energies is retained by removing aliasing errors,
rendering the results nearly equivalent to those obtained from the Roothaan
procedure. The algorithm will be tested and optimized for a series of small
molecules and will be generalized to excited state, density functional, and
generalized valence-bond calculations.