* 8704491
* Synthetic, Structural and Reactivity Studies on             Chalcogenide Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Dimitri Coucouvanis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John B. Hunt
* 11/30/1990
* USD 328,966.00

The elements of Group Seven of the Periodic Table, including oxygen, sulfur,
selenium and tellurium, are known as the chalcogens. This research project is
concerned with the synthesis and properties of metal chalcogenides, especially
compounds of metals with sulfur. Such compounds play important roles both in
biological and industrial catalysis. Metal Sulfides constitute the active sites
of a number of important enzymes and are the active ingredient in the
industrially important hydrodesulfurization catalysts. This project is expected
to enhance understanding of these important catalysts and lead to the design of
more efficient catalysts. The goals of this project are to synthesize,
structurally characterize and explore in detail the reactivities of specific
metal- sulfur complexes. These complexes are expected to assist in our
understanding of a) The structures and reactivity of the metal sulfur active
sites in the industrially important hydrodesulfurization (HDS) reaction
catalysts. b) The structures and reactivity of specific early transition metal
sulfur complexes and c) The structures and reactivities of a new class of
heteronuclear M/Fe/S clusters. Research in the first area of interest will place
emphasis in the synthesis, structure and reactivity of the binary complex anions
containing molybdenum and sulfur and ternary molybdenum/sulfur/oxygen anions.
Heterometallic clusters will be obtained using the Mo/S(O)complex anions as
ligands for divalent transition metal ions. The structures and reactivity of the
new M/Mo/S(O) complexes will be studied in detail. The effectiveness of
supported or unsupported Mo/S(O) and M/Mo/S(O) complexes as catalysts for the
HDS of thiophene concerns the chemistry of Zr/S, Nb/S and Lanthanides/S
complexes. These complexes are expected to display exceptional reactivity, and
will serve as reagents for the synthesis of specific heterometallic clusters.
Finally the ability of the Fe6S6L6 clusters to serve as ligands for
coordinatively unsaturated organometallic fragments, will be utilized for the
synthesis of hepta- and octametallic clusters with the MFe6S6 and M2Fe6S6 cores.
The importance of these clusters as templates for the activation and reduction
of small molecules will be evaluated.