* 8704253
* Dye Laser System for Materials and Combustion Research
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1990
* Jean Robillard, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1990
* USD 246,506.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was established
to provide support to strengthen the research environments and capabilities of
predominantly minority institutions or institutions that have substantial
minority student populations. Eligible instiuttuions must also have graduate
programs in science or programs in engineering. Funding is provided for faculty
research in fields of science and engineering supported by the Foundation and
for the acquisition of research instrumentation. New Mexico State University
will use RIMI support to acquire a dye laser system for performing materials and
combustion research. Combustion research is becoming more and more important as
a result of potentially rising fuel costs and environmental issues. Greater
understanding of the soot formation process will be sought through the
utilization of laser diagnostic techniques for the detection of flames and
practical combustion systems. Although all fuels have carbon as the major
chemical element, various soot and other carbonaceous materials should have
significantly different optical properties because of their different
composition. The differential scattering cross section and extinction cross
section of homogeneous spherical soot particles will be found by the Mie
solutions, using complex refractive index, wavelength, and the particle size
parameter. The principal investigator is well trained in optical diagnostics and
radiative transfer of flame soot. The Foundation has supported this project
because minorities will have greater opportunities to perform meritorius
combustion and materials research.