* 8704058
* Structure and Function of the Cyclic Nucleotide             Phosphodiesterases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1991
* Ronald Davis, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 02/28/1991
* USD 308,000.00

Dr. Davis proposes to isolate cDNA and genomic clones containing structural
information for the several known rat phosphodiesterases (PDEs). Two such
genomic clones have already been identified using the cloned drosophila gene as
a hybridization probe. Once the rat sequences are known, isozyme specific
regions will be selected for probes for in situ localization of mRNAs in the rat
brain, and for characterization of processed forms of the messages. High titer
antisera will also be prepared and then used immunocytochemistry of the rat
brain. Finally, mouse/hamster hybrid cell lines will be tested with the probes
to establish the chromosomal locations of the cognate mouse PDE genes. Since
their discovery by Sutherland, cyclic nucleotides have been shown to play a
central role in the regulation of cell metabolism in virtually all organisms. As
a result, the regulation of the enzymes that produce (cyclases) and degrade
(PDEs) these compounds has continued to be a subject of great importance.
Considerable evidence, both direct and indirect, points to important roles for
the different PDEs in various functions of the mammalian brain (for example,
vision and memory). As yet, however, there is little information about the
number of PDE genes, about their regulation, and about the localization and
eventual fate of their products in the brain. The proposed work will provide the
tools needed to provide this information.