* 8704177
* Aztec-period Ceramic Distribution and Exchange Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1987,10/31/1990
* Mary Hodge, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 10/31/1990
* USD 9,363.00

This grant permits Dr. Hodge to analyze ceramic mateials from 372 Valley of
Mexico sites which date to the Aztec period. She will divide the sample into
"Early" and "Late" Aztec periods and then study diagnostic decorated sherds to
compare their distribution across sites. By examining shared elements between
sites and setting these relationships into a geographical context, it should be
possible to determine patterns of site interaction and show how these changed
over time. Documentary sources describe the overall organization of the Aztec
empire but provide few details about the effects of the empire on local economic
systems. This project will investigate the organization of production and
distribution of utilitarian goods. Sites and polities participating in the same
ceramic distribution systems will be mapped and patterns of exchange delineated.
Dr. Hodge will determine the relationship of Early Aztec political boundaries to
ceramic distribution systems and evaluate changes in existing economic systems
that occurred as the valley became politically unified by the Aztec empire. This
research is important because it sheds light on the interaction between local
economic and political factors in the rise of complex civilations. It will
increase our understanding of how "simple" state-level societies develop and
function and how economic systems change as political power is centralized. The
data may help explain how some third world countries function today.