* 8704581
* Mass Transfer in Supercritical Fluid Extraction
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Peter Harriott, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1989
* USD 147,000.00

Research Summary: The objective of this project is to determine the fundamental
mechanisms governing the transport of binary and ternary mixtures of oleic and
linoleic acids and their methyl esters into supercritical carbon dioxide using a
specially designed wetted wall column. Phase equilibria of the biomaterials will
be measured using previously developed apparatuses designed for this purpose.
The gas and liquid film mass transfer coefficients will be calculated as a
function of temperature and pressure. The applicability of existing correlations
for mass transfer to conditions above the critical point of the pure solvent
will be tested. An attempt will be made to generalize the theory of mass
transfer of large bio- molecules into supercritical solvents and in expanded
liquid mixtures. Innovation/Novelty: The proposed work will be the first
rigorous attempt to measure supercritical fluid-fluid mass transfer parameters
under carefully defined conditions. In wetted wall columns, no bubbles form or
coalesce, no froth forms and mass transfer area can be controlled. Moreover,
models simulating the behavior of wetted wall columns are currently at a high
stage of sophistication, thereby giving a sound theoretical framework to
correlate the data. Although the use of wetted wall columns at low pressure in
gas absorption/stripping and liquid-liquid extraction is widespread and its
utility in obtaining fundamental data is widely recognized, this would be the
first effort to construct a workable wetted wall column for use with
supercritical solvents at pressures up to 350 atmospheres. Technical and
Practical Significance: In addition to the inherent value of the phase
equilibrium data for characterizing the behavior of biomaterials in
supercritical solvents, the proposed research will yield high quality data for
mass transfer coefficients through known interfacial mass transfer area. The
functionality of mass transfer coefficients with pressure and temperature can
then be profitably used on a theoretical as well as practical level as a guide
in determining mass transfer rates and optimal operating conditions for
supercritical fluids in packed, tray and bubble columns.