* 8704310
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of Competence for Genetic        Transformation in Streptococcus Pneumoniae                 #~
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Donald Morrison, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 04/30/1992
* USD 248,500.00

A study will be made of pneumococcal transformation, a naturally occurring,
inducible gene replacement mechanism that is relatively simple and very
efficient. Competence for genetic transformation in pneumococcus (Streptococcus
pneumoniae) occurs during a brief period of highly specialized protein
synthesis, coordinated among all cells of an actively growing culture. During a
period of approximately 10 minutes, the competent cells can transport DNA into
the cytoplasm, and replace homologous genes in the chromosome very efficiently.
Identification and cloning of the genes involved in this mechanism, and
determination of their roles, will be carried out with classical techniques,
including the efficient gene replacement provided by the natural transformation
process itself, in combination with molecular methods in vitro and recombinant
DNA cloning in E. coli, to establish the molecular genetics of the system. This
strategy uses gene disruption mutations made by insertion of a drug resistance
marker that is expressed both in E. coli and in Streptococcus. These studies
will identify, clone, and map competence genes of several phenotypic classes,
identify gene products, and characterize phenotypes of gene disruption mutants.
These clones and maps will be used as tools to study both the genetic exchange
mechanism and the control system responsible for the differentiation at
competence.