* 8704038
* A Theoretical Intermediate Energy (Nuclear/Particle) PhysicsGroup
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Warren Buck, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1990
* USD 285,000.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was established
to provide support to strengthen the research environments and capabilities of
predominantly minority institutions that have substantial minority student
populations. Eligible institution must also have graduate programs in science or
programs in engineering. Funding is provided for faculty research in fields of
science and engineering supported by the Foundation and for the acquisition of
research instrumentation. Hampton University will use RIMI support to establish
a physics research group to study theoretical intermediate energy
(Nuclear/Particle) on few-body and many-body systems. The project will focus on
the quark content in the nuclear force, nuclear physics with antiprotons, and
relativistic effects in these systems. Techniques such as field theory, coupled
channels, hybrid models, and quark exchange diagrams will be employed to explore
the long, medium, and short-range pieces of the Nucleon-Nucleon and Nucleon-
Antinucleon interactions. Phase shifts and cross sections will be obtained and
predictions with respect to the empirically obtained Nucleon-Nucleon phase
shifts and many-body cross sections will be made. The principal investigator is
a well trained theoretical physicist who has performed research at several
Federal laboratories. The Foundation has supported this project because
minorities will have opportunities to participate in meritorious theoretical
physics research at Hampton University and at the Continuous Electron Beam
Accelerator Facility (CEBAF).