* 8704153
* Strengthening of Research and Teaching in Poultry Meat      Processing Through Application of Irradiation Technology
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Damanna Rao, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1990
* USD 284,999.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was established
to provide support to strengthen the research environments and capabilities of
predominantly minority institutions or institutions that have substantial
minority student populations. Eligible institutions must also have graduate
programs in science or programs in engineering. Funding is provided for faculty
research in fields of science and engineering supported by the Foundation and
for the acquisition of research instrumentation. Alabama A&amp;M University will
use RIMI support to strengthen its poultry meat irradiation technology. Research
will be conducted on the effect of combining radurization (low dose irradiation)
with other treatments (lactic acid, whey fermented by streptococcus
thermophilus) on the nutritional, microbiological and sensory qualities of
chicken meat. In addition, the effectiveness of using the threshold dose of
Cs-137 (cobalt 60) for an identifiable irradiation flavor in the whole carcasses
will be assessed. Past and present work at the institution with whole lactic
cultures and extracts prepared from thermophilus milk and thermophilis whey
indicate that lactic cultures can be used to extend the shelf life of certain
meats. The principal investigator is well-trained in physiology and animal
nutrition and has published widely in these fields in refereed journals. The
Foundation has supported this project because more minorities will participate
in meritorious research on the irradiation of meat.