* 8704383
* Interfacial and Turbulent Mass Transfer of Monomers into    Latex Particles Stabilized with Mixed Surfactants and       Water-Soluble Polymer
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Andrew Klein, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1989
* USD 89,000.00

Research Summary: Mass transport of small organic molecules through well
characterized interfacial films, adsorbed on latex particles, will be studied.
Interfacial films of the "condensed" type, those with strong interactions
between adsorbed molecules such as the sodium hexadecyl sulfate/sodium hexadecyl
alcohol mixed surfactants or sodium lauryl sulfate at high ionic strength, will
be used. The effect of agitation on the mass transport will be also studied. The
proposed work is aimed toward the understanding of mass transport through
tightly packed molecules in the interface. Most studies have been on liquid
drops, where the transport resistance was due to the reduced liquid
recirculation near the surface of the drop. In this work the substrate is a
polymer particle and recirculation effects are absent. The mass transport
resistance must than depend on the barrier properties of the interfacial film.
Technical Impact: In commercial latex manufacture, colloid stabilization is
often based on mixed stabilizers, ionic/nonionic surfactant mixtures, which
often lead to interfacial layers of tightly packed molecules. Information about
the mass transport through such a phase in the turbulent agitation regime is
needed for the effective kinetic modeling of commercial reactions. Such
information is currently not available. This work will yield some of this
missing information.