* 8704288
* Momentum Distributions in Quantum Liquids                   (Materials Research)
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Paul Sokol, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* E. Diane Ruffner
* 07/31/1988
* USD 41,500.00

The measurement of atomic momentum distributions can provide detailed
microscopic information on the single particle density matrix. The quantum
liquids, helium three and helium four, provide an interesting and technically
easy system in which to study the momentum distribution. They are an extreme
example of liquids where both quantum zero point motion and quantum statistics
dominate the behavior. The bulk liquids have been extensively studied
theoretically. Calculations have also been made for the mixed Boson-Fermion
system of helium three-helium four. Recently, the properties of liquid helium
three and helium four in confined geometries have received considerable
attention. The restricted geometries extend the liquid phase well into the
region where the bulk solid is stable. Surface solid layers play an important
role, especially in helium three where a ferromagnet transition has been
observed in the surface solid layer. Professor Sokol proposes to use high energy
inelastic neutron scattering to study the properties of the momentum
distribution in liquid helium four, helium three, helium three- helium four
mixtures, and in restricted geometries. Measurements of the width of the
momentum distribution will be used to study the local environment of the
particles as a function of temperature and pressure. For restricted geometries
the momentum distribution can be used to extract information on the molecules
bound to the surface as well. Work will be carried out using existing
spectrometers at Argonne National Laboratory and Rutherford Appleton Laboratory,
in the United Kingdom, as well as a newly constructed dedicated spectrometer at
Argonne.