* 8704624
* Variable Pressure and Temperature NMR Studies of Transition Metal Complexes (Chemistry)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* John Hunt, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 12/31/1990
* USD 223,048.00

Studies of the effects of high pressures on the rates of chemical reactions
reveal information about reaction mechanisms which cannot be obtained in any
other way. In particular, such experiments provide insight into the expansions
and contractions which molecules must undergo in order to react. However, such
experiments are very difficult and require specialized equipment available at
only a small number of universities. The Principal Investigators are the only
group in the United States applying such techniques to the study of electron
transfer reactions. Volume of activation studies on outer-sphere electron
transfer reactions will be continued and expanded. It is planned to measure
molar volumes in non-aqueous solvents in addition to doing high pressure NMR
research. The prime goal is to obtain volume of activation values as an aid in
determining reaction mechanisms and testing of theories for the kinetic
behavior. In addition, it is planned to look at solvent exchange kinetics and
equilibria in mixed solvent and with mixed ligand systems, e.g. Co(II) complexes
with HMPA in HMPA, or Co(II) complexes in water-methanol and water-ammonia
mixtures. These measurements will be done at various pressures and temperatures.
Besides kinetic data, information on solution species and structures will be
obtained.