* 8704342
* ASM Conference on DNA Replication and Mutagenesis,          November 12-18, l987, Marco Island, FL
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1988
* Robb Moses, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 03/31/1988
* USD 4,000.00

This meeting will bring together workers in the areas of DNA replication and
mutagenesis for a combined meeting focusing on the events of DNA replication
which effect mutagenic events. The area of DNA replication is rapidly advancing
with increasing definition of the proteins required for initiation and
elongation. At the same time, studies in mutagenesis are becoming defined at the
molecular level with accumulation of a large mass of data with regard to the
spectra of mutagenesis and the contributions of the host cell to mutagenesis.
Recent evidence from several laboratories implicates specific replication events
in mutagenesis and recently developed techniques allow the analysis of large
numbers of transfecting or chromosomal mutations. It is the intent of this
meeting to open new contacts between investigators. This meeting is not part of
a continuing series, but has been designed to satisfy a defined need. We
anticipate that the meeting will be attended by 200-250 outstanding individuals
from around the world. Poster sessions will provide an opportunity for all
investigators to present recent work in great detail. Discussion leaders and
speakers will be drawn from outstanding members of the research community, but a
distinct effort will be made to include junior investigators and those with
recent striking findings in the formal presentations. Session chairman will be
such outstanding scientists as Arthur Kornberg (Stanford), Charles Richardson
(Harvard Med. School), Thomas Lindahl (ICRF, London), Paul Modrich (Duke U. Med.
School), Harrison Echols (Berkeley), Jeffrey Miller (UCLA), and Peter Herrlich
(Karlsruhe). The sessions will cover: the basic enzymology of DNA replication,
including the components of the replicative apparatus; DNA replication systems,
including both prokaryotic and eukaryotic studies; mechanisms of
misincorporation, including errors by the synthesis apparatus as well as adduct
formation; the genetic control of mutagenesis, with particular attention to
mismatch repair; DNA polymerase functions in mutagenesis; damage-directed
mutagenesis, with attention to the spectrum seen in transfecting and chromosomal
genes; and induced mutagenesis, with updating on eukaryotic systems. The impact
of this meeting should have long term affects on the research in the areas of
DNA replication and damage, DNA repair, mutagenesis and cellular regulation of
gene expression.