* 8704443
* Collaborative Research on the Relationship between Income   Tax Auditing and Compliance
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1990
* Michael Graetz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 08/31/1990
* USD 50,169.00

Tax noncompliance is widely recognized to be an extremely serious problem.
Recent estimates suggest that at least $90 billion of taxable income goes
unreported annually--an average of 10 to 15 percent of total taxable income.
Concern about declining tax compliance has produced an outburst of policy and
academic writing, but both the causes and the appropriate responses remain
controversial. Early tax compliance literature treated tax compliance as a
"portfolio problem," deriving rules for optimal consumption of the "risky asset"
(unreported income) under the assumption that the probability of detection is
fixed. These models produced ambiguous results. More recent theoretical
innovations have attempted to move out of the decision-theoretic framework to a
principal-agent problem and game-theoretic model. In these approaches the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) is allowed to act strategically, conditioning its
audit rules on the information it receives from taxpayers. These interactive
models, developed by Wilde, Reinganum and Graetz under a previous NSF grant,
yield predictions about the nature of the equilibrium audit rule used by the IRS
and the equilibrium reporting rule used by taxpayers. The purpose of this
research is to test a game-theoretic model and to develop empirical evidence on
the relationship between audits and compliance. Three distinct data sets are
analyzed: (a) a cross-section data set related to 1969 individual Federal Income
Tax returns, which was assembled by the IRS in the seventies; (b) a cross-
section, time series data set related to state-level variables for the period
1969-1985; and (c) a data set related to 1979 TCMP individual return items,
which was recently assembled by the IRS. The major question to be addressed is
whether, and in what fashion, audit rates respond interactively to the
compliance behavior of taxpayers. The introduction of IRS as a strategic actor
is considered to be a significant improvement in the economic theory of law
enforcement generally. The behavioral framework of tax non- compliance makes it
an especially appropriate case for an empirical test of the theoretical
construct that explicitly takes into account the interactions and responses of
the cognizant law enforcement agency. The research is of substantial scientific
significance in that it promises not only to offer insights on an important
policy issue but also to add powerfully to fundamental knowledge of the
conditions that engender conformance to law.