* 8704938
* Studies of the Structure, Phase Transitions, and Dynamics ofAdsorbed Monolayers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1987,09/30/1990
* Haskell Taub, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 09/30/1990
* USD 213,800.00

Experiments which utilize two complementary scattering techniques will be used
to address a variety of problems of current interest in surface physics. These
include: 1) the study of novel structures in molecular monolayers and the
determination of the interactions which stabilize them; 2) the nature of
collective vibrational excitations in quasi two- dimensional (2D) molecular
solids; and 3) the study of phase transitions in adsorbed monolayers which
either do not occur in bulk or which may be more tractable theoretically in 2D.
The experiments will employ inelastic neutron scattering to investigate film
dynamics and both elastic neutron diffraction and synchrotron x-ray scattering
to probe film structure. In designing the experiments, considerable effort has
been made to match the probe to the system of interest and to utilize the best
facilities available in the United States. The latter include a neutron
diffractometer equipped with a multidetector-data acquisition system at the
University of Missouri Research Reactor Facility, state-of-the-art triple-axis
spectrometers at Brookhaven National Laboratory, and a specially designed ultra-
high vacuum sample chamber to be used at the x-ray beamline at the National
Synchrotron Light Source. Of particular interest will be to apply this
combination of probes to adsorbed hydrocarbon whose monolayer structure is
crucial to a fundamental understanding of catalysis, lubrication and adhesion.