* 8704466
* Proximate Causes of Parental Desertion
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* Douglas Mock, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 12/31/1988
* USD 16,989.00

In many kinds of animals, parental care is essential for the survival of newborn
progeny, yet it is sometimes terminated by the parent long before the offspring
reach full independence. The ecological causes for such desertion are diverse,
but center on the evolutionary principle of maximizing reproductive success. In
other words, parents may be able to raise more young in the long run by
truncating investment when the cause is already lost (for example, during a
drought, if the food base deteriorates dramatically). Recent field studies of
birds (egrets and herons) have identified another condition under which parents
appear to abandon already-hatched young. When brood size drops from three or
four chicks to just one surviving nestling, parents may forsake it and use the
remainder of the summer breeding season to renest, perhaps thereby producing a
larger brood. The signal for such a switch in parental behavior is presumably
the number of chicks in the nest. This idea has been supported by observational
data on two species, but has not been tested experimentally. The present study
aims to fill that void with a set of complementary field experiments, using an
extremely common species (the cattle egret). In the first experiment, brood size
will be artificially reduced from three chicks to just one, by transferring the
newly hatched nestmates to undersized broods nearby, where they are accepted
readily. Controls will consist of broods whose young are handled the same
amount, but then returned to their own nest. Dr. Mock predicts that parents will
desert the singletons more frequently than the control broods. In order to
explore whether this effect decreases as the remaining amount of breeding season
wanes, the first experiment will be run three times throughout the nesting
period, with the prediction that the later singletons are less likely to be
abandoned than those occurring early in the season. If so, parents would have to
take both number of chicks and time of season into account. The final experiment
involves the behavior of the nestlings themselves. In this and related species,
chicks hatch at different times, and the slightly older and larger nestlings
persecute their younger siblings, even to the point of killing them. If becoming
a singleton is a perilous condition (increasing the risk of parental desertion),
then chicks may reduce their rate of fighting siblings when brood size drops
from three to two. This will be tested by removing the youngest of three chicks
from nests kept under continuous observation and then replacing it three days
later. If aggression depends on the number of nestmates, its frequency should
dip when only two chicks are present, but return to baseline levels when the
full brood is restored.