* 8704954
* Sequential Stochastic Decision Processes II
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* None   DATA NOT AVAILABLE, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/1990
* USD 52,000.00

The project described in this proposal consists of five research issues in the
general area of Sequential Stochastic Decision Processes. Four of the issues
focus on two established lines of research in Markov Decision Processes and
Sequential Stochastic Games, respectively. For the former class of models an
approach to the analysis of the "risk- sensitive" versions of these models is
suggested. For the latter class, the project focusses on the issues of
characterization and computation of "stationary equilibrium strategies". For
both classes of models, successful resolution of these research issues would be
likely to increase their appeal as modeling tools in applications. Furthermore,
the first research issue proposes a method of embedding the famous "Traveling
Salesman Problem" in an appropriately constructed (and then perturbed) Markov
Decision Process. It is expected that this new way of viewing the traveling
Salesman Problem will lead to useful computational procedures and theoretical
insights. An important objective of this project is the demonstration that all
of the above research issues can be analyzed with the help of a conceptually
unified approach. Namely, by formulating the respective subproblems as
mathematical programs which in turn should be solved by a combination of
mathematical programming techniques, and the relevant dynamic programming/game
theoretic techniques. This research concerns certain types of sequential
stochastic decision processes: such processes are used in modeling a wide
variety of engineering problems in manufacturing, power systems and economics.
An objective of this project is to show that numerous research issues associated
with sequential stochastic decision processes can be analyzed by formulating
them as mathematical programs. It is expected that this research will lead to
better algorithms for solving these problems.