* 8704602
* Blue Light Photoreceptors in Phycomyces
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1993
* Edward Lipson, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* M.  Paige
* 06/30/1993
* USD 214,000.00

The objective of this research project is to identify and isolate molecules
that serve as blue-light photoreceptors in the fungus Phycomyces. Special
attention will be given to phototropism mutants (genes madA to madH) including
those (madB and madC) with defective photorecptor(s). Recent spectrophotometric
and biochemical analyses have revealed modifications in the photorecptor
mutants, notably light-induced absorbance changes (LIAC) with specific
alterations in madC mutants. LIAC will be measured in vivo and in vitro and will
serve as a spectroscopic assay for the photoreceptor(s). Biochemical
characterization and purification of the photoreceptor(s) will employ two-
dimensionl gel electrophoresis and fast protein liquid chromatorgraphy (FPLC) in
conjunction with spectroscopic and genetic assays. Flavoproteins will receive
special consideration as probable candidates for blue light photoreceptors.
Electrophoresis and chromatography will also be applied to proteins found to be
altered in other behavioral mutants (madA, madB, and madE). Additional mutants
will be sought and incorporated in the project. Although blue-light responses
are widespread among plants, funji, and other organisms, the photoreceptor
molecules remain to be identified. Phycomyces offers special advantages, in view
of its unmatched sensitivity and the availability of behavioral mutants.
Identification of photoreceptors in Phycomyces will greatly promote the
understanding of photosensory transduction in connection with its various light
responses (phototropism, light- growth response, photocarotenogenesis, and
photodifferentiation). The results on Phycomyces should lead the way to
identification of blue light photoreceptors in other organisms.