* 8704992
* REU:  Ecology and Evolution of Social Behavior
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1991
* Walter Koenig, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 03/31/1991
* USD 58,740.00

This project seeks to understand the ecological basis of social behavior by
focusing on a species of bird common in the Western United States with an
extremely unusual social organization, the Acorn Woodpecker. This species lives
in family groups of up to 15 individuals of both sexes and all ages; all birds
in a group share in defending the territory and raising young. The study
population consists of about 120 birds, the majority of which are individually
color-marked, and has been going on continuously since 1971. Thus, the project
allows the unique opportunity to obtain basic data on long-term demographic
consequences of group living. It also allows an investigation of some of the
specific adaptations to group living shown by this species as well as the
advantages and disadvantages of their unusual social organization. In
particular, Dr. Koenig will be exploring the consequences of group living using
time-activity budgets, the mechanisms of brood reduction, and the role of vocal
behavior in group integration. Data acquired by the basic research being done as
part of this project will provide new information toward the understanding of
the evolution of social behavior. In particular, it will uncover more about both
the short-term and long-term consequences of group living and of altruistic
behaviors, many of which are shown by this species.