* 8704576
* Performance Evaluation of Parallel Logic Programming        Paradigms (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Michael Flynn, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce
* 01/31/1989
* USD 75,898.00

A shared memory multiprocessor testbed will be built for measuring parallel
logic programming language architectures. The purpose of developing the testbed
is to compare several parallel implementations of logic programming languages to
determine which paradigm offers greater cost-effective performance. An equally
important goal is the determination of the memory characteristics of, and memory
designs suitable for those languages. The testbed, enabling empirical
measurement of benchmark performance, will be composed of architecture emulators
and memory simulators running on a host multiprocessor. Processor performance is
estimated as required shared memory bandwidth because high speed processors are
ultimately limited by memory bandwidth and architectures that require less
bandwidth have greater potential for high performance. Memory performance
statistics to be collected include local cache miss ratio, traffic ratio,
broadcast traffic (necessary to retain consistency between caches). This
methodology is most suited for ongoing processor design efforts, like the PIM
project at ICOT, because experimental memory designs can be quickly described,
tested and results compared with other models. This project is a collaborative
effort with the Japanese Institute for New Generation Computer Technology (ICOT)
and funded under the NSF/ICOT Visitors Program.