* 8704677
* Molecular Aspects of Ethylene-Regulated Gene Expression     in Phaseolus
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* John Gaynor, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* M.  Paige
* 02/28/1991
* USD 205,000.00

Molecular Aspects of Ethylene-Regulated Gene Expression in Phaseolus: The
objectives of this project are two-fold: 1) to characterize the hormonal
regulation of the genomic clones of chitinase from bean (Phaseolus vulgaris);
and 2) to map and define the ethylene sensitive elements (i.e., promoter) of
these clones. The phytohormone ethylene has long been known to exert powerful
effects on physiological and developmental processes in higher plants. The
chitinase gene family from Phaseolus is used as a paradigm for ethylene
regulated gene expression in higher plants. Under normal growth conditions, when
ethylene levels are low, chitinase expression is minimal; when ethylene levels
are high, however, such as when plants are subjected to physical or biological
stresses, or by normal developmental processes connected with aging or
senescence, the level of chitinase expression can increase as much as 75- to
100-fold over controls. The exact role of chitinase in the physiology and
biochemistry of the plant is unknown. Chitin is, however, a major component of
fungal cell walls and insect exoskeletons and, thus, it has been postulated to
have a protective function. Using cDNA clones of chitinase isolated from
Phaseolus vulgaris, this agronomically important gene family will be
characterized. Since ethylene is intimately involved in numerous processes in
the normal growth and development of higher plants, knowledge of how vanishingly
small amounts of ethylene affect gene transcription may yield insights into the
molecular aspects of senescence, fruit ripening, wound response, as well as the
mechanism(s) of response to stress and pathogen attack. Considering the
magnitude of crop losses each year by pathogenic fungi and insect pests,
chitinase stands out as an excellent candidate for genetic transfer to plants
with the possible aim of incresing resistance to chitinous pathogens. Likewise,
further characterization of the putative ethylene promoter could be of
immeasurable practical use for regulating the expression of foreign genes at
times of high stress.