* 8704126
* Amino Acid Substitutions Affecting in Vivo Folding          Intermediates of the Thermostable P22 Tailspike Protein
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Jonathan King, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1991
* USD 270,000.00

Some of the amino acid interactions critical for determining three dimensional
protein structure must somehow direct the conformation of folding intermediates.
The thermostable tailspike endorhamnosidase of phage P22 has a thermolabile
early intermediate in its folding and subunit association pathway. Over 100
temperature sensitive folding mutations have been isolated which either further
destabilize the thermolabile intermediate, or otherwise alter early kinetic
steps. Many of the substitutions of glycines and hydrophilic residues are at the
surface of the native structure, probably associated with surface turns. Since
tailspike secondary structure is over 50% beta-sheet/turn, these are probably
beta turns, and the mutations identify residues influencing their formation. The
specific objectives of the award are to: 1) Identify the sites and amino acid
substitutions for the remainder of the tsf mutations; 2) For those substitutions
altering charge, determine which are at the surface and therefore turn
candidates, and analyze the folding defect in these mutants; 3) Isolate second
site suppressors of these defects, to determine whether the interacting residues
are local or distant in the chain; 4) Isolate and characterize the protrimer
intermediate from wild type and mutant infected cells; 5) Isolate and
characterize the aggregated chains that accumulate at high temperature as a
means of investigating the conformation of the early intermediate from which it
forms; 6) Purify tsf mutant and tsf/suppressor-tsf double mutant proteins for
collaborative X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, in vitro refolding, and
differential scanning calorimetry studies.