* 8704948
* Behavior of Repaired Masonry Infilled RC Frames
* O/D,OISE
* 03/31/1988,03/31/1991
* Daniel Abrams, Institute for Testing and Res in Materials & Structures (ZRMK)
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/31/1991
* USD 0.00

The principal objective of this U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research project in
earthquake engineering between Roko Zarnic of the Boal Institute for Structures
and Earthquake Engineering in Ljubljana and Daniel P. Abrams, Mete Sozen of the
University of Illinois is to study the behavior of structures composed of
repaired and/or strengthened reinforced concrete frames with masonry infills.
Many existing buildings in the United States have masonry infilled walls.
Understanding the behavior of such frames when under stress and heavy loading is
of particular importance to the development of earthquake resistant masonry
structures and reinforced concrete structural systems. Through complementary
abilities and facilities, the U.S. and Yugoslav investigators expect to develop
a simple analytical method for determining possible earthquake damage and for
analyzing structural behavior. This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav
Joint Board on Cooperation in Science and Technology and is supported through a
joint fund consisting of matching contributions from the U.S. and Yugoslav
governments. The U.S. contribution is provided annually by the Department of
State. No NSF funds are involved. The grants are composed principally of
Yugolsav dinars and made to the principal Yugoslav institute. Funds include
travel for U.S. scientists to Yugoslavia and a modest dollar allowance for
Yugoslav scientists' living expenses in the U.S.