* 8704377
* Inferential Reasoning and the Processing of Evidence by Advocates and Fact-Finders
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* David Schum, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 12/31/1989
* USD 90,563.00

How masses of complex evidence in the legal system are generated and used
effectively in the formulation and structuring of argument and in the process of
drawing conclusions is not well understood. This is partly because these
processes involve discovery, proof, deliberation, and choice which can entail
creative or imaginative reasoning. Yet illuminating these processes is
fundamental to general knowledge of human inferential reasoning and to a
specific understanding of the behavior of advocates and fact-finders in law. Dr.
Schum's research on the inferential use of evidence involves building upon and
integrating research in multiple fields--legal theory, statistics, psychology,
and decision analysis. The aim of Dr. Schum's research is to enhance our
understanding of evidence-marshalling and argument-structuring theory and to
apply this theory to specific inferential and evidential issues. While attending
to fact-finding, of particular interest in this research is the important task
of structuring arguments from a mass of evidence in preparation for presentation
and defense at trial. His specific theoretical objectives involve study of ways
of integrating various forms of argument structuring activity and study of the
ways in which such activity can facilitate the process of discovery, the
recognition of evidential subtleties, and the assessment of the probative weight
or value of evidence. His methods of study incorporate the development and use
of a computer-based system to aid in the analyses of large collections of
evidence. Also, the computer-assisted methodology should permit sorting out of
the structural and temporal elements involved in integrating, weighing,
sequencing, and presenting evidence. The results of the research should be
relevant to efforts to design computer-based systems for assisting the research,
practice, and teaching of discovery-related and other inferential tasks.