* 8704684
* Mathematical Sciences: Pure and Applied Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Joel Pincus, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 12/31/1990
* USD 119,707.00

Operator theory is a central discipline in Modern Analysis. Its origins lie in
the study of mathematical physics and partial differential equations in the
early twentieth century. At the same time, it was seen that numerous physical
problems in the theory of equilibria, vibration, quantum theory, etc. could be
studied productively via the integral equations that model the phenomena. So it
has been, that from the fertile minds of Hilbert, von Neumann, and other giants
that the subject of operator theory has grown to a central position in such
investigations, and in the core mathematics as well. At the heart of this
methodology is the deep investigation of the spectrum of an operator. For self-
adjoint or normal operators, this theory is now a standard technique throughout
analysis, and the spectral theorem provides the necessary building blocks for
all such operators. The current frontier, therefore, in the study of the
structure of operators is in the non-normal theory. At this frontier, Professor
Pincus is a world leader with an established reputation for deep, conceptualy
innovative fundamental, interdisciplinary work. In his early research career,
while at Brookhaven Laboratories, Professor Pincus pioneered new ideas and
techniques, both theoretical and computational, in medical tomography. Notably,
his use of the Radon transforms for image reconstruction appears to have been
the precursor of the more well known work of others, for example the Nobel prize
work of Cormack. Subsequently, he began his investigation of the principal
function, which has been one of the main themes of his career in operator
theory. His theory of the principal function, defined on the spectrum of certain
operators, is a broad extension of the ordinary index. This new object has its
own topological and stability properties. His penetrating investigations, in
part in collaboration with his students and others, have established connections
between the principal functions and the distribution of zeroes of functions
associated with ergodic flows, the structure of subnormal operators, and the
theory of closed currents in the study of function algebras. These geometric
measure theory techniques have recently led Professor Pincus to introduce a new
index associated with the generated operator algebras. This new index has
important properties connected with the Fredholm spectrum and its behavior on
singular subvarieties. The investigation of this theory is continued in the
current proposal. Its focus is on the systematic introduction of techniques from
algebraic geometry into operator theory.