* 8704625
* The Joint Effects of Herbivory and Competition Upon         Plant Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Norma Fowler, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 12/31/1991
* USD 235,367.00

This proposal by Dr. Norma Fowler of the University of Texas, Austin is to
examine the combined influences of grazing and interplant competition on plant
community structure. The effects of grazing upon plants are not limited to the
effects of defoliation, but include the effects of trampling, and urine and dung
deposition. Investigation of these secondary effects will not be done.
Initially, the investigation will concentrate upon the effects of defoliation.
However, each of the field experiments will include both a (fenced) clipping
treatment and an (unfenced) grazing treatment as well as a (fenced) control;
differences between the clipping and grazing treatments may be due to these
secondary effects, or perhaps to differentiate between mechanical clipping and
the action of an animal's jaw. An absence of differences between the clipping
and grazing treatments will support the null hypothesis that in this system the
effects of grazing are largely limited to the direct effects of tissue removal.
A clipping treatment will be included in these experiments, not only to test
this hypothesis, but also because the effects of grazing are also a function of
animal preferences for plants of different species, sizes, physiological and
developmental states, surrounding vegetation, and so on. An apparent interaction
effect between competition and defoliation can arise from the effects of
preference, when none is actually present. Estimates of preference will be made
and the results used to indicate appropriate additional experimental treatments.
This work has much intrinsic, ecological interests, but its immediate practical
value is in its importance for understanding plant community maintenance,
especially in over-grazing situations in nutrient poor prairies, savannas, etc.