* 8704136
* Communications and T-Cell Design for the FFP Machine:       A Cooperative Research Project with the University of       North Carolina.
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Charles Molnar, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Michael Foster
* 12/31/1988
* USD 144,068.00

The Formal Functional Programming (FFP) machine is a novel computer architecture
that has the potential of combining high performance with programming ease and
flexibility. It is a direct implementation of a reduction model of computation.
Program decomposition, task allocation, synchronization and scheduling are
efficiently automated in the FFP machine, and therefore are removed from the
programmer's concern. The primary objective of this research is to design the
asynchronous T- cell component of the FFP machine, and to coordinate the
specification and design of parts of the system. The secondary objectives are to
use the experience of collaborating on the FFP machine design to challenge the
asynchronous methodology as well as to help refine it, and to apply the FFP
machine to scientific problem solving. This is a collaborative effort with Gyula
Mago of the University of North Carolina. The program director considers the FFP
machine to be a truly novel computer. Dr. Molnar is a recognized expert in
asynchronous logic, and is uniquely qualified to design and build the T-cells
that are essential to the success of this combined research effort. The program
director strongly recommends funding this proposal.