* 8704217
* US-Ireland Cooperative Science: An Investigation Into FiniteDeformation of Solids
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1987,10/31/1992
* Kumbakonam Rajagopal, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 10/31/1992
* USD 10,450.00

Objective: In most technical applications wherein solids undergo large
deformations, the deformation is primarily non-homogeneous, accompanied by
changes in material symmetry and the development of residual stresses and
permanent deformations. An understanding of the nature of the changes in
material symmetry and the extent of the residual stresses can play a great role
in the design and performance of manufactured products. To date the changes in
material symmetry and the induced anisotropies due to non-homogeneous
deformations, as well as the basic mechanics of non-homogeneous deformations of
non-linearly elastic materials, are not well understood. In this proposal the
principal investigator Dr. K.R. Rajagopol outlines a detailed study of non-
homogeneous deformations of non-linearly elastic materials. He plans to
determine the class of constitutive equations for which certain deformations are
maintainable. He will also investigate the possible universal solutions for
specific constitutive equations. A related question which will be studied is the
stability of such solutions. In addition a study of the changes in material
symmetry due to the application of non-homogeneous deformations will be made.
Dr. Rajagopal will collaborate in this research with Professor M. Hayes,
Department of Mathematical Physics, University College, Dublin. Dr. Hayes
expertise in the field of non-linear elasticity will contribute greatly to the
success of this joint project. Relevance: It is the objective of the
U.S.-Ireland Cooperative Science Program to promote mutually beneficial research
cooperation and to enable U.S. scientists to take advantage of special research
opportunities. This award fulfills that objective by enabling Dr. K.R. Rajagopal
to spend two years in collaboration with Irish scientists with complementary
expertise. Merit: There is an excellent prospect that the proposed research will
result in a significant contribution to scientific knowledge. The principal
investigator is a respected, productive scientist, who will be working with
another international expert in this field. The work plan is sound and the
budget is reasonable. Funding: This award will not duplicate other funding.