* 8704266
* Structure-Function Studies on Phytochrome
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1993
* J. Clark Lagarias, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1993
* USD 349,100.00

Structure-Function Studies on Phytochrome: Light perception by phytochrome
initiates many developmental and physiological responses in green plants.
Research outlined in this proposal will provide new information regarding both
phytochrome structure and the primary signal transduction process(es) initiated
by phytochrome photoactivation in both a higher plant and a green alga. Studies
on both phytochromes will include a) delineation of regions of light-induced
conformational changes in the protein moiety, b) characterization of conserved
regions of primary structure between the higher plant and algal phytochromes and
c) elucidation of structural features which confer heterogeneity to the purified
photoreceptor. With regard to the primary function of phytochrome in plant
cells, the hypothesis that phytochrome is a protein kinase or is functionally
associated with a protein kinase, will be tested. These studies will include a)
delineation of the sites and stoichiometry of ATP (or other nucleotide) binding
on phytochrome, b) demonstration whether the kinase co-purifies with phytochrome
and c) determination whether phytochrome photoactivation alters protein
phosphorylation of endogenous or exogenous substrates both in vivo and in vitro.
In vivo and in vitro substrates for the "phytochrome-associated" protein kinase
will be compared. Environmental photoperception by phytochrome is essential to
optimal growth and development of plants. In the natural environment, plants are
exposed to extremes in light intensity and spectral quality. Phytochrome serves
as a molecular sensor of such changes by modulating the state of development of
the plant via changes in gene expression (cf. induction of seed germination or
flowering) as well as influencing growth rate or chloroplast orientation to
optimize light capture for photosynthesis. The experiments outlined in this
proposal will provide new information regarding both phytochrome structure and
the components of the signal transduction initiated by phytochrome
photoactivation. It is anticipated that an understanding of the phytochrome-
mediated signal transduction process at a molecular level will foster new
approaches to improve plant productivity using molecular genetic and biochemical
tools.