* 8704669
* Stochastic Economic Variables Having Equilibria as Simple   Attractors
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Clive Granger, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 01/31/1990
* USD 102,305.00

This project makes an important contribution to the statistical theory
concerning the analysis of economic time series data. Traditionally, models
considered by time series analysts have concentrated on a few important economic
variables and incorporated complicated lag structures of those variables.
Structure of the economy was inferred from the data by examining the way the
economy evolved and changed through time. This is in contrast to another form of
economic modelling, which includes many variables in a sharply specified
mathematical structure consisting of many equations. Both techniques have their
advantages and disadvantages, and this project is part of an ongoing attempt to
meld the two modelling strategies into a single coherent, and statistically
consistent framework. Much empirical research in macroeconomics has shown that
economic time series data typically include non-stationary processes such as
trends. Different data series, for example national income data, GNP data, and
price series, might include a common trend or tendency to grow over time. Thus
these data are statistically linked with each other in the long run. To gain any
meaningful insight into the actual movements of the variables in the economy,
one must purge the data of the influence of non-stationary processes. In the
past, achieving stationarity has been especially difficult if an analytical
model included several data series each containing similar growth tendencies.
Professor Granger has developed a statistical characterization of time series
known as co-integration in which a linear combination of data series is itself
stationary. This project makes a significant contribution to the existing
literature in that it extends the idea of co-integration of time series to allow
for nonlinear common trends, and offers an economic interpretation of data
fluctuations as movements away from economic equilibrium. For example the price
of an agricultural product such as tomatoes will vary from one section of the
country to another, but will not vary a great deal, at least not in the long
run. If the price of a product differs greatly from one location to another,
market forces will act to eliminate the price disparities and reach an
equilibrium. Professor Granger empirically identifies the equilibrium concept as
a point to which the data in the series seem to gravitate. This point is known
as an attractor, and the task of the econometrician is to isolate possible
attractors in a group of data sets that the economic theory has suggested should
be considered in the analysis and to confirm their importance. This work
significantly increases the strength of the bond between economic theory and
empirical analysis.