* 8705888
* Equipment for the University of Michigan Biological Station
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* James Teeri, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 12/31/1988
* USD 69,049.00

The University of Michigan Biological Station (UMBS) has a long history of
research and teaching. Ecological studies, limnological in particular, have been
in progress since the Station was founded in 1909. Long-term experiments and
data bases form a unique background to more detailed experimental studies of
nutrient dynamics, plant ecology, soil ecology, ecological genetics, and plant-
animal interactions. These areas of study have been hampered in the past by the
lack of certain facilities at the UMBS. This project will provide funds for a
CHN analyzer, electrobalance and environmental chambers for the station. The
availability of a CHN analyzer (and the associated electrobalance) will make
possible accurate measurements of the amounts of carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen
in a wide array of biological samples, which is critical for both modern
descriptive work as well as experimental studies. In addition, a wide variety of
ecological studies which depend upon having access to controlled environmental
chambers will be possible with the added facilities. These additions to the
Station's facilities will allow a variety of experimental approaches which past
researchers simply could not utilize. Combining such improved analytical
capabilities with the Station's historical records will greatly improve our
understanding of ecological and evolutionary processes. The role of soil
nutrients in affecting plant growth and how plants respond, in particular, to
low-nutrient sutuations will be amenable to investigation, as well as studies of
the genetics of how plants utilize available nutrients. Simultaneous
measurements of carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen in samples from both terrestrial
and aquatic environments will lead to more accurate descriptions of nutrient
cycles in those environments. In addition, this will allow experimental studies
of the role of such cycles in the growth of algae, higher plants, fungi, and
bacteria as well as the effects of such organisms on the population dynamics of
animals.