* 8705483
* The Evolution and Maintenance of Mutualism Between          Lycaenid Butterflies and Ants
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Martin Kreitman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Althea Ball
* 01/31/1991
* USD 181,786.00

Dr. Naomi Pierce of Princeton University proposes an intriguing approach to
quantifying various selection forces that drive the evolution of mutalisms in
living organisms. This research will identify selective forces shaping the
evolution of mutualism between lycaenid larvae and ants, and behavioral and
biochemical mechanisms maintaining the association. The first part of the
project will measure the benefits that ants (Iridomyremes anceps and I.
rufoniger) receive from tending larvae of Jalmenus evagoras in terms of colony
growth rate and investment into reproductive brood. It will also investigate the
importance of individual variation in attractiveness to ants of larvae of J.
evagoras that live in aggregations. The second part of the project will consider
some of the causal mechanisms maintaining the association by first testing the
oviposition behavior of females of J. evagoras on host plants that vary in their
nitrogen content. The main emphasis of this side of the research, however, will
be in using ant bioassays and biochemical analyses to learn more about the
nature of the secretions of lycaenid larvae. Of particular interest will be
identifying the chemical cues involved in species specific recognition between
larvae and their attendant ants. To do this, Dr. Pierce will compare the
secretions of each species in the genus that associates with a particular
species of ant. She will also determine whether the amino acid profiles secreted
by different species of Jalmenus reflect the dietary preferences of their
attendant ants. And finally, she will examine whether the epidermal secretions
of lycaenid larvae mimic in any way the surface secretions of the brood of their
attendant ants. These studies should add significantly to our understanding of
interdependent organism associations and to our perspective on general
evolution.