* 8705974
* A New Separation Process for Biotechnological Products:     Interfacial Condensation in Aqueous Bi-Phasic Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1987,06/30/1988
* ChoKyun Rha, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1988
* USD 29,994.00

Separation is an area of biotechnology where both fundamental and developmental
research are most needed. The products that modern biotechnology can produce
often are limited by the effectiveness of the separation process. Separation is
a major issue when biological activity, purity, and safety are of prime concern.
Yet today, the general separation processes commonly used in biotechnology are
those that are taken directly from the separation of organic and inorganic
materials that are not as sensitive or complex as biological materials.
Consequently, when used for the latter, these processes are slow, tedious, and
generally ineffective. Research separation in the biochemical area is frequently
based on modification of and minor improvements in the conventional processes,
with little regard for the sensitive nature of biological materials. To avoid
these, a novel technique known as "interfacial condensation" will be examined in
this study for protein purification. This involves the use of two aqueous phases
(with polymers and salts) to precipitate the proteins at the interface (i.e.,
between the two phases). Separation by interfacial condensation promises to: o
reduce or eliminate further concentration steps because of higher concentration
of products and smaller volume of associated liquid; o simplify recovery of
products; the interface can be recovered by draining or decanting aqueous
phases; o provide additional purification effects with the combined exclusion
and salting-out effects of two phases; and o simplify recycling or removal of
aqueous polymers and salts.