* 8705210
* Collaberative Research:  Ultimate Causation of Insect Drift:An Evaluation of Active and Passive Models
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* David Allan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jethro Moorefield
* 07/31/1991
* USD 229,685.00

Insects living on or within the substrate of streams "drift" downstream in
substantial numbers and with a pronounced nocturnal rhythm. Insect drift is one
of the unique properties of running waters and, despite numerous studies, it
remains both a challenge and a puzzle to lotic ecologists. Recent developments
of concepts and techniques now allow for a concerted attack on the issues of why
organisms drift, to what degree drift entry is active vs. passive, and the
relative influence of biotic vs. abiotic causes. This research is directed
toward the goal of understanding insect drift within the context of foraging
events and risk of predation. Nocturnality has been satisfactorily explained by
the risk of predation hypothesis. Two explanations exist for why drift occurs:
as the passive and accidental consequence of nocturnal foraging activity, or as
an active and purposeful process of habitat search/dispersal, related to
resource depletion. While the passive model is widely accepted, evidence from
recent work documents weaknesses in the passive mechanism and a significant role
for an active mechanism. This research uses a combination of field sampling and
laboratory and field experiments to address five objectives that test multiple
hypotheses concerning the mechanism(s) underlying drift behavior. Their
completion should lead to an improved understanding of the relative
contributions of active and passive explanations of downstream drift, which
remains one of the major, unresolved issues in river ecology.