* 8705270
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Batch Reactor        Faciltiy
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1987,04/30/1988
* Harvey Stenger, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/1988
* USD 45,941.00

Economic pressures are forcing the chemical industry to decrease production of
large amounts of commodity chemicals and to move to the production of smaller
amounts of fine or specialty chemicals. These require different modes of
operation, an important one being batch processing. Processes related to the
production of specialty chemicals are characterized by significant price
differences between the reactants and the products. Often a batch does not
result in making a product of the desired quality and has to be discarded.
Because the added value of the product in relationship to the reactants is so
high, significant economic benefits can result from a general purpose modeling
and optimization strategy for batch processes that decreases the number of
batches that do not meet the product quality constraints. In contrast to
continuous processes, batch processes are characterized by transient and
nonlinear behavior. The linear approximate models, useful for continuous
processes, can not be applied simply because there does not exist a steady state
about which the process can be linearized. The use of batch reactor models that
predict the time evolution of the concentration changes of the most important
reactants and products offers the possibility for a much better understanding
and a significant increase in the optimization of the process. The PI's plan to
use "Tendency" or "Gray" models, because they do not depend upon the
availability of a detailed and predictive model of the process ("White" model)
as such models are very rarely available. In this technique an initial model is
postulated (often a very crude one) and is successively updated and improved
using experimental results. The equipment requested, a batch reactor, a gas
chromotograph (to measure concentrations) and computer equipment for on line
calculations and control of the process, are appropriate for the project. The
PIs are respected researchers. Digital Equipment Corporation offers a 30%
discount on equipment awarded under NSF grants. The PI has obtained an estimate
of $40,330 for the computer equipment, therefore using the 30% discount and 1/3
cost share by Lehigh University an award of $45,941 out of FY87 funds is
recommended.