* 8705680
* Dynamics of Radiation-Enhanced Etching Studies on           Metals, Semiconductors and Silicides
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1988,09/30/1993
* Thor Rhodin, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* John C. Hurt
* 09/30/1993
* USD 436,514.00

The objective of the research is to clarify dynamic factors in chemical
processes, which are stimulated by radiation, related to plasma and reactive ion
etching of metals, semiconductors, and silicides. New approaches will be used to
study the fundamental mechanisms using time-of-flight and modulated beam mass
spectroscopy, pulsed ion beams or tunable dye-pumped photon beams, combined with
modulated neutral beams to examine the kinetics and dynamics of these surface
reactions. Efforts will be made to separate the physical or thermal stimulated
decomposition and desorption from quantum mechanical enhancement mechanisms.
Chemical surface states induced by the radiation will be studied using Auger
spectroscopy, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and thermal desorption
spectroscopy to characterize the surfaces. The studies will emphasize the unique
chemical and physical processes which distinguish etching reactions on compound
surfaces from their respective elemental components. Dry etching processes such
as reactive ion etching, plasma etching, and laser etching play an important
role in semiconductor technology by precise control of anisotropy, selectivity,
and etching rates required for highly integrated circuits. Energetic radiation
(such as ion, electron, or photon radiation) plays a crucial role in these
processes, and optimization of these reactions can be facilitated by an
understanding of the effects of energetic radiation on the basic reaction
mechanisms. This research seeks to increase fundamental understanding of these
effects. In addition, students will be trained in the fundamental physics and
chemistry of surface reactions, and will be prepared to contribute to research
and development in the semiconductor industry.