* 8705565
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Geometrical Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* F. Reese Harvey, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* James Glazebrook
* 11/30/1990
* USD 230,300.00

Professor F. R. Harvey is one of the top researchers in complex analysis from
the viewpoint of differential geometry. With his coworkers he has developed a
new branch of geometry-- calibrations, which has applications to Cayley geometry
and spinors. He proposes to continue his work on calibrated geometry,
particularly with regard to area minimizing submanifolds. Professor J. C.
Polking is an expert regarding the solution of partial differential equations
containing several complex variables. His construction with Harvey of an
explicit kernel for the complex Neumann problem is an important piece of work.
Polking proposes to continue his work on explicit kernels for solving the
Cauchy-Riemann equations and related equations in several complex variables.
Professor Harvey is a world-leader in the field of differential geometry
involving complex analysis and has developed with collaborators a new field of
geometry, known as calibrated geometry. Calibrated geometries possess the
property of absolute area minimizing. Professor Harvey proposes to continue his
research on this exciting new topic which should lead to important results.
Professor Polking is an expert on solving partial differential equations in
several complex variables. He proposes to continue his research in this area by
looking for the solutions of equations for problems for which very little is
known. A good understanding of these problems would be of great interest.