* 8705307
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Hydration Free Energies  and Water Structure in Solutions of Solute Molecules
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1992
* Harold Scheraga, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1992
* USD 21,210.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Harold A. Scheraga, Professor of
Chemistry, Cornell University, to pursue with Dr. Mu Shik Jhon, Professor of
Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), for a
period of 24 months, a program of research to determine the free energies of
hydration of model compounds that are prototypes of the side chain groups of
proteins, and the free energies of interaction of various pairs of these
molecules in water. In addition, the structure of water in solutions of these
model compounds will be investigated, especially the nature of the hydrogen-bond
network. An adaptive, importance sampling Monte Carlo algorithm, together with
empirical pair-wise and three-body potentials based on ab initio quantum
mechanical calculations, will be used. The results of this phase of the research
will be used to calculate hydration free energies and the most stable
conformations of polypeptides and proteins in aqueous solution. This research
project involves the use of statistical mechanical and quantum mechanical
calculations to determine the molecular geometry of polypeptides and proteins
which are dissolved in water. The research results will contribute to a better
understanding of solution chemistry. The collaborators are highly respected
scientists who have acquired considerable expertise in the field of the project.
They have developed a research plan in which responsibilities are shared, and
the expertise of the one, in quantum mechanics, and the other, in statistical
mechanics, will be combined and brought to bear on a problem of mutual interest
and mutual benefit. This research problem is important, not only to theoretical
chemistry, but also to medical sciences, where an understanding of protein and
other biopolymer solutions may have a bearing on thrombosis and other
cardiovascular abnormalities. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.