* 8705256
* Perceptual Grouping in Computer Vision                      (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Mihran Tuceryan, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce
* 12/31/1989
* USD 156,761.00

Perceptual grouping is the phenomenon of putting items in the visual field
together, or of "organizing" image data. It is an "intermediate" level process
in vision. Such a process of organizing image data requires the use of rules and
constraints defined in terms of the image plane entities, such as the Gestalt
laws of organization. These constaints are those that are invariant under the
projection process. The problems of perceptual grouping in the context of
computer vision then are (i) To identify important intrinsic properties of the
image plane tokens and important image plane relationships among them, and (ii)
To devise a computational framework in which these properties and their image
plane relationships can be identified and larger units can be constructed from
these tokens and groups of tokens. The rules to detect the organization need to
be completely stated in terms of intrinsic properties of tokens being grouped
and their image plane relationships. This research is aimed at studying the
grouping phenomenon from a computational viewpoint for patterns containing
"generalized" tokens. These tokens can be a subset of dots, line segments,
curves, and globular or elongated blobs with arbitrary shapes. Our approach
primarily involves the use of the Voronoi tessellation (and its dual Delaunay
graph) as the underlying geometric representation of the spatial distribution of
tokens in the scene. A grouping built upon this representation will enforce non-
local Gestalt constraints such as alignment of tokens along smooth curves to
resolve ambiguous situations. This grouping process integrates the information
from different sources each of which detects groupings independently based on
token properties such as orientation or size. The algorithms developed in this
project will be tested on real images and the usefulness of these grouping
algorithms will be assessed in such areas as gap filling in object boundaries,
segmenting homogeneous textured regions, and computing optical flow in dynamic
images.