* 8705003
* Mechanisms of Habitat Selection in a Specialist and A       Generalist Species of Sparrow
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1990
* Russell Greenberg, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 05/31/1990
* USD 73,125.00

Considerable ecological theory is directed towards the use of habitat by
potentially competing species and how this might change with varying resources
and community composition. Much less work has been conducted on the basis of
habitat responses and the formation of habitat preferences. However,
understanding the proximate basis of habitat selection is critical in
determining how readily animal species can respond to observed environmental
changes. The focus of this project is the determination of factors that
influence habitat selection and the differences in ecological plasticity found
in two closely-related sparrow species. A series of experiments will be done to
determine the differences in intrinsic habitat responses in the Song (Melospiza
melodia) and Swamp (M. georgiana) sparrows. The Song Sparrow is one of the most
widely distributed North American bird species, occuring in a variety of scrub
and marsh havitats. It is well established in human-altered habitats such as
agricultural fields and cities and is also a frequent colonizer of small
islands. The Swamp Sparrow is relatively specialized occuring mainly in marsh or
marsh-like habitats. Based on field observations and experiments, the focus of
the laboratory experiments will be on the response of sparrows to water, cover,
and novelty. Differences in responses between species in wild- caught immatures
will be uncovered and the responses of hand- reared sparrows raised under
identical laboratory conditions will be tested. Because neophobia provides a
relatively simple mechanism for regulating the degree of ecological plasticity
in animals, its study will be emphasized. Experiments will include preliminary
work on the use of heart-rate telemetry to measure a physiological correlate of
fear-responses of sparrows to novelty. Methods to be perfected during the study
could be used for a variety of other topics in vertebrate ecology.