* 8705480
* REU:  An Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Interactions Among Zooplankton
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Carol Folt, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 06/30/1990
* USD 92,195.00

One of the most striking characteristics of aquatic communities is the extreme
spatial and temporal heterogeneity in zooplankton abundance. A major consequence
of patchiness is that individuals differ in the densities and species they
encounter, and therefore are likely to experience different competitive
pressures and predation risks. The goal of this research is to determine whether
patchiness in zooplankton communities affects the outcome of interactions among
commonly co-occurring species under realistic conditions. The research combines
field measurements and experimental laboratory manipulations. The field
measurements characterize the neighborhoods (the number and composition of the
zooplankton and phytoplankton in close proximity) experienced by each species in
2 dates during the growing season. The effect of sampling volume (1, 14 and 50
liters) and diurnal movements on estimates of spatial pattern (patchiness,
number of other animals experienced by each individual, species specific
tendencies to aggregate) will be tested. The experimental manipulations measure
the outcome of 2 types of interactions that are more likely to be affected by
close neighbors than by mean population densities: filtering and predation rate
inhibition by neighbors. The appropriate neighborhood volume for measuring these
2 types of interactions will be experimentally quantified and compared to the
field measurements of spatial pattern at the same scales when possible. This
approach links patchiness in zooplankton abundance to the controlled study of
species interactions under realistic field conditions. Measuring density
dependent interactions among zooplankton is necessary if we are to expand the
study of zooplankton interactions to include the striking spatial and temporal
distribution patterns observed in nature.