* 8705643
* Indo-U.S. Workshop on Geotechnical Engineering Perspectives-Expansive Soils Conference, December 1-4, 1987, New Delhi   and Roorkee, India, Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Robert Lytton, Texas A&M University
* GAA
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1988
* USD 39,000.00

Objectives and Relevancy: This project supports the particiation of a U.S.
delegation of 10 scientists in meetings in India related to geotechnical
research. Specifically, the team will attend a standardization committee meeting
in New Delhi, to be followed by the 6th International Conference on Expansive
Soils to be held December 1-3, 1987, and attend an Indo-U.S. workshop on
geotechnical engineering perspectives on Dec.4th, then visit construction sites
in southern India and attend a one-day technical deliberation on the practices
observed. It is hoped that these activities will help develop the use of science
and engineering knowledge to mitigate the damage that results from expansive
soils in India and the U.S. The U.S.-India program supports participation of
scientists from the U.S. in important international meetings in India as is the
case in this project. Merit: The conference deals with a very important topic
for the U.S. and India. The proposed extensive activities within this project
are quite appropriate and useful for the scientists from the two countries.
There is potential benefit in the experiences to be gained, in reducing the
structural damage, through the interaction with participants from India and
other countries. The selection procedure of U.S. participants is planned to lead
to a strong delegation. Funding: None other than this action.