* 8705470
* Weak Electrolyte Vapor-Liquid Equilibria
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Bruce Poling, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1990
* USD 130,000.00

Research Summary: An equation of state model which successfully correlates vapor
liquid equilibria behavior of weak electrolyte systems containing ammonia,
hydrogen sulfide, and carbon dioxide has recently been developed by the
principal investigators. This earlier work was focused primarily on the vapor
phase, so that the vapor phase behavior for a given overall liquid phase
composition was successfully characterized. In this project, work will focus on
the liquid phase. Specifically, several proposed modifications to the existing
model will be examined so that concentrations of individual species in the
liquid phase will be successfully characterized. In addition, the feasibility of
replacing the perturbed hard chain equation, which is presently in the model,
with a cubic equation of state, will be examined. Finally, an experimental
program will be undertaken whereby total pressure, temperature, and the density
and conductivity of both phases will be measured in situ. These results, along
with the theoretical model, will then be used to calculate phase compositions.
The program will eliminate the two features which have given traditional methods
so much trouble--overly complex theoretical models and removing and analyzing
samples from equilibrium cells. Innovation: The proposed work will lead to two
scientific innovations. First, it will continue to develop the application of
equations of state to weak electrolyte systems. The equation of state
development will lead to a model which will be simpler than those models
currently used to represent weak electrolyte behavior. The proposed methods will
possess the many advantages which have made equations of state so popular for
representing non-electrolyte vapor liquid equilibria. The second innovation is
that an experimental technique will be developed which will eliminate the need
to remove and analyze samples from the equilibrium cell. With current
techniques, this is the most difficult step, so its elimination will indeed be a
major development in the methods used to study these systems. Significance: The
proposed research will have considerable practical impact in the area of sour
water processing, water purification, natural gas processing, and heavy oil
refining. The reason this work is applicable in so many areas is that techniques
for the CO2-NH3-H2O and H2S-NH3-H2O systems can be easily extended to systems in
which the ammonia is replaced by amines, glycols, or alcohols. Thus, much
industrial interest results because of the importance of H2S removal from
natural gas by amine treating. At this point, the problems associated with weak
electrolyte VLE have not been solved satisfactorily. The proposed techniques
couple new approaches in the experimental procedure with new approaches to
modelling the behavior in a manner that may solve the problem.