* 8705349
* Nonequilibrium Molecular Characteristics of Glassy Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Henrik Pedersen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1989
* USD 131,929.00

Introduction: The transient structure and property changes that occur in glassy
polymers during chemical and physical aging and/or annealing below the glass-
transition temperature Tg are of great current research interest. This time-
dependent behavior, also referred to as volume or enthalpy relaxation (or
recovery), originates from the nonequilibrium nature of the glassy state. From
an application point of view, it is apparent that this phenomenon is the
controlling factor in predicting the "initial" behavior as well as the practical
performance of glassy or partially glassy polymeric materials during their
useful lifetimes. Research Summary: In this research, the PIs probe the effects
of controlled (and accelerated) chemical and physical aging and/or rejuvenation
on achievable barrier property levels in a carefully selected glassy polymer of
major commercial significance (polyethylene terephthalate). This will be
accomplished by conditioning the polymer over a range of temperatures below Tg
with small molecule penetrants (at high chemical potentials) which are
interactive with small segment regions. Most importantly, the microstructural
changes which specifically control the behavior of transport parameters in
sorption and diffusion will be directly measured and identified for the first
time, via monitoring of the kinetics of the isomerization reaction which governs
the distribution of polymer segmental conformers. The research will be
accomplished through combined experiments utilizing gas transmission and Fourier
Transform I.R. Spectroscopy, together with enthalpy relaxation studies.
Significance: The results of this work will contribute strongly to the
development of a comprehensive molecular theory which may lead to the design of
a variety of new and/or improved processes for the production of glassy polymers
with superior properties in packaging applications, as protective coatings, and
for use as permselective membranes in energy-efficient separations of gaseous
mixtures, to cite only a few examples. Also, knowledge of both transport and
mechanical property variations (which can be interrelated through free volume
and its distribution) will be acquired in this research. It is anticipated that
novel polymer microstructural states with significantly enhanced property levels
and application lifetimes will be discovered.