* 8705138
* Engineering Research Equipment Grants:  Fourier Transform   Infrared Spectrophotometer
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* Don Williamson, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1988
* USD 25,000.00

BALDWIN Research Summary: This is an Engineering Equipment Grant. The Fourier
Transform Infrared Spectrophotometer will be used for research on a broad range
of topics by a user group from the departments of Chemistry, Physics, and
Chemical Engineering. Examples of the specific projects where the
instrumentation will be used are as follows. The interactions which exist at
metal/electrolyte and metal/polymer interfaces will be probed using the FTIR in
the grazing angle specular reflectance mode. A second program will employ the
instrument for examination of adsorbed species on catalyst surfaces. Two
additional projects will take advantage of the ability of this instrument to
incorporate photoacoustic FTIR for identification and analysis of
polymer/pigment crosslinking mechanisms and for the characterization of coal and
coal liquefaction residues for purposes of reactivity correlation utilization.
The instrument will also find application in a research project where the nature
of the structure of amorphous silicon-based semiconductor alloys is being
investigated, as well as in a number of projects where only routine chemical
analysis of complex mixtures and pure compounds is required. The concept for
utilization of the instrument is centered around a flexible, multi-user campus
research resource rather than an instrument dedicated to any one single project
or program. Novelty/Innovation: Each of the individual research programs
described in the proposal has its own novelty and innovative features. As
examples of this, the study of polymer/pigment interactions with FTIR permits
examination of these mechanisms