* 8705486
* ROA:  Relationships Between Fungi and the Nutritional       Content of Detritus for Leaf-shredding Invertebrates in     Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Keller Suberkropp, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 06/30/1991
* USD 215,834.00

Microbial ecology, of all areas of general ecology, is the least well researched
and understood. This is most obvious in aquatic microbial ecology. In recent
years, because of genetic engineering of microbes, there is a national need to
know more about microbial ecology. Dr. Suberkropp, of the University of Alabama,
proposes to study aquatic microbial and invertebrate communities. The proposed
studies are designed to determine the degree to which the species composition of
fungi colonizing leaves in different stream habitats affects the growth of leaf-
shredding habitats. The dynamics of leaf conditioning by the dominant fungi in
these steams will be determined to establish the time required by each species
to fully condition leaves in the laboratory. The rates of growth, ingestion,
egestion and respiration of shredders from different streams fed diets of leaves
that have been fully conditioned by pure cultures of these fungi will be used to
estimate the food quality of fungal species. Energetics of different shredder
taxa fed fungi of high and low food quality will be compared. The effect of
fungal species composition on shredder growth will be examined for leaves
colonized in streams containing fungal communities dominated by different fungal
species. The fungal species present on leaves will be determined, and shredder
performance on diets of these leaves will be evaluated. Results will be related
to food quality of the fungi colonizing leaves in different streams. The studies
proposed will provide a comparative data base on relationships between shredder
performance and diets of different fungal species in pure culture and in natural
microbial communities and should increase understanding of the range of
interactions that can occur between these two groups of organisms.