* 8705250
* REU:  Photosynthetic Pathways in Seasonal Pool Aquatic      Macrophytes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1990
* Jon Keeley, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 03/31/1990
* USD 103,369.00

Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert atmospheric carbon
dioxide into carbohydrates. All animals including man, directly or indirectly,
depend upon this process for their daily caloric intake. Although food
production demands are continuing to rise, our food production/unit of land area
has leveled off. The future demands an increased understanding of and ability to
manipulate plant photosynthesis. Our understanding of photosynthesis has changed
dramatically in the last 15 years due to the discovery of different metabolic
pathways in some plants. It is now known that there are at least two rather
specialized groups of plants (C4 and CAM) which, prior to assimilating CO2 into
glucose, fix C02 directly into an organic acid (malic acid). The proposed
research will focus on recent discoveries of these unusual photosynthetic
pathways incertain aquatic plants. It appears that for these aquatic plants, CO2
fixation into malic acid may be a mechanism for increasing net productivity. The
implications of such a processare obvious when one recognizes that our most
productive crops and our most drought.resistant crops possess this
photosynthetic pathway. These generalizations however apply to terrestrial
plants, very little is known about aquatic plant photosynthesis.