* 8705199
* Structure of Plant-Arthropod Associations: Differences      Related to Habitat Adversity and Stage of Establishment
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Richard Root, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 11/30/1989
* USD 100,000.00

The relationship between herbivores and goldenrod (Solidago altissima) will be
studied at several sites in the environs of Ithaca, New York, with the purpose
of explaining how plant- herbivore interactions vary during different stages of
succession and on sites of varying fertility. The research will be organized
around three activities. One activity involves the completion of a long-term
study (6 years) in old fields to determine how prolonged suppression of
herbivores has altered: 1) the relative importance of different plant species;
and 2) the standing crop biomass of the vegetation in the system. A second
activity will involve the determination of the major population levels of
goldenrod-herbivores in 6 meadows. The meadows are in different successional
stages and so the food resources available to the herbivores differ. And the
third activity will involve a comparison of adaptive syndromes of caterpillars
in forests and meadows. This will permit Dr. Root and his colleagues to
determine if there are basic differences in the population biology of species
that utilize similar resources in different habitats. This research will expand
our understanding of plant- herbivore interactions and should help us to develop
biologically sound practices for herbivore control. Dr. Root has an excellent
record of scientific achievement. Previous NSF grants to him have produced a
large number of peer- reviewed scientific papers and have supported the training
of numerous young ecologists. Cornell University will provide excellent
institutional support for this research. The Ecosystem Studies Program
recommends award of this grant.