* 8705686
* 1987 Midwest Regional Developmental Biology Conference      Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, May 14-16, 1987
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1987,10/31/1987
* Anton Neff, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1987
* USD 2,000.00

Support is requested to defray part of the room and board expenses for graduate
students attending the 1987 Midwest Regional Developmental Biology Conference in
Bloomington, Indiana, May 14-16. The 1987 conference will include the following:
(1) At least four sessions of platform presentations. Topics of these sessions
are "Control of Gene Expression during Development"; "Cellular and Molecular
Aspects of Limb Development"; "Muscle Development, Regeneration, and
Plasticity"; and "Embryonic Organization and Pattern Formation". Each platform
presentation will include 3 to 5 invited speakers from leading developmental
biology laboratories in the Midwest. (2) A poster session. (3) Live-material
sessions in various research laboratories in the Dept. of Biology, Indiana
University. (4) A keynote address by Dr. Urs Rutishauser of the Dept. of Anatomy
and Developmental Genetics, Case Western Reserve University. The purpose of the
conference is to provide an effective opportunity for the formal and informal
exchange of information and ideas between established investigators and graduate
or postdoctoral students. This goal is achieved much more readily at the
regional conferences than at national meetings primarily because the regional
conferences are smaller, less rigidly scheduled, and allow ample time and
occasion for discussions.