* 8705706
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: A Fundamental Study on Polyurethane-Unsaturated Polyester Interpenetrating Network
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Chang Han, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 12/31/1990
* USD 12,514.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Chang Dae Han, Department of Chemical
Engineering, Polytechnic University, to pursue with Dr. Sung Chul Kim, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, for a period of 24 months, a
program of cooperative research on fundamental aspects of the polyurethane-
unsaturated polyester interpenetrating network. Specifically, the collaborators
will develop (1) kinetic models for describing the curing reactions of
polyurethane-unsaturated polyester blends, (2) chemorheological models for
describing the variation of the viscosity of these blends during curing, and (3)
a mathematical model for simulating the pultrusion process of such blends. By
establishing a firm basis for understanding the curing reactions of
polyurethane-unsaturated polyester blends and determining the optimal processing
conditions for yielding desired end-use properties, the researchers seek to be
able to develop new resins or modify existing resins for specific applications
and to better control processing operations. Although the proposed cooperative
project is basic research on an important polymer blend system, its successful
completion could have important implications for the development of new products
tailored for specific applications. The two collaborators are highly respected
scientists who have long been engaged in parallel studies on polymer systems.
The present project will permit them to combine their complimentary talents and
experience in important and interesting research. This project is relevant to
the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and
engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. The research
will add an international cooperative dimension to ongoing research at
Polytechnic University supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant
No. MSM8744680.