* 8705430
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  A Deterministic      Analysis of Turbulent Mass Transfer (Spectrum Analyzer)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Young Lee, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1988
* USD 16,533.00

This project is an Engineering Research Equipment Grant. PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Deterministic analyses applied to velocity fluctuation data obtained close to
gas-liquid interface allow the estimation of the length and velocity scales of
individual eddies taking part in gas absorption. The mass transfer prediction by
this method has been shown to be superior to that by the statistical method
employing the root mean square velocity and the integral length scale in two
turbulence gas absorption. An extension of the deterministic approach to higher
turbulence and for different device geometries is proposed. The spectrum
analyzer is expected to expand the scope in this research significantly.
Simultaneous measurements of concentration and velocity fluctuations by an
oxygen microprobe and a laser doppler anemometer allow, for the first time, the
investigation of transfer phenomena on a single eddy level. This method is
utilized to confirm the proposed deterministic approach for analyzing mass
transfer phenomena. JUSTIFICATION: The proposed research will help establish the
deterministic method for analyzing the velocity fluctuation data to obtain the
length and velocity scales of individual eddies. This new approach is expected
to give better prediction of the mass transfer compared with the conventional
statistical approach, and it could be extended to heat transfer as well.
Potential applications exist in design of new biofermentors and gas-liquid
chemical reactors.