* 8705506
* The Process of Territorial Settlement:  Field Experiments   and Theoretical Models
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1992
* Judy Stamps, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 01/31/1992
* USD 58,623.00

Recent research has established that the characteristics of animal territories
can have important implications both for the survival and breeding success of
individual territory-owners and for the population ecology of the entire
species. For species with seasonal territories, such as migratory birds, events
during the initial period of territory- acquisition and settlement may have a
strong impact on such characteristics as territory size, the extent of contact
between adjacent territories, and the density of territorial individuals within
the habitat. For example, the number of animals simultaneously competing for
territories during the settlement period may affect territory sizes, leading to
smaller territories in years when many individuals are competing for space than
in years with fewer territorial contenders. Similarly, when all of the settlers
arrive at one time (simultaneous settlement), territories may be smaller and
more densely distributed than when the arrival of settlers is spread out over
many days or weeks (sequential settlement). Despite the potential importance of
settlement behaviors of territorial animals, there are very few empirical or
theoretical studies of these phenomena. Dr. Stamps will investigate the process
by which settlers acquire territories using three different, complementary
research techniques: field experiments, theoretical modeling, and a review of
the literature on settlement. Field experiments using juvenile lizards will
provide controlled, empirical tests of two processes that have been hypothesized
for territorial species: (1) a relationship between number of contenders and
territory size, and (2) a relationship between temporal pattern of settlement
(sequential versus simultaneous) and territory size. The results of these field
studies, in combination with a review of the scattered literature on settlement,
will be used to develop a set of general computer models of settlement. In turn,
the results of these models will suggest further directions for field
experimentation. These detailed studies on territorial settlement should be
useful to the many ecologists amd behavioral biologists working with seasonally
territorial species. In addition, this work is directly relevant to problems in
conservation and the protection of endangered species, many of which defend
territories on a seasonal basis.