* 8705744
* Collaborative Research: Organic Carbon Dynamics and Trophic Pathways in a Low-Gradient River-Floodplain Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1990
* Judith Meyer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 07/31/1990
* USD 217,081.00

The influence of both hydrologic regime and temperature on production and
decomposition processes in low-gradient blackwater river-floodplain ecosystems
will be investigated. The major goal of this research is to develop a model to
predict the magnitude of green plant production, and the carbon (energy)
dynamics associated with consumer and decomposer activities in these ecosystems
as a function of abiotic conditions. Results from previous NSF-funded research
will provide most of the data needed to build the model. New field and
laboratory research will be conducted to supply data that is essential to the
model-building effort, but is unavailable either in extant data sets developed
by Meyer and Benke or in the literature. For the past six years Meyer and Benke
have studied the organic carbon dynamics and trophic pathways in the Ogeechchee
River and its floodplain in the lower coastal plain of Georgia. In this new
research they will synthesize their previous work in a model that uses two
abiotic "driving" variables, "hydrodynamic regime" and temperature to predict a
series of biotic characteristics of the system including; system primary
production and respiration, secondary production, and the dynamics of bacteria.
If the model is carefully crafted it will be a useful tool for clearly outlining
the possible affects on the biology of black water rivers of the southeastern
United States of disturbances such as damming and dredging, and changes in
thermal-regime like those associated with power-plant cooling. New field and
laboratory research will address the following issues: availability of dissolved
organic carbon to bacteria in a river's water column; the role of protozoa in
controlling bacterial populations through consumption; the importance of
protozoa as food sources for macroinvertebrates; and the importance secondary
production in the floodplain. This new research is key to our understanding of
the structure and function of blackwater rivers. The research team that will
conduct these studies is strong. Drs. Meyers and Benke are experienced stream
ecologists, and Dr. Weigert, a consultant on the modeling task, is a world-
recognized ecological modeler. The institutional settings for the project will
provide excellent scientific interaction and a synergistic environment of
colleagues and related research. The Ecosystem Studies Program recommends award
of this grant.