* 8705659
* Effect of Fiber Orientation on Fiber Damage During Sliding  Wear of Fiber Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1988
* Jae Youn, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Martha P. King
* 11/30/1988
* USD 30,000.00

The objective of this project is to experimentally and theoretically investigate
the effect of fiber orientation on fiber damage during sliding wear. The
experimental investigation will consist of preparing graphite fiber composite
specimens with specific fiber orientations, friction and wear testing,
extracting damaged graphite fibers from the wear debris, and evaluating the wear
track and the damaged graphite fibers by scanning electron microscope. Typical
sliding directions against fiber orientation will be longitudinal, transverse,
and normal directions. Extraction of damaged graphite fibers from the wear
debris will be achieved by thermally degrading the matrix material. It is
expected that the shape and size of the fiber debris collected from the wear
particles will reveal different damage mechanisms for different fiber
orientations, e.g., buckling, bending, pulling, or sliding wear of individual
fibers. The theoretical investigation will employ a finite element method to
determine the deformation of fibers and the stress distribution within the
composite subsurface under normal and tangential loadings. The stress
distribution in the subsurface and the deformation of fibers obtained from the
finite element analysis will indicate the possible fracture point of the fibers
during sliding wear. Microscopic examination of the fiber debris will be
compared with the results of finite element analysis.