* 8705588
* Vibration Control of Rotating Plates and Translating Bands
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/15/1987,09/30/1991
* Clayton Mote, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 09/30/1991
* USD 200,722.00

The project investigates three fundamental problems important to machine
dynamics and the design of high productivity machines in material processing and
computer industries. They are: 1) Vibration of Free Center, High Speed Rotating
Circular Plates; 2) Supercritical Speed Rotating Plates; and 3) Vibration of
High Speed Bands: Tapes, Drive Belts, and Saws. The free center plate of Problem
1 is positioned along a splined drive spindle by fluid bearings acting on the
faces of the plate. It achieves remarkable control over product dimension and
dramatically reduces cutting residual. The mechanics of the machine is not
known. Observed catastrophic instabilities, gyroscopic precessions, and control
of the plate position on the spindle during operation by driving with the
bearings are some of the important issues which are addressed. In Problem 2, the
supercritical speed rotating circular plate spins at a higher speed than that
expected at instability, i.e., the critical speed. Designers of disk drives and
circular sawing machines currently set the operating speed to substantially less
than the critical speed. The restriction limits the potentially enormous
opportunities for increased productivity from high speed on both. The problem
must be approached with sufficient precision and depth so that the causes of
instability are identified, speed windows for stable operation are observed, and
possible technological solutions to the instability problem are evaluated. The
translating bands in Problem 3 cut materials, transport people and products, and
transmit information. Operation at high speeds with high precision requires
understanding of the mechanics of the system and implementation of vibration
control. A model of the coupled longitudinal and transverse vibration of a band
and wheel system in the absence of dissipation must now be extended to include
dissipation. It can be used to predict passive and real-time control for
vibration.