* 8705446
* An Integrated Science Workbench/Data Bank for Ecosystems    Research
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1987,10/31/1990
* Susan Stafford, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 10/31/1990
* USD 221,515.00

This award will support the Andrews ecosystems research group in the
acquisition of an integrated information processing system that combines 1) on-
line storage of the Forest Science Data Bank (FSDB), 2) a SUN 3/280 graphics
workstation, and 3) a local area network (Ethernet LAN) linking the SUN
workstation and FSDB with existing personal computers of the Andrews ecosystem
research group. An on-line data bank is essential for the future success of the
integrated forest research program. An on-line data bank will promote more
efficient use of existing data and facilitate prompt documentation and storage
of data currently being gathered. The LAN will allow high-speed access to the
data bank by Andrews researchers in three University departments (Forest
Science, Fisheries and Wildlife, and Entomology) and the US Forest Service. The
LAN also allows harddisks, laser printers, and plotters to be shared among
users, greatly multiplying computing power. The LAN provides electronic file and
message transfer among researchers, and also among sites via the OSU campus
network as well as existing national and international networks. The
workstation, with its high- resolution graphics, will be used to study pattern
and process at the landscape and other levels of spatial resolution. A
geographic information system (GIS) will be the main tool for these studies. The
workstation will also allow scientists to work efficiently with more complex
models than are available now, and to use a new breed of exploratory statistical
techniques. The ecosystems research group comprises scientists with a noteworthy
record of research. Further enhancement of their collective productivity will be
expected with the new computer system. Institutional facilities are excellent
and cost sharing is significant. The Ecosystem Studies Program recommends
enthusiastically that this award be made.