* 8705620
* Acquisition of a Variable Temperature Superconducting       Magnetometer/Susceptometer (Materials Research)
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1988
* Martha Greenblatt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Yvette Jackson
* 11/30/1988
* USD 75,000.00

The instrumentation requested is a Variable Temperature
Magnetometer/Susceptometer manufactured by Quantum Design. Acquisition of the
magnetometer is absolutely essential for the research programs of the principal
investigators and will enhance the productivity of research programs currently
supported by ONR, NSF (DMR), and DOE grants by providing critical capability
currently not available at Rutgers University for variable temperature magnetic
susceptibility measurements and other magnetic studies of various materials in
the following areas of chemistry and physics: 1. Synthesis and characterization
of high temperature superconducting copper oxides. 2. Synthesis and single
crystal growth of quasi low- dimensional alkali metal molybdenum oxide bronzes
and characterization of their structural, electronic transport and magnetic
properties. 3. Synthesis and characterization of new three-dimensional network
oxide materials, which are proposed for the development of solid electrolytes
and cathode materials for use in solid state high energy density batteries. 4.
Preparation and characterization of transition metal chalcogenides with quasi
low dimensional properties. 5. Sol-gel synthesis of electronic materials. 6.
Synthesis of new ternary crystalline and binary amorphous rare/earth-compounds
with unstable valence states, and the study of their structural, electronic,
magnetic and transport properties. 7. Studies of Spin-Crossover Complexes. 8.
Synthesis of thiolate-bridged Fe(III)-Cu(II) dimers as possible models for
cytochrome c oxidase and characterization of their structural, electronic and
magnetic properties.