* 8705907
* Bursting the Bounds of Time
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1987
* Martin Rudwick, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 12/31/1987
* USD 10,500.00

Science manifestly has the capacity to change our views of the world. Major
transformations of our world view, however, are relatively rare. The paradigm
case is that of the Scientific Revolution of the 16th &amp; 17th Centuries in
which the traditional view of a closed universe with the stationary earth at its
center was replaced by an infinite universe in which the earth is one of several
planets circling the sun. Another radical transformation of our world view
occurred at the start of the 19th century. In this case, geological sciences
replaced the classical understanding of a brief history of the earth
traditionally derived from the Bible, to the vastly extended histories
associated with modern radiometric methods and modern cosmologies. This temporal
transformation, as significant in its extent as the spatial transformation of
the Scientific Revolution, is surprisingly poorly understood and is too often
described in terms limited to the simplistic models of the conflict of science
and religion. Although the issues are generally framed in terms of an expanding
time scale, the magnitude of time itself was actually of less importance than
the character of the history (of the earth and of life, including human life)
that was believed to have filled it. The crucial period in this outstandingly
important development was the first half of the 19th century (with the last
years of the 18th). With this grant, Professor Rudwick will undertake research
necessary for a new synthetic account and interpretation of the building of
earth-history during this decisive half century.