* 8705912
* Collision-Induced Electronic Energy Transfer in Small       Molecules (Chemistry)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Paul Dagdigian, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1990
* USD 226,501.00

Dr. Dagdigian, in collaboration with Dr. Millard Alexander of the University of
Maryland, plans to continue a joint theoretical-experimental project involving
studies of electronically inelastic collision processes in small molecules and
radicals. The experiments will involve the use of optical-optical double
resonance for the determination of energy transfer rate constants with initial
and final quantum state resolution in a flow system. The following collisional
processes will be investigated: (a) transitions between low-lying triplet states
of nitrogen, (b) transitions among low-lying states of CN and carbon monoxide
positive ions, (c) spin-changing transitions in CS, and (d) transitions between
excited states of the calcium monohalides. This experimental work is being
carried out jointly with the following theoretical projects: (a) the development
of the fully quantum description of electronically inelastic collisions, in
particular those involving a change in spin multiplicity of the molecular
partner, (b) the determination of ab initio potential energy surfaces and
wavefunctions relevant to collisions of electronically excited CN and nitrogen,
and (c) the calculation of fully state-resolved cross sections based on ab
initio potential surfaces. Specific attention is being given to the calculation
of the electronically nonadiabatic matrix elements which describe the coupling
between the nuclear motion of the collision partners and the motion of their
constituent electrons. This research is important because the processes under
investigation are responsible for quenching of electronically excited states of
molecules and for the pressure dependence of photon yields in many
chemiluminescent reactions. For example, there has been a long-standing interest
in understanding the detailed mechanisms that govern energy flow in systems
containing electronically excited nitrogen molecules. Since it is the major
component of our atmosphere, knowledge about collisional processes of nitrogen
is crucial for an understanding of phenomena such as auroras and airglows. In
the laboratory, nitrogen is often present in gas mixtures in discharges,
including various gas laser media.