* 8705717
* RUI: Field Study in Northeastern Mexico  of the Southern    Edge of North America During the Late Paleozoic
* GEO,EAR
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1990
* James McKee, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 03/31/1990
* USD 93,000.00

Geological field studies will be undertaken in northeastern Mexico in order to
learn the history of the southern margin of the North American continent during
the latter part of the Paleozoic Era. This history is now very poorly known
because there are only a few places where rocks of the appropriate age are
exposed and there have been no studies which include both collection and
integration of field data from all of these localities. This project is a broad,
systematic study of some of the remaining relatively unknown areas; knowledge
thus gained will be integrated with that derived from our previous work in
northern Mexico. That two or more lithospheric plates converged in northern
Mexico in the latter part of the Paleozoic Era is proven by the presence of
calcalkaline volcanic rocks and associated basinal sediments in southern
Coahuila. A principal objective of this study is to seek the kinds of
information in other Mexican states which will help determine the orientation,
geographic setting, and timing of convergence. There is also indirect evidence
that rocks formed along the boundary may have been disrupted by lateral movement
along one or more large, NNW- trending faults during the Mesozoic Era.
Therefore, a second objective is to compare rocks along the zone of postulated
faulting to learn about the nature of the disruptions. The principal
contributions of this project will be knowledge, interpretations, and data which
are necessary to those geologists who have been trying to fit one of the last
pieces into the Pangaea puzzle. Further, it is in the national interests of both
the U.S. and Mexico to understand the geology of rocks which may have
substantial potential as bearers of both petroleum and metallic mineral
resources.