* 8705303
* Neuronotrophic Effects of the Fibroblast Growth Factors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1992
* Patricia Walicke, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1992
* USD 215,184.00

The survival and growth of all nerve cells including those in the brain is
thought to be controlled by special growth regulatory proteins, called
neuronotrophic factors (NTF). At this time only one NTF has been identified,
nerve growth factor, and it only affects a very small proportion of the neurons
in the brain. From studies using cell cultures of highly purified nerve cells
from fetal rat brains, Dr. Walicke and her collaborators have recently obtained
evidence suggesting that two proteins long known to stimulate growth of
connective tissue, the fibroblast growth factors (FGF), might also improve
neuronal survival and growth. This research will try to determine whether the
FGF's are really NTF's for brain neurons. A combination of biochemical and
histological techniques will be used to determine whether the FGF's stimulate
neurons directly by acting on specific cell receptors. These studies will first
use isolated cells in culture, then intact brain tissue. Whether FGF is produced
by constituents of brain tissue such as neurons or their support cells (glia)
will be studied. Neurons from different regions of the brain will be examined in
tissue culture to determine what types of CNS neurons might be stimulated by
FGF. Finally, whether application of FGF into a wound in the brain can influence
neuronal survival or process growth will be examined. Dr. Walicke has an
excellent reputation in the neuronotrophic factor field and is highly qualified
to conduct this important research. In addition to determining whether FGF is a
NTF, these studies should indicate whether FGF is a reasonable candidate for use
in treating brain injuries or diseases.