* 8705492
* The Process and Mechanisms of Plant Competition in the      Great Basin Sagebrush-Dominated Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1992
* James Richards, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 12/31/1992
* USD 1,179,512.00

This multi-investigator research project will address mechanisms of plant
competition and their linkage with the process of competition and plant
community development in the Great Basin sagebrush-dominated ecosystem. The
research is based on manipulative field studies in replicated plots with
extension to a landscape setting. Belowground competition is emphasized in four
sets of hypotheses concerning (1) the occurrence, magnitude and significance of
water leakage from roots and water transfer between plants -- experiments
involving whole-plant gas exchange, soil psychrometry and time-domain
reflectometry, stable isotopes, and root anatomy, (2) exploitation of resource-
rich patches -- involving microscale root distributions, mycorrhizal dynamics,
dual-isotope labeling, and root physiological properties, (3) characteristics of
roots associated with competitive ability -- using indicator plant approaches
with a broad germplasm resource, and (4) linking competition with plant fitness
components such as seed output and seedling establishment -- using plant
demographic and competition exclusion approaches. Additionally, a set of
predictions extending these concepts to landscape situations will be tested. In
all, 22 hypotheses and 4 predictions are posed and these range in scale from
individual roots and associated mycorrhizae to community-level phenomena. The
research team for this project is excellent and will undoubtedly maintain its
pest productivity. Facilities provided by the institution for both field and
laboratory positions of the project are first-class. A high level of scientific
productivity can be expected to result.