* 8705407
* REU:  A Molecular Approach to Understanding the Genetic     Response of Soil Microbial Populations Under Selection
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Barry Chelm, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jethro Moorefield
* 01/31/1991
* USD 289,873.00

Drs. William E. Holben and James M. Tiedje of Michigan State University propose
taking a molecular approach to understanding gene ecology and exchange under an
applied selection pressure -xenobiotic chemicals in the environment. Past
research in microbial ecology has provided virtually no information on genetic
changes of microbial populations in soil. This omission is particularly
apparent, not that the issue of release of genetically engineered microorganisms
has raised questions for which little data exists to underpin interpretations of
risk. To study such change, an effective and ecologically sensible selection
that can be followed at the DNA level is needed. The investigators have chosen
the biodegradtion of a new energy resource -- herbicides -- as the system of
study. They proposed to test the hypothesis that the native and soil microbial
population is not genetically optimized for use of a new energy resource when
first introduced, but that after repeated exposure, genetic changes will be
selected that enhance the ability of populations to use these chemicals. By
using gene-specific probes, DNA restriction analysis, hybridization and related
molecular methods, they can distinguish among the five most likely genetic
responses: (i) regulatory changes resulting in altered gene expression; (ii) a
mutation which results in a new metabolic activity; (iii) rearrangement or
amplification of genetic information; (iv) transfer of genetic information to
similar organisms; (v) transfer of genetic information to dissimilatory
organisms. While there is little doubt that these types of genetic changes that
occur in the laboratory, there is little information on which are to prevalent
changes that occur in nature, at what frequency and under what conditions. To
provide this information, they propose to study these changes using chemostats,
soil microcosms, field studies and a retrospective analysis of populations after
20 years of agrochemical treatment. This continuum of approaches should allow
them to extrapolate information on mechanism and frequency between laboratory
and field. Information on the latter is entirely lacking. This is extremely
timely and much needed research by several groups in the scientific community
(e.g., regulatory agencies) as well as by an industry struggling to make "safe"
new organisms and their products by genetic manipulation. The investigators and
their organization are world renowened for their expertise in this field.