* 8705611
* The Quantum Dynamics of Molecular Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1993
* None   DATA NOT AVAILABLE, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 06/30/1993
* USD 1,466,773.00

Drs. Gentry and Giese plan to continue and expand a program of research
involving the following types of experiments. (1) Molecular beam experiments
will be carried out to measure differential cross sections for the benchmark
chemical exchange reaction between deuterium atoms and hydrogen molecules. (2)
Photodissociation dynamics for both small and large molecules will be examined
by time-of-flight measurements on the fragments with very high resolution. (3)
The decay of weakly-bound molecular clusters will be measured in real time
following vibrational excitation of the cluster, in order to study the dynamics
of energy flow within the cluster. (4) A new apparatus incorporating vacuum-UV
photoionization and mass spectral analysis will be used to measure cross
sections for growth, exchange, and metathesis reactions of weakly bound clusters
as functions of kinetic energy. (5) Energy flow and reaction dynamics in
electronically excited states of simple van der Waals molecules will be examined
by laser induced fluorescence and chemiluminescence spectroscopy. (6) A unique
time-of-flight apparatus will be used to study the properties and applications
of extreme gas expansions in generating super-cold gas phase species. These
investigators have made and are continuing to make important new technical
constributions to experimental capabilities. The pulsed nozzle which they
developed has been adopted by many other groups. Their proposed work on
generating super-cold gas phase species is also expected to find applications in
future research. The importance of the hydrogen exchange reaction is its extreme
importance for fundamental and rigorous comparison between theory and experiment
in chemical kinetics. Experiments with super-cold molecules are expected to
provide data which will be sufficient to distinguish between competing theories.