* 8705553
* The Representation of Visual Feature Variables in           Connectionist Networks (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Deborah Walters, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Joyce
* 12/31/1989
* USD 165,421.00

This research provides a general theoretical framework for the description and
analysis of representations for variables in connectionist networks. The space
in which all representations lie is defined, and existing representation schemes
are described in terms of this space. In addition, the space is used to suggest
new representations. A mathematical analysis of the representations is used to
compare different representations in terms of various properties. This analysis
has lead to theories about visual processing, and has been used to determine
which types of information are best encoded by a particular representation, and
is thus useful for choosing an optimal encoding for a given computational task.
This research shows that in the early stages of visual processing the choice of
representation for a visual feature variable depends not only on the type of
information about the variable that is desired, but also on the measurement
process used to extract the feature from an image. A tuning-curve technique has
been developed for analyzing the measurment process, and thus determining the
constraints placed on the choice of representation that are a function of the
measurement process. The focus of this project is to study a special
representation techniques, call Rho-space representation. It has been developed
along with simple parallel connectionist computations for edge analysis. Rho-
space has many advantages over other edge representations including: no
thresholding of local edge elements is required; a natural representation of
connectivity is created which agrees with human perception; both coarse and fine
representation of orientation information is possible; and, illusory contours,
of the type produced by the human visual system occur.