* 8705375
* The Theoretical and Empirical Foundation of Relativity      (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Mark Haugan, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 06/30/1991
* USD 63,513.00

Our understanding of gravitation, like all scientific knowledge, rests on a
foundation of carefully interpreted experimental results. Adding to this base is
a challenge for theorists and experimenters. The effects one must study and try
to observe in order to distinguish between competing ideas and theories are
subtle and minute. In this project possible effects of gravitation in a special
binary star system and in atoms and nuclei are studied. Though vastly different
settings, each offers the opportunity to learn something new about gravity. The
binary pulsar PSR 1913+16 is a unique testing ground for relativistic gravity.
The pulsar emits a steady stream of radio pulses as it orbits a companion star.
Careful interpretation of the variation in the rate at which we receive these
radio pulses will enable the reconstruction of the orbit and the testing of our
ideas about gravity. The first evidence for the existence of gravitational
radiation comes from the study of this system. This evidence grows stronger as
more data accumulates. The idea that gravity is described by a geometrical
structure of space and time is common to all metric theories of gravity. General
relativity is such a theory. To test this most fundamental idea, Einstein's
equivalence principle effects on atoms and nuclei which move through a
gravitational field are studied.