* 8705690
* REU:  Ecological Interactions of Genetically-Engineered     Microorganisms in Root-Soil Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Peter Hartel, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 12/31/1990
* USD 186,225.00

Drs. Peter Hartel and colleagues at the University of Georgia, Athens propose to
conduct research on several critical, ecological questions concerning
genetically engineered microorganisms. The ability of a microorganism to
survive, grow, and interact in a ever changing soil environment persists because
microorganisms actively exchange genes horizontally for these traits. By asking
a series of questions, the investigators will assess the ecological worth of
specific genes to a microorganism in a root/soil system. They have used genetic
engineering to clone and manipulate the genes which encode for endoglucanase and
polygalacturonase in the bacterium Pseudomonas solanacearum. They will use the
same techniques for the genes encoding for extracellular polysaccharide,
protease, and lipase. The loss of expression of these specific genes will be
tested singly and in combination for their effect on the ability of P.
solanacearum to survive, grow, and transfer these cloned genes in soil and in
the rhizosphere to tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum). The cloned genes will also
be placed in Pseudomonas putida, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Escherichia coli.
Rhizosphere interactions will be assessed by use of a rhizosphere cell employing
membranes of varying porosities. In this manner, the microbial competitiveness
of the genetically-engineered bacteria will be assessed. The research is
expected to yield fundamental knowledge on the ecological value of a specific
gene to a microorganism in the environment. Preliminary work on the genes for
endoglucanase and polygalacturonase in P. solanacearum has shown that genetic
engineering has a profound influence on the performance of this organism in a
plant. These data will be of immediate value to microbial ecologists and to
regulatory agencies concerned about accidental release of genetically engineered
microorganisms.