* 8705704
* History of Planetary Physics
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1989
* Stephen Brush, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 05/31/1989
* USD 18,000.00

Professor Brush is continuing his long-term project examining theories of the
origin and structure of the Earth and other members of the solar system in
modern times. This study spans a number of disciplines ranging from astronomy
and physics to geology. Topics range over issues of celestial mechanics,
properties of planets and the sun, meteoritics, the age of the Earth, and the
physical/chemical state of its core. During the course of this grant, Professor
Brush will concentrate on issues surrounding astronomy and cosmogony since 1940.
This is a period of radical changes in theories of cosmogony and will include
specific questions about which theories were most successful in gaining
acceptance and why? What criteria were used to evaluate hypotheses of origin,
and how have these criteria changed over time? How have developments in nuclear
astrophysics, cosmochemstry, and the space program affected the theories
concerning the origins and development of our solar system? Professor Brush's
work has proved to be extraordinarily useful for both historians and
philosophers of science. A trained physicist, he fully understands the technical
aspects of his subject. Such a background is essential in studying contemporary
science. Further, he is an award winning historian--his study of the development
of thermodynamics won the major book award in the field. These combined
scientific and historical credentials with his proven productivity virtually
guarantee that this grant will result in significant results in our
understanding of the processes of development of contemporary theoretical and
experimental science.