* 8705884
* Econometric Modeling of Processes with Varying Structural   Parameters
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Robert Engle, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 07/31/1990
* USD 117,047.00

This project continues a successful line of econometric research on a type of
model especially suited for time series analysis, in particular for examining
financial sector price movements. Traditional statistical methods for time
series analysis assume that the variances of forecast errors remain constant
from one observation to the next. Professor Engle and his colleagues have
developed a class of models know as Autoregressive Conditional
Heteroskedasticity (ARCH) models which relax this restrictive assumption. In the
ARCH model the variances of a variable are themselves stochastic and conditioned
on the information contained in the entire variable set. These models have been
used very successfully in analyzing asset price movements, volatility in the
stock market, in forecasting inflation, and in measuring risk. In this project
Professor Engle extends his past work to include multivariate time series
models. He allows the variances to change over time in a manner that does not
decrease the generality of the model, but results in a parsimonious
specification. Also included in this work is the concept of co-integration,
which is a statistical characterization of several series of data which might
reasonably contain common trends or growth tendencies. This is an important
extension in that such models have a straightforward economic interpretation.
Professor Engle also empirically validates his theoretical work by applying the
ARCH specification to data on asset prices in foreign exchange markets, interest
rates, options contracts, and equity prices.