* 8705646
* Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotic Methods for Bayesian and  Likelihood Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Luke-jon Tierney, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 12/31/1990
* USD 231,092.00

The primary goal of this research is to provide widely applicable methodology
for Bayesian analysis based on accurate, higher-order asymptotic theory. The
main analytical tools to be refined and employed are based on Laplace's method
for approximating integrals and the theory of weak convergence of distributions.
The effect of the parameterization on the size of apporximation errors will be
explored and diagnostic tools for assessing the adequacy of an approximation
will be obtained. Approximations for problems with multimodal posterior
densities and margianl posterior densities of implicitly defined functions will
be dervied. The first order behavior of posterior distributions based on general
nonparametric prior distributions on densities and hazard functions will be
investigated and the possibility of extending second order approximations to
nonparametric, infinite dimensional problems will be explored. Bayesian methods
are aimed at improving our ability to incorporate existing (prior) information
into decision and prediction strategies. The Baysian approach has remained
rather philosophical until the recent computer revolution. The current thrust of
excitement and activity in this area derives from the recently obtained
computational capability brought by the computer revolution and the critical
need brought by inundation of information relevant to any subject of interest.
These scientists are leaders in the effort to dramatically improve computational
capabilities for Bayesian methods. Their research will create more powerful
statistical techniques for comprehensively using informaion in the decision
making process.