* 8705134
* Muti-Channel Digital Storage and Data Reduction System for  Rotordynamics Research Laboratory
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1988
* R. Gordon Kirk, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 11/30/1988
* USD 80,153.00

A research program for experimental verification of new advanced computer
analysis codes for turbomachinery seals has been initiated at VPI. Problem areas
for design evaluation have been identified and current research is concentrating
on the prediction and experimental verification of the performance of liquid and
gas seals. Equipment provided by this grant will enable data reduction for
response and phase versus speed, orbit display, and frequency spectrum analysis
for up to 48 channels of simultaneous vibration sensor input required for this
research. The evaluation of liquid seal designs will be made by monitoring the
leakage flow, thermal distortions, pressure pulsations, and the vibratory
response of the rotating shaft and the seal element(s). The equipment provides
state-of-the-art capabilities for monitoring and reducing the vast amount of
vibratory data essential to the total understanding of the various seal designs
and the proper correlation to predicted system response. The results of this
research work will give valuable information on the accuracy of analytical
prediction programs and the data necessary to develop new advanced computer
programs which can assist in the analytical design evaluation of machinery
components and will enhance the sale of U.S. turbomachinery equipment in the
international marketplace.