* 8705084
* Interactions, Radiation and Acceleration of Energetic       Particles in Solar Flares
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Vahe Petrosian, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 12/31/1990
* USD 214,000.00

One of the most important problems in the study of solar flares is the
understanding of the mechanisms of particle acceleration. An essential step in
the solution of this problem is the determination of the characteristics of the
accelerated particles. The characteristics observed or inferred from flare
radiation, however, are not those of the accelerated particles but are these
characteristics modified through interaction with the flare plasma. The aim of
this research is the detailed investigation of these interactions with ambient
plasma waves, particles and macroscopic magnetic and electric fields. This work
will find application also in the study of electrons in the earth's ionosphere
and many other situations. The results from this analysis are used for study of
the impulsive phase gamma-rays hard x-ray, microwave and type III flare
radiation. Many of the details of interaction of energetic particles have been
analyzed under previous grants. This grant will complete some of these and begin
investigation of effects of the geometry of flaring loops and their
homogeneities on the observable quantities. It is intended to concentrate on
some statistical analysis of the observations and begin work on acceleration
mechanisms, initially in a manner that will be a natural extension of previous
studies.