* 8705445
* Genetically-Altered Bacteria:  Effects on Community         Structure and Dissemination of Recombinant DNA
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1991
* John Cairns, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 06/30/1991
* USD 166,946.00

Drs. George Lacy and John Cairns of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University request funds to determine (1) if recombinant DNA may be dispersed
into or from other bacteria in plants as well as in selected microcosm habitats,
(2) if genetically engineered microorganisms (GEMs) survive and/or colonize
these habitats, and (3) if the presence of genetically engineered microorganisms
(GEMs) have an effect upon bacterial community structure. The GEMs to be used
are constructed from the pathogenic bacterium Erwinia carotovora, which causes
soft rot or many plants, has distinct pthogenic and resident phases on or in
living plants, and survives transiently in, but does not colonize, soil or
aquatic habitats. These objectives will test the hypotheses that (1) recombinant
DNA can be dispersed from GEMs to native bacteria, (2) that GEMs survive the
habitats into which they are placed, even if at low concentrations, and (3) that
GEMs will compete with and displace native species, thus producing alterations
in normal community structure. The frequency for dispersal of recombinant DNA
from the GEMs and its integration in the genomes of other microbes will be
examined from three points of view: (1) in vitro studies will determine the
frequency for mobilization of recombinant DNA conjugation and transformation
under optimal laboratory conditions, (2) in situ microcosm studies will
determine detectable frequencies for genetic mobilization by any genetic
mechanism, and (3) in plants studies will determine if transfer may occur within
diseased plants. In these experiments, the effect of genetic similarity of DNA
recipients will be followed using taxonomically less related organisms (Bacillus
and Pseudomonas spp.) isolated from the microcosms, related organisms (Erwinia
and Klebsiella spp.), and closely related organisms (strains of E. carotovora
EC14 from which the GEMs are derived. Effects upon bacterial community structure
will be measured in microcosms representing soil and aquatic habitats into which
the pathogen is released naturally in high to low populations by decomposition
of diseased plants. Estimates of survivorship and/or colonization by the
introduced GEMs will be determined by comparing the populations reached by the
GEMs with those reached by the wildtype pathogen and total bacterial and
actinomycetal populations. Populations of specific genera will be monitored,
including Bacillus, Clostridium, Streptomyces, and fluorescent Pseudomonas spp.
by viable count procedures. This area of research in microbial ecology is highly
topical and needed at the national level. There is a great paucity of data in
these areas and both industry and regulatory agencies are being inhibited in
progress with GEMs because of the lack of fundamental information. The research
will be funded jointly with the EPA. The investigators and their institution are
highly regarded and suited for this research. The Program recommends funding.