* 8705517
* Studies of Distant Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Richard Kron, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 01/31/1992
* USD 149,000.00

The properties of galaxies at distances of many billions of light years are to
be investigated. Such galaxies are seen as they were at earlier stages of
evolution and may reveal evolutionary effects. Moreover, the curvature of the
universe expands the apparent sizes of galaxy images to a detectable degree if
the distance is great enough. Progress in this field has been difficult because
evolutionary, selection, and cosmological effects may be similar in appearance,
and the accidental measurement errors of such faint sources may be large. The
existence of large-scale structure in the universe provides a rich new field for
study, but complicates the definition of statistically fair samples. The studies
will feature the ultimate use of all practically accessible information for
complete samples of distant galaxies, including the morphology and the internal
kinematics. The methodology will be explored first by making observations of
nearby galaxies. One telescope will be instrumented with an array detector
sensitive to near-infrared light, and another telescope will be instrumented
with an optical spectrograph. The observations, carried out with large
telescopes to observe distant galaxies, will involve the use of the same
infrared array detector for the purpose of making precise photometric
measurements. An ongoing very faint redshift survey will be expanded to map out
large-scale structure in the universe at the greatest accessible distances.