* 8705323
* REU:  The Nature of Nutrient Limitation in Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Keith Van Cleve, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 01/31/1991
* USD 643,864.00

This project will examine the nature of nutrient limitation at the level of
ecosystem function. The hypothesis that the degree of nutrient limitation in an
ecosystem depends not only upon the fertility of the site but also upon the
responsiveness of the vegetation that occupies the site and upon the potential
of soil microorganisms to immobilize nutrients will be tested. The response to
nitrogen addition in two nitrogen-limited ecosystems (tundra and boreal forest)
will be examined. Field experiments will determine the growth response of
vegetation to large and small levels of nitrogen addition and the degree to
which added nitrogen is immobilized by micro-organisms or absorbed by plants.
Laboratory experiments will determine the potential of plants and soil
microorganisms adapted to differing soil fertility to absorb nutrients. The
extent to which soil microorganisms are energy- vs. nutrient-limited in
ecosystems of different fertilities and the way in which changing
energy/nutrient limitation affects nutrient immobilization or release will also
be determined. The research should improve basic understanding of the nature of
nutrient limitation in ecosystems and may provide insight into the question of
why some ecosystems are so much more responsive to fertilization than are
others. The latter question has considerable economic importance. The University
of ALaska Taiga research group is excellent and highly productive. Facilities
for the work are quite well developed as is the science administration
environment provided by the Institute of Arctic Biology. The Ecosystem Studies
Program enthusiastically recommends that this now three-year continuing award be
made.