* 8705811
* Development of a Production System Model of Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1992
* John Anderson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 03/31/1992
* USD 380,424.00

This research is concerned with developing and testing a theory of human
cognition. That theory sees human cognition as operating according to a set of
production rules. Each production rule specifies that a mental act should take
place when a particular type of mental state occurs. The research will continue
the development of the PUPS computer simulation program, begun under Anderson's
prior NSF support, which enables one to trace out the interactions of these
production rules. An effort will be made to make the PUPS simulation available
to other interested researchers in the cognitive science community. Part of the
effort will be devoted to the writing of a research monograph that will describe
the support for Anderson's production system theory. Empirical research will be
devoted to analyzing the distinction between procedural and declarative
knowledge which is central to the theory. Procedural knowledge is knowledge
about how to perform various cognitive skills and is encoded as production
rules. Declarative knowledge is factual knowledge about the world which can be
used by the production rules. The research will try to establish that these are
separate types of knowledge, by showing that there is little transfer between
learning procedural and learning declarative knowledge, that declarative
knowledge is more readily interfered with by performing a concurrent task which
involves similar information, and that people have more conscious control over
expression of declarative knowledge. The research will also compare the basic
parameters associated with acquisition and retention of the two types of
knowledge. The theory is of general applied significance, because it is
concerned with the processes by which complex cognitive skills (like doing a
proof in logic) are acquired. In particular, in examining the relationship
between declarative and procedural knowledge, the research is laying the
foundation for understanding how people make the transition from reading written
instruction in a technical domain to solving problems fluently in that domain.
Anderson is following up this applied challenge in other projects with other
funding.