* 8705574
* Identification and Control of Pharmacokinetic/Physiological Systems by Closed-Loop IPFM Drug Injection
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Robert Northrop, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* william weigand
* 02/28/1990
* USD 173,574.00

The pharmacological treatment of disease becomes more effective when the
concentration of the administered drug in the body is held constant. This action
provides for the renewed support of a research project in which the discrete
algorithms for the closed-loop control of in vivo drug concentration or some
physiological parameter has been developed. These algorithms are based on
Integral Pulse Frequency Modulation (IPFM), in which control is in the form of
small, bolus injections of the drug. Accurate and rapid identification means to
estimate the parameters of various controlled plants (the plant dynamics relate
drug concentration or regulated physiological parameter to drug input rate)
while the closed-loop system is operating will be developed. Continuous
estimates of the pharmacokinetic plant's parameters will be used to tune the
controller, detect side-effects of the drug, and form a data base for particular
drug's behavior in the body. An improved, finer grained nonlinear model of
glucose metabolism will be developed in order to adapt the nonlinear IPFM
controller previously designed to run effectively with a peripheral compartment
glucose sensor. Futhermore, models will be developed for the dynamics of deep
pain in humans, including neurophysiological and psychological factors, and the
pharmacokinetics of opioid drugs for analgesia. A non-linear, adaptive, demand-
analgesia controller will be designed for safe and efficient self-administration
of analgesic drugs. The Principal Investigator has been well trained both in
engineering and physiology to lead this interdisciplinary research. The
Institutional support is adequate, I recommend support.