* 8705228
* Mechanisms of Homogeneous Activation of Hydrocarbons by     Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1987,04/30/1991
* Thomas Flood, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 04/30/1991
* USD 302,924.00

Metal compounds are used extensively as catalysts for facilitating structural
conversions of hydrocarbons, as required for reforming petroleum distillates to
produce high octane gasoline, and for the formation of carbon-carbon bonds, as
is necessary in the utilization of coal for the synthesis of useful organic
compounds. The goal of this project is to provide a more thorough understanding
of such catalytic processes, with a focus on transition metal catalysis of the
formation or cleavage of carbon-carbon or carbon-hydrogen chemical bonds.
Mechanistic studies of reactions of hydrocarbons in the coordination sphere of
soluble complexes of transition metals will be undertaken. The target systems
have been chosen to provide well-defined examples of reactions which form or
break C-H and C-C bonds. Reversible alkene insertions into metal carbon bonds,
intramolecular gamma-C-H activations, and intermolecular C-H activations provide
the focus for the work. Metal oxidation state, steric bulk and electronic
effects of ancillary ligands, alkyl group structure, charge and chelate ring
size will be investigated as variables in a detailed look at the mechanisms of
representative reactions. Systems to be studiesd include complexes of Pt, Pd, Ti
and Zr containing a deuterium-labeled 2,2-dimethyl-5-pentyl ligand which shows
reversible alkene insertion by specific deuterium site exchange. Gamma-C-H
activation will be investigated with a variety of deuterium-labeled square-
planar iridium(I) alkyl complexes. Intra- and intermolecular C-H activation will
be studied in a series of octahedral Os(II) and Ir(III) phosphine and phosphite
alkyl hydride complexes. The possibility of dictating a preference for
intermolecular activation of alkanes by the synthesis of cyclometallation-
resistant ligands will be investigated. In all cases a thorough examination of
mechanisms will be made using kinetics, deuterium site labeling, kinetic isotope
effects, and the effect of substrate structure on reactivity.