* 8705434
* Application of the Supercomputer to the Solution of Large-  Scale Economic Models
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Bruce Lehmann, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 12/31/1988
* USD 0.00

This interesting project examines the applicability of the supercomputer in
solving large-scale economic models. These models occur in macroeconomic
analysis and in research on the financial sector of the economy. They are
typically very complicated and nonlinear. They cannot be solved analytically,
and so require simulations to be useful. The advent of relatively inexpensive
and powerful computers, such as the vector processor, has greatly reduced the
cost of simulation in many fields including economics. In statistics and
econometrics, simulations usually take one of two forms, namely Monte Carlo
studies, and parameter estimation via a technique known as bootstrapping. In the
former, random samples are repeatedly generated from a known model, thus the
statistical properties of the estimates of the model parameters can be
ascertained. This is in essence a controlled experiment. In the latter approach,
simulation is used to evaluate the statistical properties of parameter estimates
obtained from a particular sample by repeatedly randomly generating data that
are similar to the original data and examining the statistical properties of the
resulting parameter estimates. Each procedure has advantages and disadvantages.
This project examines these two analytical techinques in detail using the
supercomputer. In particular they are applied to large economic factor analysis
models of the financial sector to test various theories of stock price movements
and asset pricing and accumulation.