* 8705394
* Evolution of Specificity in Insect/Plant Interactions: The Relationship of Oviposition Preference and Larval Performance
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1987,06/30/1991
* John Thompson, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* James R. Gosz
* 06/30/1991
* USD 240,860.00

Thisresearch concerns the relationship between oviposition preference and larval
performance in closely-related butterfly species of Papilio (Lepidoptera) that
differ in the plant families on which they feed. The study will take advantage
of the recent finding that oviposition preference in P. oregonius is controlled
partly by loci on the X chromosome. This finding provides for the first time the
opportunity to ask some fundamental questions on how oviposition preference and
larval performance are genetically related in the evolution of host associations
in insect/plant interactions. Section I of the study tests whether larval
performance on different plant species is controlled, partly or solely, by loci
on the X chromosome as is oviposition preference in these species. Section II
then analyzes whether there is variation among isofemale lines within population
in larval performance on different plant species as there is for host selection
in ovipositing females in these species. Finally, section III considers how
variation in larval performance correlates with variation in oviposition
preference with respect to inheritance through the X chromosome. Together, the
results from these three sections will aid in the development of the theory of
insect/plant interactions and the evolutionary ecology of host association by
addressing the fundamental problem of the relationship between oviposition
preference and larval performance on different hosts.