* 8705294
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Game Theory and            Mathematical Economics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Pradeep Dubey, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1989
* USD 115,800.00

This project focuses on fundamental mathematical questions in game theory and
its applications to economics. In particular, the investigation centers on value
theory for games with a continuum of players. Theory of value for such games was
developed by Aumann and Shapley in the period between 1964 and 1974. It has
provided a mathematical model of perfect competition in productive economies and
in some exchange economies. The existence and uniqueness of values for various
classes of games, characterized by mathematical properties such as atomic or
non-atomic probability measures, finite number of generators, or finite number
of lattice operations from a finite set of measures, is of current vivid
interest. Neyman and Dubey intend to prove that, for exact market games, any
continuous value is necessarily an element of the core, and to extend this
investigation to more general market games. Complementary to this axiomatic
approach is the asymptotic one, in which the model involves the approximations
of a game with a continuum of players by finite games. The asymptotic value is
defined as a limit of the Shapley values of such finite games. One of the
central problems is the existence of the asymptotic value. Neyman has recently
settled a long standing problem by proving that all games defined by a monotone
continuous function and a probabilty measure with a non-atomic part and possibly
countably many atoms have asymptotic value. He and Dubey now propose to study
the existence of asymptotic values for games with either positive or signed
vector measures. Another area of proposed study is the axiomatic theory of
allocations and payoffs that would encompass economies with core allocations,
value allocations and Walrasian allocations. One goal is to explain the much
remarked fact their solutions become equivalent on the domain of smooth,
perfectly competitive economies. Another goal is to pinpoint the differences
that emerge between them on bigger domains. The approach taken in this research
is as follows: given a domain of economies and a solution, one lists properties
that categorically determine the solution there. If these properties are shared
by another solution on that domain, one deduces that they coincide there. On the
other hand, if a minor variant of the properties categorizes the other solution,
then this pinpoints the difference between them. The investigators intend to
analyze the economies both with and without perfect competition. Mathematical
game theory of the type described here is a large research activity bridging
economic theory and pure and applied mathematics. I relies on mathematical tools
such as measure theory, multivalued maps, saddle point theorems and stochastic
processes. The results of this and other investigations are aimed at
interpreting the mechanisms governing various economic models . They create a
conceptual framework for understanding of real economic systems.