* 8705589
* Multi-variate Minimization Techniques and Molecular         Dynamics Simulations for Predicting 3-D Structures of DNA   and RNA on Supercomputers
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1991
* Suse Broyde, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Maxine Hynson
* 02/28/1991
* USD 260,291.00

The goal for the research proposed here is to develop mathematical tools for
computing three-dimensional structures of large biological molecules. In
particular, modeling and large- scale minimization techniques will be devised to
predict the conformations of single and doublestranded RNA and DNA molecules.
The computational tools involve semi-empirical potential energy minimization and
molecular dynamics, executed on the Cray X-MP and aided by interactive computer
graphics on the Evans and Sutherland PS-330. The plan is to work on the
following four areas of program development: (1) Global optimization strategies;
test the determination Tunneling method of Levy and Gomez and a variant of the
stochastic Simulated Annealing: (2) Faster manipulation of the pairwise
interactions in the energy function; investigate the new method recently
proposed by Greengard and Rokhlin which could reduce the order O(N2)
computational complexity for an N - particle system to order O(N): (3)
Implementation of molecular dynamics: dynamics simulations will enable an
examination of the dynamic trajectories of the structures obtained from
minimization; and: (4) Incorporation of solvent and metalions into the molecular
model; this will provide a more realistic potential field to represent the
molecular forces influencing the RNA and DNA in its natural milieu. The
developed computational tools will yield the ability to investigate some
intriquing problems of three-dimensional molecular structures. These problems
include the dependence of DNA conformation on the nucleic acid base sequence and
the structure and the complex folding patterns of single-stranded RNA. The
minimizations and dynamics results will be used to make 16 mm films and
videotapes that will reveal the dynamic range of structures and permit us to
relate conformational features with known biological functions. This proposal
projects to develop mathematical tools, using state-of-the-art optimization
algorithms, for examination of dynamics simulation of solvent and metal-ion
interaction in the biologically important molecular RNA and DNA. The Program
Director for Computational Science and Engineering recommends support in the sum
of $69,370 for a period of one year.