* 8705703
* Synthesis, Spectroscopy, and Novel Reactivity of            Metalloporphyrin Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1987,10/31/1990
* Harold Goff, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* John B. Hunt
* 10/31/1990
* USD 282,186.00

An extremely important type of chemical reaction is the addition of oxygen atoms
to an organic compound, a process called oxidation. The compounds under study in
this research project, metalloporphyrins, constitute the active sites of enzymes
which carry out biological oxidations and also show great promise as laboratory
and industrial catalysts for oxidation reactions. The aims of this project
include both the synthesis of new compounds of this type and achieving a more
profound understanding of the mechanisms of catalytic action. This project
represents in part a continuation of present efforts in the general area of
spectroscopic studies of highly oxidized and unusual metalloporphyrin compounds.
Newly proposed studies are designed to demonstrate prototype chemical and
electrochemical systems for oxidation of hydrocarbon and carbonyl compounds.
Preliminary results with iron porphyrin-catalyzed air oxidation of these
molecules are particularly noteworthy. Deuterium NMR spectroscopy of the
paramagnetic and often highly reactive metalloporphyrin compounds provides a
central theme for the five diverse projects described here. Specific objectives
include: (1) continued synthetic and reactivity studies of metalloporphyrin
complexes with strongly oxidizing oxyanion and thioanion axial ligands; (2)
expanded use of fluoroiron complexes for electrocatalytic hydrocarbon oxidations
and dioxygen activation; (3) detailed study of chlorine(I) oxide as a
metalloporphyrin oxidant, and evaluation of the role of this anhydride in
manganese porphyrin mediated hypochlorite oxidation of hydrocarbon compounds;
(4) evaluation of various metalloporphyrin derivatives as catalysts for the air
oxidation of aldehydes and other cosubstrates; and (5) synthesis of novel
metalloporphyrin compounds by insertion of substrates into the iron-carbon bond
of alkyl and aryliron porphyrin complexes.