* 8705398
* A New Method for Response Spectrum Superposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1987,08/31/1988
* Mihailo Trifunac, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1988
* USD 29,955.00

This project is undertaken under provisions in AD/ENG Bulletin No. 85- 25 for
"Expedited Awards for Novel Research." The primary objective of the research is
to complete the final development of a statistical response spectrum method for
multi-degree of freedom systems. Currently, such problems can only be handled
using approximations. The new method to be developed is powerful, accurate, and
has a round theoretical basis following the work by Cartwright and Longuet-
Higgins. The need to estimate the maximum response of multi-degree-of-freedom
structures is evident as many spectrum estimation or superposition methods have
been proposed. However, very few of them are established on sound physical basis
and utilizing statistical theory which can account for the uncertainties in the
results they produce. The proposed method is capable of evaluating the expected
and most probable amplitude of local response peaks for each floor of a multi-
story building. Computer runs will be made to test the numerical accuracy before
the method can be fully documented, published, and introduced into practical
applications. The work proposed would produce a method far superior to any of
the existing methods. The expedited award mechanism is used to enable a uniquely
qualified graduate student to complete the work while available. The Principal
Investigator is one of the leaders in structural dynamics and ground motions. He
has pioneered many important subjects in these areas. A one-year grant is
strongly supported.