* 8705008
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Multiple Spark-Gap   Camera
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1987,01/01/1988
* Wayne Charlie, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Dianne McCormick
* 01/01/1988
* USD 0.00

Research equipment is provided for the configuration of a multiple spark-gap
camera having framing rates of about one million frames per second. Its purchase
will complement an existing blast-induced liquefaction laboratory and field
site, where small-scale, blast- loading field tests in saturated soils are
currently performed. Research conducted with the multiple spark-gap camera will
permit laboratory tests to be conducted to study the elasto-dynamic behavior of
unsaturated and saturated photoelastic models of soils. The soil particles are
modeled as a series of round and randomly shaped discs of different sizes. This
type of modeling provides basic information about wave velocities, contact
stresses (normal and tangential) and contact duration between particles. This is
all necessary information for a rigorous analysis of the complex dynamic wave-
soil interaction where nonlinear stress-strain behavior is the norm, providing
the potential for adaptation to experimental modeling of saturated soils. The
multiple spark-gap camera is also expected to show the usefulness of a new
concept, that of the subsurface wave gide, to isolate structures form surface
vibrations. This is a concept which may provide an alternative to the use of
trenches and other surface wave guides, which for the most part are impractical
in real world applications.