* 8705986
* Evolution of North American, Upper Cretaceous Dinosaurs     and Their Terrestrial Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1992
* John Horner, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1992
* USD 220,569.00

The Upper Cretaceous Two Medicine Formation of northwestern Montana has promise
of yielding the most comprehensive data ever documented concerning the evolution
of Upper Cretaceous dinosaur faunas and their respective ecosystems. Preliminary
collection of dinosaur specimens from various stratigraphic positions throughout
the 650 meter thick (12 million years) unit has produced primitive,
opportunistic species (ancestral to known lineages) from basal sediments;
conservative species from "upland" sediments; and transitional (Judithian to
Edmontonian) species from uppermost sediments. In each case a regressional or
transgressional phase of interior seaway fluctuation can be correlated with a
particular fauna. The objective of this proposal is to collect additional
specimens and data from previously known and new, uncollected sites for use in
subjecting previous hypotheses, concerning physical, causal effects of
speciation, to rigorous tests. Additionally, the Two Medicine sites offer
considerable promise of yielding a substantial amount of new data pertaining to
ancestral and descendant Upper Cretaceous dinosaur species. Determination of
transitional variables is made possible, owing to the fact that abundant, well
preserved specimens of numerous ontogenetic stages are available. The proposed
time frame for the project is three years.