* 8705534
* Transition Metal-Catalyzed Olefin Polymerization:           Mechanistic Studies and Catalyst Design
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1987,04/30/1991
* Maurice Brookhart, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 04/30/1991
* USD 272,282.00

One of the most important industrial processes is the conversion of olefins,
i.e. hydrocarbon molecules containing double bonds, to polymers. Examples of two
such polymers are polyethylene and polypropylene. Although organometallic
catalysts have been used in the commercial polymerization of olefins for several
decades, remarkably little is understood about the detailed mechanism of the
catalytic processes, and catalyst design has been largely empirical. The
Principal Investigator has developed chemistry which promises to yield
mechanistic details of olefin polymerization and allow more logical design of
catalyst systems. Migratory insertion reactions of transition metal alkyl olefin
complexes are key transformations in hetero- and homogeneous olefin
polymerization reactions and numerous stoichiometric carbon-carbon bond forming
reactions. The proposed work focuses on understanding fundamental aspects of
this reaction coupled with preparation and study of new olefin polymerization
catalysts. The Principal Investigator has obtained results recently which
suggest that there is a relationship between the structure and dynamics of
ethylene hydride complexes and their alkyl analogs and that ethylene hydride
complexes which exist as bridged or agostic structures can serve as ethylene
polymerization catalysts. A cobalt complex possessing an agostic ethyl group has
been discovered which catalyzes living polymerization of ethylene. Goals of the
research are (1) to synthesize and explore the reactivity and catalytic activity
of cationic and neutral Co(III) complexes containing an agostic ethyl group, a
neutral or anionic two-electron donor group, and either a Cp or a Cp* ligand,
(2) to prepare new agostic ethylene hydride complexes and evaluate these species
as olefin polymerization catalysts, (3) to develop these new complexes for
living polymerization of a diverse group of olefins, with emphasis on
correlations of mechanistic features with polymer structure and utilizing living
systems for block and copolymerization, and 4) to develop methods to
functionalize or cap one or both ends of the polymer chain with functional
groups.