* 8705477
* Contracting Under Asymmetric Information
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* William Rogerson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1990
* USD 67,133.00

In recent years it has become clear that the paradigm of a competitive market
with large numbers of buyers and sellers determining price in a full information
environment is not a very useful perspective for the study of a broad range of
interesting economic relationships, such as the relationship between the
shareholders of a firm and its managers, or between Congress, the military, and
defense contractors. In these and many other relationships information about
important economic variables is privately held and the response of economic
actors in these relationships is to construct contractual relationships which
give incentives for correct actions given the informational constraints of the
situation. Thus shareholders must attempt to structure contracts which give
managers the incentive to choose the right mix of projects for the firm as well
as to exert sufficient effort in implementing them. The project contributes to
four important unresolved issues in the study of contracts under asymmetric
information. The first part develops a new method for determining when necessary
conditions for optimal contracts can be derived from a first-order approach. The
second topic involves the double-tiered agency problem, i.e., the principal
offers a contract to his agent who in turn offers a contract to another agent.
For example, society (the chief principal) gives the shareholders of the firm
(the subordinate principal) a liability rule for accidents. The firm in turn
hires directors and managers (the agent) who exert effort to reduce the
probability that the product will be defective. Preliminary work suggests
welfare gains if society directly imposes legal liability on managers. This will
be the first time that this important problem has been studied within a contract
theory framework. The third topic investigates the nature of optimal contracts
when a better-informed agent must be given incentives to truthfully reveal his
information to the principal. Finally the fourth topic concerns a number of
approaches to modeling the contracting relationships in defense contracting
among Congress, the military, and defense contractors.