* 8705558
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Research in Law & Social     Science
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Robert Georges, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 01/31/1989
* USD 6,825.00

Ethnicity is an important source of identity and community and as such needs to
be understood in terms of the issues of legal pluralism in our own society. Ms.
Evans-Pritchard's study applies the theoretical, methodological, and empirical
insights that have been gained in this arena as well as the perspectives and
concerns of folkloric research to a study of how the American legal system goes
about maintaining what it considers to be ethnic traditions--the way arguments
and definitions are formed and the way that the matter of ethnic values and
traditions are made justifiable in a multi-ethnic society. Through her doctoral
dissertation research under the direction of Drs. Jones and Georges, she plans
to examine the conceptualizations of tradition that emerge from the judicial
process and the relationship such conceptualizations have to ethnographic
reality. Specifically, Ms. Evans-Pritchard focuses on the "Portal Case," a
highly controversial lawsuit in which an Anglo craftsman challenged the Indian-
only policy of Santa Fe's traditional Indian market. She compares the Portal
Case with five recent court cases in various parts of the country which have
involved similar issues of tradition and ethnic or cultural boundaries in order
to operationalize the process by which the formal legal apparatus is currently
handling the informal social force of tradition. A key element of her work is to
establish the ethnographic context of three related New Mexico cases, including
the Portal Case, involving Native American arts and crafts in order to
illuminate the relationship between the codified conceptualizations of tradition
expressed in the court proceedings and the imbedded views of tradition held by
the affected Native American craftsmen. Through systematic, comparative analysis
of diverse sources of data, this project holds substantial promise of advancing
our understanding of how courts and litigants construct boundaries around
cultural or ethnic groups.