* 8706102
* Organoboranes - New Chemistry and Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Herbert Brown, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 07/31/1991
* USD 286,524.00

This program in organoboron chemistry is being supported by the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program. The vast majority of molecules in natural
systems exist in only a right- or left-handed form. This phenomenon was
discovered by Pasteur. This work will develop new routes to these right- or
left-handed forms using organoboron compounds as reagents. These organoboron
compounds are being developed as synthetic tools to facilitate new and economic
pathways to the complex molecules that occur in nature. The hydroboration
reaction makes organoboranes readily available. Research in this area has
extended the applicability to the synthesis of cyclic, polycyclic and various
partially alkylated organoboranes. A recently developed method of enhancing the
optical purity of mono- and diisopinocompheylalkylboranes to essentially 100%
enantiomerically pure boronic esters opens possibilities for preparing a variety
of chiral boranes in essentially 100% enantiomeric purity. The reactions of
organoboranes commonly proceed with complete retention. For the first time, it
is possible to develop a procedure for the synthesis of optically pure
enantiomers. To explore this possibility, it is planned to search for new
reactions leading to valuable compounds not now available, such as terminal
acetylenes, mercaptans, nitriles, etc. A systematic study will be made to modify
certain existing reactions to accommodate relatively hindered optically active
groups. The utility of various homologating agents will be explored for the
homologation of boracyclanes and vinylborane derivatives. The homologation of
B-alkyl-9-borabicycloı3.3.1!nonane derivatives to alpha-amino acid derivatives
will be examined. The synthesis of various stereodefined vinylorganoboranes will
be made and studied for their utility in the synthesis of a wide variety of
unsaturated organic compounds.