* 8706151
* Four Semiannual Carnegie-Rochester Conferences on Public    Policy: University of Rochester, April l989 - Carnegie-     Mellon, November 1989
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/1987,05/31/1990
* Allan Meltzer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1990
* USD 150,000.00

The Carnegie-Rochester Conferences on Public Policy are designed to foster
research and discussion of major policy issues by economists from academia and
policy-making institutions. Economists in universities are often unfamiliar with
the constraining effect of institutional arrangements in the shaping of policy
issues and policies and economists in government are often less aware of current
research and its implications. A central purpose of the conference is to provide
the interaction between these groups in order to improve the economic analysis
of policy issues and policy. The specific aims of the conference are to develop
the implications of recent research for policy; bring together economists with
different approaches or conclusions to narrow the differences; and to uncover
the analysis used by institutions that set policies. The conferences are held
semi-annually at Carnegie-Mellon University and the University of Rochester.
About 50 participants plus faculty and graduate students from the host
institutions are invited to each conference. Participants from U.S. and foreign
central banks and U.S. and international agencies attend regularly. Special care
is taken to involve promising younger scholars. The papers and formal
discussions are edited and prepared for publication to broaden the impact of the
conference. The high quality of past meetings in this conference series show
that the conference organizers have the ability to accomplish the goals of this
project.