* 8706444
* Equipment and Renovation Support for the Coweeta Hydrologic Laboratory
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1989
* Wayne Swank, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 06/30/1989
* USD 70,350.00

Results of more than 50 years of scientific investigation at the Coweeta
Hydrologic Laboratory have established the site as a national and international
center for forest ecosystem and hydrology research. The 2185-ha Laboratory,
located in the Southern Appalachian Mountains of North Carolina, is a USDA
Forest Service property where cooperative research is jointly administered by
the Southeastern Forest Experiment Station and the University of Georgia. In
1986 the research program included more than 50 senior investigators and over 50
graduate students and technicians from 19 different universities and agencies.
Although current research use of the site is high, lack of adequate overnight
facilities has significantly restricted use by important segments of the
scientific community. One house trailer with accommodations for eight persons is
the only on-site facility currently available for overnight occupancy. This
project provides support to renovate and refurbish an existing building for
dormitory, living and work space to accommodate up to 30 investigators. Funds
are also provided for a microcomputer to be placed in the facility and a four-
wheel-drive vehicle for shared investigator use. Support for these items will
substantially enhance the value of the site for environmental and hydrologic
research.