* 8706703
* Neurochemistry of Schwann Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Joseph Poduslo, Mayo Clinic Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 06/30/1991
* USD 134,100.00

Two experimental animal models of neuropathy permit the in vivo assessment of
alterations in Schwann cell metabolism that occur during the presence and
absence of myelin assembly. The crush-injured, adult rat sciatic nerve permits
the analysis of Schwann cell metabolism during active myelin assembly whereas
the permanently transected nerve permits analysis of Schwann cells in the
absence of myelin assembly. The purpose of this grant application is to
determine the biosynthetic control mechanisms in the post-translational
processing of the major myelin protein (PO) expressed by Schwann cells in these
two models of neuropathy. This will be compared to the processing events in the
normal adult nerve, as well as the nerve during development. Processing events
that will be investigated will include glycosylation, phosphorylation,
sulfation, and acylation. In addition, by directly comparing these events, using
the appropriate radioactive precursor, it should be possible to assess the
sequence of these post translational modifications. Scientific methods to be
employed include 1) radioactive precursor incorporation into PO after in vitro
incubation gradient electrophoresis as identified by fluorography and
autoradiography; c) serial lectin affinity chromatography coupled with
endoglycosidase and exoglycosidase digestion to determine the precise
oligosaccharide structure calibrated gel filtration and high performance liquid
chromatography. The post- translational modification of proteins is an important
processing event which governs the appropriate targeting of proteins to their
often uniquely determined by the protein modifications. Little information is
available concerning the mechanism which regulate these post-translational
control mechanisms will foster future research concerning potential abnormal
protein processing resulting in defective intra- or extracellular targeting and
subsequent disruption of cellular communication.