* 8706754
* Mathematical Sciences: Optimal Bayesian Design for          Non-Linear Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Kinley Larntz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 12/31/1989
* USD 110,303.00

The goal of this research is to provide the theory and the methods for finding
efficient experimental designs for non-linear problems. In the non-linear case,
the efficiency of a design depends on the values of the unknown parameters and a
traditional approach to the problem has been to design for a best guess of the
parameters. A Bayesian approach uses a prior distribution and takes into account
not only the best guess but also the uncertainty associated with the best guess.
Bayesian designs can also be interpreted in a non-Bayesian framework as designs
that minimize the average asymptotic variances. The authors will extend their
results on the important special problem of designing an experiment where the
response increases with dose according to a logistic distribution. The primary
tools they must further develop in order to obtain successful extensions are
optimization algorithms. They first intend to work on sequential designs. This
research will permit more information to be incorporated into the design of
efficient experiments. Inproved computational capabilities over the last decade
makes this work possible. Prior to the computer revolution, scientific
experiments were simply designed with computational feasibility a major
consideration. Not only has this limitation been largely eliminated, but also
larger and more complex experiments are being conducted. Efficient designs for
modern science are critical for sound utilization of the nation's research and
development funds.