* 8706866
* Magnetoreception and Magnetotactic Orientation
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* John Phillips, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 06/30/1991
* USD 173,672.00

Behavioral studies carried out over the last 20 years indicate that many,
perhaps most, types of animals detect the earth's magnetic field and use this
source of directional information to guide their movements. Remarkably, however,
among higher animals and, in particular, land-dwelling vertebrates, the way in
which the magnetic field is detected has not been determined. Recent studies of
the Eastern newt have shown that this salamander is an especially good subject
for studying magnetic- field sensitivity because it exhibits much stronger
responses to earth-strength magnetic fields in the laboratory than have been
observed for other vertebrates. Furthermore, the Eastern newt exhibits two types
of magnetic responses with different properties, suggesting that two different
magnetoreception systems may be involved. Dr. Phillips will carry out behavioral
experiments designed to elucidate the sensory mechanism(s) responsible for
detection of the earth's magnetic field. Specifically, these experiments will
test the hypothesis that the Eastern newt has two different magnetoreception
systems: one system utilizing small particles of the mineral magnetite that act
like tiny compass needles and a second system that relies on specialized visual
receptors that, in effect, "see" the magnetic field. Determining how vertebrates
detect the earth's magnetic field and, in particular, whether the visual system
plays a role in this sensory capability is of considerable importance to our
understanding of the detection and processing of sensory information by
vertebrates, including man.