* 8706858
* Automatic and Attentional Components in Visual Space        Perception
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1990
* William Epstein, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/1990
* USD 126,998.00

This grant for two years is on visual perception. The function of the visual
system is to generate representations of the environment that will support
adaptive behavior. It is important for certain "visual constancies" to be
developed, so that for example a small object nearby is not mistaken for a
larger object farther away. For an observer to compute a visual representation
of the size of an object, both the projected size of the object and the viewing
distance must be considered. Similarly, other "visual constancies" of objective
shape, depth and velocity must involve considering features other than the
projected view of the object. One explanation for considering these other
features is that mental "attention" is required for adequate processing, in
addition to some "automatic" processing components that work in the absence of
attention (known as "pre-attentive" processing). This two-stage model suggests
that two-dimensional properties (size, shape and position) do not require
attention, but the 3- dimensional construct does depend on attention, operating
on the 2-D representation. This project will assess the computational steps for
producing such representations, to see whether a two- stage model of processing
is required for 3-D analysis. Human observers will be presented with visual
stimuli along with different kinds of attention-distractors. Then they will be
given a test stimulus and asked if it is the same or different from the
original. If a two-stage process occurs, distraction of attention is expected to
cause false positive responses. Tests will concentrate on shape-at-a-slant, and
size-at-a-distance. A second set of experiments will utilize search time
necessary to distinguish such targets in a multiple array. Here longer search
times are expected to reflect the longer processing required for attentive
steps, compared to the pre-attentive steps. This research uses a novel approach,
and has important implications for understanding visual space perception, and
the field of computational vision. It is likely to have impact on concepts of
the role of attention in perception in general, and also on design of artificial
vision systems.