* 8706652
* Automated Semantic Analysis of Formal Specifications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Stephen Garland, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Janet L. Gatton
* 12/31/1990
* USD 203,012.00

There is now widespread agreement that precise specifications can play an
important role in software development and maintenance. It is less clear that
formal specification, as opposed to precise informal specifications, are worth
the extra effort required to create them. Proponents of formal specifications
have argued that their susceptibility to machine analysis and manipulation
increases their value and reduces their cost. This project is trying to support
this claim by building and using tools that aid in the construction of formal
specifications for programs and program modules. The specification languages
that have been used permit significant assertions about logical properties of
specifications--properties related to consistency, completeness, and module
independence--to be made. Experience in hand checking specifications has lead to
the conviction that such assertions are useful in establishing the validity of a
specification. Unfortunately, these assertions cannot be checked completely by
machine because they are all undecidable in the general case. Hence, this
project will: do the theoretical work necessary to design useful approximations
to these checks; implement a specification system that incorporates these
approximations, building upon an existing syntax-directed editor and term-
rewriting laboratory; evaluate these tools by using them to write
specifications; and report on this experience, paying particular attention to
the merits of formal vs. precise informal, and definitional vs. operational,
specifications.