* 8706261
* Interpreting Quantum Field Theory
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1987,05/31/1989
* Paul Teller, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 05/31/1989
* USD 33,000.00

Professor Teller, in collaboration with Professor Michael Redhead, is
undertaking a major project to produce a new interpretation of quantum field
theory. Heretofore, most work on this topic has used a particle interpretation
with much less sophistication than has been applied to the interpretation of the
parent theory, quantum mechanics. Professors Teller and Redhead will develop
their new interpretation of quantum field theory based on an application of the
quantized harmonic oscillator and will build this into an interpretive tool
which will give a much more faithful grip on the theory than does the particle
approach. That such a new interpretation is needed is clear because this theory
provides our currently best explanation of the nature of matter. The current
impoverished state of its interpretation constitutes an important gap in our
larger scientific understanding of the world. Yet such an interpretation of QFT
has been difficult to construct because of the newness and complexity of the
theory. This study will begin by showing the inadequacy of anything which could
plausibly be called a particle interpretation as well as develop their
alternative. Both Professors Teller and Redhead are well qualified to carry out
this research. Professor Teller has made significant contributions under
previous NSF grants to our understanding of the philosophical foundations of
quantum mechanics. Professor Redhead is a noted physicist and philosopher. Their
collaboration promises to make a very significant contribution to our
understanding of the most formidable of theories concerning the nature of
matter. Their projected study will be of great value for physics and philosophy
alike.