* 8706850
* Competition, Relativism and Market Choice
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1989
* Debra Aron, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1989
* USD 42,817.00

Most of standard microeconomic theory focuses on the absolute level of crucial
decision variables rather than on the importance of their relative magnitude
among agents. The firm's profit maximization condition compares the absolute
level of marginal costs with the absolute level of marginal revenue. But this
abstracts from most of the strategic behavior that businessmen consider crucial.
For example, two firms compete in an existing market, say, main frame computers.
One firm is trying to decide whether to enter a new currently nonexistent
market, say, personal computers. The decision to enter depends on expectations
about what the firm's rival will do. Calculations about how one firm does
relative to its rival are as important as calculations that align marginal cost
with absolute levels of marginal revenue. The contribution of this project comes
from developing and testing empirically a theory of product choice based
directly on relative comparisons. The idea is that a firm that is behind in one
market has an incentive to move into another line with higher variance outcomes,
much like the trailing boat in yacht racing will often veer off from the current
direction in the hopes of benefitting from an unexpected shift in the wind that
would make the new course the faster one. In yacht racing, the leader maximizes
his chances of winning by following the strategy of his opponent and also
veering off in the new direction because the leader maintains his relative
advantage over the challenger. If the wind shifts favorably for the challenger,
the leader benefits as well. If it does not, the leader is still likely to
maintain his lead. For the same reasons the firm that led in the original market
may be drawn into competition in the new market. The goal of this project is to
provide empirically testable implications for the product development strategies
of firms across industries and by other observable characteristics, such as age
of the firm, start-up costs, and inherent riskiness of the business. The high
quality and originality of the preliminary work by the investigators on this
subject show they have the ability to accomplish this goal.