* 8706094
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Modern Analysis          Applicable to Fundamental Physical Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Irving Segal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* William Y. Velez
* 12/31/1990
* USD 181,893.00

Professor Irving Segal has been an extraordinarily creative, broad, and
influential mathematical scientist. His seminal contributions spread over five
decades span a range of research from the theory of noncommutative integration,
operator algebras, representation theory, commutative and noncommutative
harmonic analysis, Lie groups, to quantum physics, and more recently
extragalactic astronomy. Professor Segal's research is still of the highest
calibre, and his fertile mind remains a font for both remarkably beautiful
mathematics and foundational insights into the fundamental physical laws of the
universe. The current proposal treats mathematical physics on a grand scale. Its
aim is a comprehensive study of fundamental physical laws utilizing a range of
sophisticated mathematical ideas drawn from functional and harmonic analysis,
geometry, group representations, nonlinear partial differential equations,
scattering theory, and more. Central to this work is the wave equation (and
other mass zero equations) in four-dimensional space-time, the extension of
solutions beyond Minkowski space, and the quantization of nonlinear wave
equations. Applications to the Riemannian geometry of nonlinear parabolic
partial differential equations go hand in hand with modelling of empirical
elementary particle phenomena. This is an immense mathematical project of great
significance to a vast expanse of natural science.