* 8706002
* Inheritance, Change and Constraint Propagation in a Version Server for Computer-Aided Design Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Randy Katz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 02/28/1991
* USD 285,729.00

The principal investigator's approach is to study problems in the management of
data in the CAD design process. In previous NSF- supported research, the
proposer has implemented a prototype version server for computer-aided design
(CAD) data. He plans to use this as an operational testbed in which to
investigate how to apply and implement object-oriented and logic-programming
concepts, such as prototypical objects, inheritance, and inference, within the
CAD environment. Dr. Katz plans to investigate two problems: (1) new ways to
propagate data through a lattice of interrelated design objects; and (2) extend
some recent work, applying inference techniques to validate design correctness,
to the problem of controlling constraint and change propagation. VLSI (very
large scale integration) is a recent field that explores how to design highly
complex integrated circuits and related electronic systems. Development of the
field is important to the nation's competitive lead in electronics. The proposed
research is in CAD design management, a subject that is of exceptional
importance to the CAD industry. Traditional database techniques are not adequate
to support today's CAD design process. This research addresses the need to
carefully manage the many information details which are typically produced
during the CAD process. Such research is needed to promote automation in the CAD
field, where design of very and ultra large scale integrated (VLSI/ULSI)
circuits is now so complex that humans cannot effectively deal with them. The
principal investigator has made important contributions to the CAD design
management area. He brings to bear a useful blend of theoretical and practical
talents.