* 8706503
* Workshop in Advanced Molecular Biology Techniques and Their Application to Plant Research, SFC Award in U.S. and        Pakistani Currencies
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1987,05/31/1988
* John Scocca, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1988
* USD 28,254.00

Objectives and Relevancy: This project supports Dr. John Scocca to spend four
weeks at the Center for Advanced Molecular Biology at the University of Punjab,
in Lahore, Pakistan. During this period he will collaborate with Dr. S.
Riazuddin, director of the center, in conducting a workshop on molecular biology
techniques. They will be joined by two scientists from England and India as well
as scientists from Pakistan. Students will be young researchers from Pakistan as
well as from neighbouring countries. In addition, Dr. Scocca will review with
Pakistani scientists their research in this field and examine areas where future
collaborative research can be beneficial to the two countries. Special emphasis
will be on the application of these techniques to plant research. He will also
deliver lectures describing his current work. The Science in Developing
Countries program supports participation by U.S. scientists in workshops in a
foreign country to assist in the application of science and technology to
development. The training of these Pakistani scientists is useful to both
countries because their laboratory is currently carrying extensive experiments
in conjunction with scientists from several top U.S. research institutes, and
the proposed investigation will help the work on improving agriculture products
in Pakistan. Merit: The P.I. is a capable researcher in the field of the
workshop. The pakistani scientist is one of Pakistan's best known in molecular
biology experimentation, who has conducted productive research under NSF grants
in the last seven years. The workshop is likely to help the participants from
Pakistan and neighbouring countries by exposing them to the most recent
techniques of research in the field. The interaction is likely to increase the
interest in the field and in collaboration with the U.S. to the advantage of
both countries. Funding: None other than this grant.