* 8706784
* Thermal Structure of a Hot Accretionary Complex:  Upper     Shimanto Group, Shikoku, Japan
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Michael Underwood, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 12/31/1988
* USD 14,996.00

Most models of thermal structure within subduction complexes predict the
occurrences of small geothermal gradients and low heat flow. Calculated and
measured geothermal gradients in the vicinity of Nankai Trough, however, do not
support this paradigm. Moreover, abnormally high burial temperatures may have
affected the accretionary margin of southern Japan throughout Cenozoic time.
Uplifted portions of the Nankai accretionary wedge are well exposed along
several of the Japanese Islands; the youngest of these accreted strata (Eocene-
Miocene) are assigned to the Upper Shimanto Group. This project will collect
thermal-maturity data on samples from the Shimanto accretionary prism, which is
being studied by workers at Cornell and Brown Universities. Laboratory methods
include vitrinite reflectance and illite crystallinity. Objectives include
testing tectonic models using thermal-maturity data and documentation of thermal
history within individual units of the complex. The significance of the
resulting data will extend well beyond site-specific issues. Data will provide a
much-needed empirical check on existing theoretical models of thermal structure.
More importantly, the Nankai/Shimanto example appears to represent one end
member within a spectrum of thermal regimes. Consequently, results will likely
force an expansion and refinement of the fundamental conceptual framework of
subduction complexes.