* 8706567
* Biostratigraphy, Taxonomy, and Paleogeography of Conodont   Sequences in the Middle and Late Devonian (Frasnian) Tropics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Gilbert Klapper, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 11/30/1989
* USD 94,799.00

Frasnian conodont sequences in the Montagne Noire and Alberta are superbly
developed in their biostratigraphic continuity and excellent preservation of
faunas representative of the Palmatolepis biofacies. Through graphic
correlation, the sequence composited from these two areas will become a standard
of reference for this biofacies, characteristic of outer shelf to basinal
sequences throughout the inferred Devonian tropics. There has been great
inconsistency in published identifications of species of Palmatolepis and
Ancyrognathus resulting in erroneous understanding of ranges of the two
principal groups on which the Frasnian "standard" zonation is based.
Furthermore, there has been little study of the Polygnathus biofacies,
characteristic of inner shelf Frasnian sequences. My research based on
multielement taxonomy and shape analysis of platform elements has drastically
revised discrimination of species of Palmatolepis and Ancyrognathus and
consequently their stratigraphic ranges. The result is a near doubling in number
of zones within the Palmatolepis biofacies, but their resolution is far exceeded
by that obtainable through graphic correlation. Correlation between the
Palmatolepis and Polygnathus biofacies remains difficult, but is probably
resolvable through graphic methods. Proposed research will rigorously test these
new biostratigraphic and taxonomic results in widely scattered localities
throughout the Devonian tropics, with the additional long-range purpose of
developing a comprehensive analysis of Frasnian conodont paleogeography.