* 8706657
* An International Workshop on Computer-Integrated            Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1987,08/31/1989
* John Wilson, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* William Hakala
* 08/31/1989
* USD 47,430.00

A workshop on Construction Automation: Computer-integrated Construction is in
response to the National Science Foundation's increased activity in Construction
Automation Research. The workshop will be held April 2O-23, 1987 at Lehigh
University, Bethlehem, Pa., site of the NSF Engineering Research Center for
Advanced Technology for Large Structural Systems. Preeminent individuals from
all major facets of the construction industry, as well as those from disciplines
which may substantially contribute to its technological integration, will be
brought together in a suitable forum to effectively foster the advancement of
the multi-faceted construction industry. This industry is a critical,
traditional component of the nation's gross national product. The primary
purposes of the workshop itself will be to identify and formalize the folIowing:
(a) the "Pressure Points" or areas in the construction industry for significant
breakthroughs; (b) the research that should be performed to meet the needs of
this critical industry-- giving consideration to both the short-term and the
long-term needs; (c) the resources required to support or perform this research;
(d) resources available to support or perform the research and (e) mechanisms
and incentives to implement the results of the research efforts. The
recommendations and conclusions from this workshop will receive extensive
distribution to the many segments of or related to the construction industry.
ApproximateIy 45 invited participants, and a second group (gallery) of about the
same number of interested practicing professionals, researchers, and educators
will be encouraged to attend and observe without having the responsibility to
directly develop the position paper which will result from the workshop. A
report will be produced containing a substantive analysis, summary discussions,
and implementable recommendations. The Principal Investigator is very capable,
is very active in research and administrative matters relative to the contents
of the workshop. Institutional resources and budget are appropriate. An award is
recommended. The Structures and BuiIding Systems Program will contribute $23,715
and the Automation and Systems Integration Program will contribute $23,715 for a
total of $47,430.