* 8706782
* Mathematical Sciences: Constrained Problems in the Calculus of Variations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1988
* David Kinderlehrer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1988
* USD 46,396.00

A three-year continuing grant is recommended in support of mathematical models
and methods related to problems in continuum physics. The systems of
differential equations which occur and the associated variational principles
used to derive the equations are often unstable, incompletely posed or not well-
posed. Investigations of several aspects of these problems, requiring an
assortment of methods, will be carried out. Objectives, from the viewpoint of
continuum theory, concern stability, phase transitions and defects which occur
in ordered materials. Primary examples appropriate to this work are liquid
crystals and crystalline solids. Mathematically, one wishes to obtain analytic
interpretations of certain continuum phenomena, expressed in terms of
constraints and invariance groups and the behavior of solutions for typical
problems. Of special interest is the change of constraints or groups, leading
them to become the mechanisms of phase transitions. Singular behavior may be
exhibited as well in these circumstances. Solutions of the static equilibrium
configuration correspond to stationary points of the energy density. They take
the form of harmonic mappings into the sphere in three dimensions. When boundary
conditions are placed on the model, singularities can arise in solutions (called
defects in the literature). Defects play a central role in understanding the
behavior of the material. Major new theoretical work and initial numerical
procedures have been developed by a number of researchers in the past two years.
The present work will continue analyzing the theory of defects and establishing
validation of numerical procedures. Additional work will focus on uniqueness of
solutions and measurements of the size (Hausdorff dimension) of the singular
set. This research, part of a larger effort dedicated to the study of crystal
structures, represents an impressive combination of mathematically sophisticated
ideas and models of the physical world. The steps taken by the principal
investigator in clarifying some of the difficulties has been impressive. Others
are now being attracted to this area. Funding should be continued without
question.