* 8706318
* RUI:  The Ecological Consequences of Sexual and Apomictic   Reproduction
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Paulette Bierzychudek, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 07/31/1990
* USD 105,000.00

Experimental tests will be carried out using an alpineplant, >Antennaria>
>parvifolia>. >Antennaria> is ideal for carryingout these tests, because
populations consist of two kinds ofindividuals, morphologically similar but
differing in their modeof reproduction. Some plants are sexual, requiring pollen
tofertilize their seeds, and producing genetically variableoffspring. Others are
asexual (apomictic), requiring no pollenand producing genetically identical
offspring. At some sites,both types coexist in the dame populations; at others,
only onetype or the other is present. In mixed populations, adultindividuals of
the two types are about equally common. However,the seed production of asexual
females exceeds that of sexualfemales by a factor of two, as predicted. Thus,
thisexperimental system epitomizes the paradox we seek to explain:why are sexual
individuals so common when they have areproductive disadvantage? In addition to
increasing our understanding of a very basicbiological phenomenon, this work
also has applications foragriculture and forestry. Agricultural plantings are
typicallygenetically homogeneous, and any disadvantages associated withasexual
reproduction in >Antennaria> may also exist in thesegenetically uniform
plantings. Research findings may lead torecommendations for the design of
agricultural systems that mightreduce the amount of fertilizer and pesticide
inputs necessaryfor success.