* 8706817
* The Relationship of Cognitive and Cell Biological Analyses of Associative Learning
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Edward Manier, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 12/31/1990
* USD 9,000.00

The neurosciences are experiencing explosive growth and, although many important
questions concerning their social and cultural impact remain unanswered, the
base of relevant historical case studies is glaringly inadequate. As a reslt,
much philosophical discussion of the significance of neuroscience floats free of
needed historical constraint. For example, while the debate between
"eliminative" and "retentive" materialists has clarified issues raised by the
confrontation of neurology and "folk psychology," it has not addressed the
detail involved in efforts to unify cognitive neuroscience. The debate has been
oversimplified by its reliance on a concept of inter-theoretic reduction based
on misleading analogies between diachronic developments within a single field
(eg. chemical analysis of combustion and its products) and synchronic relations
between theories dealing with phenomena at different levels of organization or
complexity. The case study which Dr. Manier is examining under this grant will
contribute to the effort to remedy such deficits by examining the relationship
between neuroscientific and psychological studies of the associative learning
mechanism. Scientists in these fields are able to avail themselves of rigorous
modes of experimental manipulation and their work is attracting widespread
theoretical interest. Preliminary research has identified an apparent split
between two cognitive approaches to the associative learning mechanism which
could complicate efforts to integrate that research area with major developments
in cellular and molecular neurobiology. With this grant, Dr. Manier will carry
out on-site archival and ethnographic research and a series of structured
interviews with principal scientists in order to clarify the details of this
divergence and assess its implications for relations linking neuroscience and
cognitive psychology. The ultimate goal of this project is to provide an
appropriate historical basis for assessing philosophical views concerning the
construction of unified scientific domains from previously disparate areas of
research. This research is of great importance for both the history and the
philosophy of science. Further, it provides a much needed philosophical survey
of these fast-moving areas of the biological and cognitive sciences.