* 8706617
* Latest Quaternary Climate Variability from                  High-Sedimentation Rate Deep-Sea Cores
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Lloyd Keigwin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 06/30/1990
* USD 190,000.00

The PI's identified high frequency variability in faunal assemblage, stable
isotopes and lithology of the Holocene section of North Atlantic deep ocean
sediment cores with very high rates of accumulation (&gt;20 cm/1000 yrs).
Combined, these results suggest significant variability in deep ocean
circulation and sea surface temperature on non-orbital timescales over the last
11,000 radiocarbon yrs BP. Particularly significant deep circulation events are
a decrease in NADW (relative to AABW) flow during the Younger Dryas cooling (11
kyr BP) and maximum flow of NADW between 9 and 6 kyr BP. Maxima in surface water
temperature are evident in recent times, 4 kyr ago, and between 6 and 9 kyr ago.
The PI's intend to continue their study of marine evidence for high frequency
variability in Holocene climate, to extend our record to 30 kyr BP, and to
integrate our results with those of others studying the continental record.
Proxy evidence for 103 yr variability in climate has been clearly identified in
terrestrial records at least as far back in time as 30 kyr BP. Limited marine
evidence suggests similar variability. By extending our study of the deep sea
from the Holocene through the last glacial maximum, we will be able to define
and contrast the characteristics of high frequency change for two completely
different climatic regimes (glacial and interglacial). This effort is important
to the goal of providing records and understanding of climate change over short
time spans, periods short enough to occur at human/cultural timescales.
Understanding of abrupt climate changes is an important objective of CDP.