* 8706083
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research on Numerical Approxima- tions of Variational Inequalities
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Jose Menaldi, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1991
* USD 8,958.00

This award will support an international collaboration between Professor Jose
Luis Menaldi of Wayne State University and Professors M.C. Bancora-Imbert, R.
Gonzalez, and D. Tarzia of the Mathematical Institute "Beppo Levi" of the
University of Rosario in Argentina. The collaborators will study three main
research areas: i) Optimization problems with monotone controls; ii) Impulse
control problems; and iii) Control problems with free boundaries. This class of
problems has the property that they can be formulated in terms of (quasi)
variational inequalities, and the investigators plan to solve them by using
techniques from numerical analysis leading, in the process, not only to concrete
algorithms but also to the study of rates of convergence and to numerical
estimates. Optimization problems with monotone controls and impulse control
problems arise from modeling the control of a dynamical system by an external
force that, as a function of time, has jumps or other types of discontinuities.
These models are quite useful in Operations Research and Economics. Other
physical applications of monotone and impulse control methods originate in the
study of oscillating systems and in the study of optimal allocation of
resources. Likewise, the study of fluid flow through a porous medium, the theory
of semiconductors, and the analysis of phase change problems, often lead to
control problems with free boundaries, so that the class of problems under
consideration is an important one with many practical applications. Furthermore,
the project brings together active experienced collaborators with complementary
skills to work on problems of mutual concern, and by so doing fulfills the
objectives of the U.S.-Argentina Program. In addition, this award adds an
international dimension to the U.S. PI's current support by the NSF Division of
Mathematical Sciences through grant DMS8601998.