* 8706731
* Research in Channel Bed Degradation of the River Nile as a  Consequence of the High Aswan Dam
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1991
* Khalid Mahmood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1991
* USD 19,200.00

Abstract Narrative Project Description: The objective of this Science in
Developing Countries cooperative research proposal between Dr. Khalid Mahmood of
The George Washington University and Dr. Ibrahim M. Elassiouti of Cairo
University is to implement an exchange of scientific knowledge in the mechanics
of alluvial channels between the U.S. and Egypt. Dr. Elassiouti has developed a
mathematical model to predict the channel bed degradation occuring in the River
Nile as a consequence of the High Aswan Dam. This proposed research will cover
the testing and improvement of hydralic, sedimentation and morphologic relations
developed by George Washington University research in the alluvial channel
research accomplished in Pakistan and their incorporation in the Egyptian model.
This improved and advanced model will be applied to the historic data for the
River Nile for both the pre- and post-dam periods. Project Significance: This
research will provide the opportunity to further the development of
international expertise relevant to the alluvial channel problems in Egypt.
Those channels are undergoing changes due to the curtailment of sediment load by
the High Aswan Dam. Changes in the Nile River channel and the Egyptian canal
system in the degradation of the river bed and the instability of the canal
banks are already occurring. Similar problems are being experienced in Pakistan
with the building of storage dams on the rivers of that country. As other
countries in the world build storage dams to firm up base flows of their rivers,
these problems will undoubtedly occur again and again. This research on the
Nile, when interrelated with the alluvial channel research accomplished in
Pakistan, will provide both U.S. and Egypt scientists enhanced scientific
results to address the problems of water resources and waterway systems in their
countries and as needed in other countries of the world.