* 8706054
* Conference on Reducing Risks from Environmental Chemicals   Through Biotechnology; July 19-22, 1987; Seattle, Washington
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1988
* Gilbert Omenn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 11/30/1988
* USD 53,500.00

This proposal by Dr. G. Omenn of University of Seattle, Washington is for a
workshop to examine the use of genetically engineered microorganisms in
degradation of toxic wastes in the environment. Biotechnology, including genetic
engineering of organisms, offers much promise for important applications in the
modification and control of toxic pollutants. Advances in engineering, molecular
biology, and microbial ecology must be brought together to achieve significant
biodegradation and in situ management of chemical wastes. At the same time
protection of local and possibly distant ecosystems must be assured. As
landfills are overwhelmed, complete in situ biodegradation or reduction of
toxicity to levels suitable for incineration must be emphasized. Increasing
knowledge of the diverse capabilities of microorganisms, of genetic means to
manipulate those capabilities, and of the factors influencing persistence and
action of these organisms in various environments offers new avenues to attack
major problems in pollution control and clean- up. It is essential to bridge
engineering, microbiology, and ecology in devising effective strategies for such
applications. It is timely to review feasibilities studies and field
applications that have been carried out. Federal and state agencies are
grappling with policy questions and permit requests for use of genetically-
modified organisms; knowledge from desirable environmental applications can
inform those decisions. NSF has a significant leadership role in these matters
at the federal level. Dr. Omenn has contributed significantly to this area of
study and concern for many years and is highly respected in the field. The
University of Washington is well equipped and suited to host this workshop to a
productive conclusion. The Program recommends funding.