* 8706029
* Facilities Improvement at the Hastings Natural History      Reservation of the University of California, Berkeley
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1989
* Frank Pitelka, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 08/31/1989
* USD 99,892.00

The Frances Simes Hastings Natural History Reservation, founded in 1937 and
operated by the University of California at Berkeley, serves as a field research
station for studies in the ecology and natural history of animals and plants. It
is located in the upper Carmel Valley 50 km southwest of Monterey, California.
The 900-ha site offers a complete representation of Mediterranean habitats
characteristic of the central Coast Ranges. Existing facilities include office
space, a dry laboratory, library, and residences for permanent and visiting
researchers. Research at Hastings is conducted by two resident scientists,
research associates from several University of California campuses, students and
visiting investigators. Since 1937, over 240 publications have resulted from
studies at the Reservation, including 43 in the last five years. The site is
best known for research in vertebrate ecology, but past and ongoing studies span
a spectrum of topics in plant and invertebrate ecology as well. This project
will provide funding to expand an existing office/dry laboratory building to
provide additional office space and a well-equipped, modern wet laboratory to
meet the special needs of field research with a strong laboratory component. In
addition to the laboratory building, partial funding will be provided for a
sewage system and drain field to serve the new laboratory, as well as selected
items of vital laboratory and field equipment.