* 8706788
* REU:  Collaborative Research:  Revisionary Studies in       Bromeliaceae Subfamily Tillandsioideae
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1987,10/31/1991
* Pamela Soltis, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 10/31/1991
* USD 111,902.00

In a collaborative project, Drs. Amy Jean Gilmartin of Washington State
University and Greg Brown of The University of Wyoming are studying the
morphology, chromosomes, and breeding systems of select members of the tropical
Bromeliaceae, the pineapple family. Among the 2100 species of the family, at
least half grow as epiphytes upon other plants, although without parasitic
effect on the host. Many are succulents that are able to survive on limited and
sporadic sources of moisture. The evolution of these xeric (dry-loving) plants
is one critical question which this research will help to answer. The project
enlists the aid of 16 resident botanists from nine Latin American countries.
These individuals and their students collect specimens including vials of floral
buds for chromosome analysis. This network of resident collectors has proven
effective and has stimulated more general collecting in several South American
countries. The primary focus of the continuing taxonomic work is on the large
and difficult genus of "Spanish moss" plants, Tillandsia. Completed work will
improve species recognition in this group, map geographic distributions
throughout native ranges, and provide an analysis of evolutionary relationships
among the species.