* 8706655
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Project:           Statistical Mechanics of Multicomponent Complex Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* G. Ali Mansoori, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1988
* USD 61,450.00

Research Summary: The goal of this research project is to utilize modern
approaches of statistical mechanics to develop analytic phase equilibrium
calculational techniques for multicomponent complex solutions of practical
interest. The PI has recently developed the fundamental basics for calculation
of thermodynamic properties of complex solutions consisting of polar,
associating, and large molecular size different species. The thrust of this
project is significant elaboration on the previous findings and detailed studies
on continuous mixture models for solute/solvent interactions in asphaltene/oil
systems to study the phenomena of asphaltene and wax deposition due to the
presence of miscible solvents. The plan for the proposed research is: (1)
Application and tests of new sets of mixing rules for complex solutions; (2)
Formation of new multicomponent computational schemes in which the unlike-three-
body effects are incorporated and phase equilibrium calculations on ternary and
other multicomponent mixtures of practical interest in order to verify the
formulations; (3) Incorporation of the theory of monomer/polymer solutions in
the mixtures in which one (or a family) of the components consist of polymers;
and (4) Detailed statistical thermodynamic modeling and a number of basic
measurements of the phase behavior and other properties of asphaltene-oil-
solvent systems.