* 8706153
* Social Stigma and Self-esteem
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Jennifer Crocker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 06/30/1991
* USD 268,925.00

It is well recognized that individuals who belong to stigmatized groups, such as
the handicapped, homosexuals, and members of certain racial and ethnic groups,
face a considerable degree of prejudice and discrimination, both socially and
economically. Psychologists have long believed that this prejudice and
discrimination should have quite negative effects on the self-concepts of
members of these groups. In particular, it is commonly assumed that members of
stigmatized groups have lower self-esteem than members of more advantaged
groups. Surprisingly, however, research to date generally does not support this
assumption. Blacks and whites, homosexuals and heterosexuals, unattractive and
attractive individuals, women and men, generally do not differ in their overall
levels of self-esteem. Why not? This is the focus of this research. This
research will examine two types of strategies that people who are members of
stigmatized groups may use to protect their self-esteem from the negative
effects of prejudice and discrimination. First, members of such groups may come
to personally devalue those attributes or qualities on which they fare poorly
relative to more advantaged groups. Consequently, negative comments regarding
those attributes may have a relatively minor impact on their overall feelings of
self- worth. Thus, for example, a physically handicapped person might come to
feel that physical agility is far less important than intellectual prowess, and
hence might be relatively unfazed by negative comments of comparisons about the
former skill. Second, members of stigmatized groups may blame negative feedback
they receive on prejudice againt their group, rather than on themselves. As a
result, they may be personally protected from such feedback. These ideas will be
tested in nine studies, using five different types of experimental designs, and
two types of stigmatized groups -- women and blacks. Results of this reseach
will demonstrate some of the psychological mechanisms responsible for the
paradoxically high self-esteem frequently found among people who are members of
groups that are discriminated against. More importantly, it should indicate the
conditions that are likely to put members of such groups at risk for lowered
self-esteem.