* 8706875
* Petrogenesis of Mid-Tertiary Synextensional Volcanic Rocks  in the Basin and Range Province, East-central Nevada and    Adjacent Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Anita Grunder, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 07/31/1990
* USD 74,700.00

This project will undertake a detailed petrologic and isotopic study of volcanic
rocks associated with mid-Tertiary, large- magnitude extension in the eastern
Basin and Range Province. The goals are to: 1) completely characterize this
moderate- to high-K calcalkalic suite; 2) petrogenetically model compositional
changes in the suite with continued extension; and 3) evaluate the relative
chemical and isotopic contributions of the continental crust and underlying
mantle. At the onset of extension (-39 Ma), it appears that volcanism was
crudely bimodal (silicic andesite to dacite, and high-silica rhyolite) and was
characterized by small eruptions from scattered vents. At -35 Ma, volcanism
shifted to dacite to low-silica rhyolite compositions erupted as voluminous,
areallly extensive tuffs and lavas. Existing models for magmatism in the region
suggest a contribution ranging from zero to as much as 50% of mantle- derived
magmas. The compositional and isotopic diversity of the suite suggest a complex
petrogenetic history involving several magma sources during early stages of
magmatism, followed by large-scale mixing of these magmas in the middle (?)
crust with continued extension and heat input. The proposed work is
multifaceted, including field, petrologic and isotopic studies which will
compliment ongoing research efforts in the area dealing with the structure,
metamorphism, and isotopic composition of the basement rocks.