* 8706486
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Function--Theoretic      Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Thomas Kriete, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 11/30/1989
* USD 32,800.00

Operator theory is a central discipline in Modern Analysis. Its origins lie in
the study of mathematical physics and partial differential equations in the
early twentieth century. Thus, it was seen that numerous physical problems in
the theory of equilibria, vibrations, quantum theory, etc. could be studied
productively via the integral equations that model the phenomena. So it has
been, that from the fertile minds of Hilbert, von Neumann, and other giants that
the subject of operator theory has grown to a central position in such
investigations, and in core mathematics as well. At the heart of this
methodology is the deep investigation of the spectrum of an operator and the
concommitant study of its invariant subspaces. For the so- called self-adjoint
operators, this theory is now a standard technique throughout analysis, and the
spectral theorem provides the necessary building blocks for all such operators.
Although not quite as complete, spectral theory is significantly well understood
for an extensive generalization of the self-adjoint case; viz., the "normal"
operators. The current frontier, therefore, in the study of this structure
theory rests in the non-normal theory. A particularly important class of such
operators are referred to as "subnormal". They are significant for two reasons.
First, there is enough residual normal information to attempt a deeper
understanding for their inherent structure. Recent results, such as the fact
that subnornmal operators are reflexive and have invariant subspaces, have given
an added impetus to the study of their spectral properties. Secondly, since many
explicit operators that arise in complex function theory, differential geometry,
and approximation theory are subnormal, there is a broad range of applicability.
Professor Kriete is a leader in the spectral theory of subnormal operators and
its relationship to classical analysis, especially polynomial approximation. His
contributions date back to a landmark paper on the spectral theory of the Cesaro
operator in 1972. This work created new directions in spectral theory, with
implications for the theory of special functions. Professor Kriete's work has
had a particularly strong influence on the Russian school of operator theory.
Professor Kriete's work of the past few years has been of the same high calibre
as his earlier work. In the present proposal, Professor Kriete will investigate
several problems at the interface of operator theory and function theory, all of
which exhibit both significanct interest and difficulty. One such problem is the
determination of when a composition operator on classical spaces in complex
function theory has a subnormal adjoint. A second involves functional models for
contraction operators. He will also continue his applications to classical
polynomial approximation with emphasis on questions of splitting.