* 8706466
* A Biography of August Krogh
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Susan Mehrtens, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 01/31/1990
* USD 14,000.00

The families Bach, Mozart and Strauss are known for music. Similarly, there are
families known for their science. Among the more famous are the Huxley, Curie,
and Bohr families. Another, not so well-known scientific family is that of the
Krogh's of Denmark. August Krogh won the Nobel prize in physiology for his study
of capillaries, but this work was only a small part of his many contributions to
the field including pioneering studies of respiration in animals and man, in
comparative physiology of osmoregulation, and in membrane transport. His wife,
Marie Jorgensen Krogh, not only collaborated with her husband on many of his
projects, but carried out independent research of her own including her classic
study of the diffusion capacity of human lungs, other work in human physiology
and nutrition. Their daughter, Bodil Schmidt-Nielsen, also became a successful
scientist carrying out important research on kidney physiology and rising to
become the president of the American Physiological Society. Though the Krogh
family is not so well-known now, this situation seems likely to change. The
daughter, Professor Schmidt-Nielsen, is undertaking with the support of this
grant a scientific biography of her parents. Professor Schmidt-Nielsen brings
unique qualifications to this study. As a physiologist herself, she thoroughly
understands her parents work and can communicate with their students and
friends. She knows Danish, and, because of her position, has special access to
sources. Further, she has a sophisticated understanding of historical
methodology which is rare among eminent scientists. She will examine vast
amounts of archival material in the Royal Library in Copenhagen including
personal family letters. She has already contacted and obtained materials from
her parents collaborators and students. Her study promises to provide us with a
classic study of the scientific enterprise from a very personal and intimately
informed position. While such studies can be problematic at times, Professor
Schmidt-Nielsen fully understands these problems and has demonstrated her
ability to overcome them and write with real understanding about the scientific
work of her parents. This study promises to be of great interest for historians,
philosophers and biologists interested in the development of 20th century
research.