* 8706616
* Chemistry of Macrocyclic Polyamine Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Cynthia Burrows, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 11/30/1990
* USD 199,500.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports research
by Prof. Cynthia Burrows, which is aimed at characterizing the binding and
catalytic properties of protonated macrocyclic polyamines. This work falls in
the general area of "host- guest" chemistry and constitutes a "biomimetic"
approach to replication of enzyme binding and catalysis in man-made chemical
systems. Macrocyclic polyamines can participate in both cation and anion
complexation phenomena. Tetraamines of 18-membered ring size are easily tetra-
protonated in aqueous media, and their high positive charge density accounts for
their ability to form strong association complexes with various organic and
inorganic anions. In this context, the Burrows group will investigate optically
active macrocyclic spermine analogs which possess functionalized side chains.
Phosphate esters and carboxylates will be studied in various media in order to
define the parameters important for strong association. Macrocycles bearing a
pendant imidazole group have been designed as potential catalysts for phophate
ester hydrolysis. Tetraamines of 14-membered ring size (cyclams) form stable
complexes with transition metal cations, especially divalent cobalt, nickel, and
copper ions. Like porphyrins, the cyclams stabilize high oxidation states of
certain metals. Burrows has recently discovered the first nickel-catalyzed
olefin epoxidations in which cyclam is the key to accessibility of the
Nickel(III) oxidation state. Optically active cyclams bearing pendant ligating
groups are under study in order to further modify the reactivity of the metal
and to investigate the potential for asymmetric epoxidation of olefins. These
studies will enhance understanding of intermolecular interactions in molecular
recognition complexes and catalysis.