* 8706429
* Continuation of Phytotron Operations
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1992
* Boyd Strain, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* David Schindel
* 03/31/1992
* USD 924,936.00

The Phytotron at Duke University is a large integrated facility for biological
research under controlled environments. Central mechanical and environmental
monitoring equipment operated by a trained professional staff provides excellent
and dependable environmental control. The facility is available to all
scientists who require well-controlled environmental conditions for their
experiments. Future developments planned for the facility are to install new
lighting and control systems to improve the quality of environmental control and
the dependability of equipment. A new computerized monitoring system will
provide more environmental sensing and more frequent updating of chamber
conditions. Energy conservation measures initiated by the staff and by the Duke
University Energy Management Section will be continued. Efforts will be
continued to develop unique analytical capabilities. In addition to the high-
energy carbon-11 analytical facility now in operation, a mass spectrometer
facility will be installed by Duke. Existing storage space will be renovated by
the University into modern physiological research laboratories to support a
growing program in ecological research. This project will provide funds for the
continued basic operation of this national environmental control facility. NSF
funds will be supplemented by space charges to users and by an operational
budget from Duke University.