* 8706312
* REU:  Temporal Variation in Soil Terpenoids and Their       Effects on Selected Soil Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Carleton White, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 01/31/1990
* USD 136,798.00

The influence of terpenoids on decomposition and nitrogen cycling in forest
ecosystems will be investigated. Terpenoids are volatile organic compounds
naturally produced by many plants. The central idea is that they are produced in
large enough quantities in forest ecosystems and persist long enough in forest
soils to act as regulators of organic matter breakdown and key processes in the
nitrogen cycle such as mineralization and nitrification; the former
(mineralization) is the microbially mediated conversion of organically-bound
nitrogen to inorganic nitrogen forms that can be taken up by plants, and the
latter (nitrification) is the microbial transformation of ammonium to nitrate.
The research will be conducted on ponderosa pine forests of New Mexico, although
the results should have very general applicability. The four specific objectives
of research are as follows: 1) identify the temporal variation in terpenoid
levels within the soil profile of an undisturbed soil profile in a ponderosa
pine forest in a field study; 2) correlate terpenoid variation in the soil
profile with variation in decomposition and nitrogen dynamics in the soil in the
laboratory; 3) identify the specific terpenoids acting as regulators of decay
and nitrogen cycling in the laboratory; and 4) test the results of the
laboratory investigations in the field through a manipulation experiment
involving burning to volatilize the terpenoids and then adding known amounts of
specific terpenoids back to the system and following decomposition and nitrogen
dynamics. The significance of this research lies in its focus on a factor,
terpenoid concentration, that can influence the nitrogen cycle in forest
ecosystems. Nitrogen is often a limiting nutrient in forest ecosystems and
understanding the cause(s) of this limitation would have important implications
for forest management. Dr. White is a young and very promising researcher and he
will receive strong support, both technical and intellectual, for his research
at the University of New Mexico. The Ecosystem Studies Program recommends that
this award be made.