* 8706263
* Copper-Promoted Oxidation and Oxygenation Reactions of      Nitrogen-Containing Aliphatic Compounds (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Fred Urbach, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin F. Plummer
* 06/30/1991
* USD 263,500.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports research
of Professors Lawrence Sayre and Fred Urbach, which aims at a mechanistic study
concerning the role of copper as a catalyst in the oxidation of organic
compounds. Such processes have far reaching consequences in both biochemical and
industrial processes. The use of more simplified model systems to study these
multifaceted processes that involve different oxidation states of copper at
specific places in the catalytic cycle provides considerable insight into how
nature achieves such chemical reactions. The planned research is divided into
four sections. The first examines the dehydrogenation of unactivated amines and
the oxidative cleavage of beta-hetero-atom-substituted amines. The second
involves a model study for the copper amine oxidases in which a quinone-mediated
transamination is followed by copper-mediated oxidation of the resulting
aminophenol. The third aspect deals with oxidations of amino acids and simple
N-acyl derivatives thereof. The fourth examines the regioselective copper-
mediated oxidative N-dealkylation of oligopeptides at the C-terminus as possible
mechanisms for the copper amidases which convert peptidylglycine to peptide
carboxamides. Initial studies in these areas make it clear that multiple
reaction pathways are possible in many cases. The planned work involves a deeper
and more quantitative characterization of the reaction in terms of (1) the
factors which control competitive reaction pathways, (2) substrate structure-
reactivity effects, (3) the effect of varying the oxidation system ?e.g.,
Cu(I)-dioxygen vs. Cu(II)-peroxydisulfate vs. Cu(III)!, and (4) the effect of
the metal coordination environment and other reaction conditions.