* 8706343
* U.S.-Thailand Conferencea:  Application of Biotechnology to the Study of Animal Parasites and their Vectors; Bangkok andChiangmai, Thailand; November 30-December 4, 1987.
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,09/30/1988
* John Bruce, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 09/30/1988
* USD 21,323.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. John I. Bruce, Director, Center for
Tropical Diseases, University of Lowell, to conduct with Dr. Chamlong
Harinasuta, Dean Emeritus, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, a
U.S.-Thailand Conference on Application of Biotechnology to the Study of Animal
Parasites and Their Vectors, Bangkok and Chiangmai, Thailand, November 30 to
December 4, 1987. The conference will bring together 7 U.S. scientists and some
50 Thai participants/observers to exchange information and ideas on the study of
animal parasites, the complex interactions occurring between animal parasites
and their vectors, and the application of current biotechnology to problems
involving animal parasites and their vectors. Two scientists each from
Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines also are expected to participate. This
grant will support only U.S. participation in the conference. Scientists at
Mahidol University have developed a profile of endemicity of the major zoonotic
parasites and their vectors whose distribution, prevalence and incidence are
related to water-resources development. The application of new biotechnological
procedures could be extremely beneficial as an aid to enhancing knowledge and
devising logical approaches to containment of these parasitoses. The conference
will provide an opportunity for U.S. and Thai scientists to identify priority
areas for future research cooperation in parasitology and to develop specific
cooperative research proposals. This project is relevant to the objectives of
the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in
developing countries through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
The U.S. and Thai collaborators are highly respected scientists with extensive
international research experience and productive publication records in the
field of the proposal.