* 8706010
* Inorganic Sol-Gel Glasses Containing Organic and            Organometallic Molecules (Materials Research)
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Bruce Dunn, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/1991
* USD 406,700.00

This proposal is being awarded under the Materials Chemistry Initiative; the
research program is at the interface between chemistry and materials science.
New types of organic/inorganic materials will be developed by embedding organic
or organometallic molecules in an inorganic matrix. This program has two
fundamental goals, one of which is materials science oriented, the other of
which is chemically oriented. The first goal involves characterization of the
gel and gel-glass. The technical objective here is to use various organic and
organometallic molecules to characterize certain aspects of the sol-gel process
and to determine the conditions which the matrix imposes on the embedded
molecules. Spectroscopic studies on the topics of site polarity, pressure
effects and site symmetry are likely to provide significant information
regarding the chemical and structural changes which occur during sol-gel
processing. The second goal is to study the fundamental photochemistry and
spectroscopy of the molecules in the sol-gel glass matrix. These investigations
will be the first of their kind. In most cases the selected molecules are those
which cannot be studied easily, if at all, in standard organic glasses. The
results of the research are expected to be significant both scientifically and
technologically. There will be investigations of several photochemical issues
which are of fundamental importance and the understanding of the sol-gel
materials and their processing will be improved. There are also plans to explore
the possibility of creating new materials with interesting properties in the
areas of photochromism, optical switching, ferroelectricity and optical
read/write phenomena.