* 8706076
* A New Approach to Canonical Quantum Gravity
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Paul Renteln, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly O'Neal Moorer
* 08/31/1989
* USD 28,650.00

A New Approach to Canonical Quantum Gravity: This award recommendation is made
under the U.S.-Industrialized Countries Program for the Exchange of Scientists
and Engineers, 1987/1988 Competition. The program is designed to enable U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research at research institutions
in the industrialized countries of Western Europe as well as Japan, Australia,
and New Zealand. Exchange awards provide opportunities for the conduct of joint
research and the utilization of unique or complementary facilities, expertise
and experimental conditions in foreign countries. Awards are selected on the
basis of scientific criteria relevant to his/her field of science, the
prospective potential of the applicants for professional growth, as well as
criteria relevant to the furthering of international cooperation in science and
engineering. The program is particularly directed to scientists and engineers
who are embarking on their research careers. The research project concerns
attempts to quantize gravity starting from Einstein's theory of general
relativity. Many fundamental problems remain unsolved. The canonical approach of
Dr. Chris Isham is a unique attempt to address precisely those issues which are
critical to our understanding of the theory. A recent reformulation of
Einstein's theory by Dr. Abhay Ashtekar has enabled Dr. Lee Smolin and the
proposer to arrive at a canonical theory of gravity which has remarkable
properties. The proposer and Dr. Isham will address these issues. This project
is under the direction of Dr. Paul Renteln, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0484, U.S.A., and Professor C.J. Isham, The Blackett
Laboratory, Prince Consort Road, Imperial College, London SW7 2BZ, England. This
award recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international
travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents allowance, if applicable,
language training, if required, and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for
the U.S. home institution.