* 8706350
* Minimal Full-Access Interconnection Networks for Parallel   Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1990
* M Sridhar, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 02/28/1990
* USD 47,125.00

With the advent of low-cost microcomputers, it is now feasible to construct
networks for interconnecting many processor and memories to achieve higher speed
of computation. In this research project, the principal investigator (PI) will
study tightly-coupled processors interconnected using a dynamic interconnection
network. In very general terms, the problem is to provide a means of
interconnecting a collection of processing elements so that any two processing
elements can obtain a direct communication path. This will allow dynamic
reconfigurations. The PI proposes to study the class of interconnection networks
that provide full access (i.e., the ability for every input to access every
output) using the fewest possible number of stages--networks which the PI refers
to as "minimal full-access" (MFA). The following are expected research results:
o Characterizations of structural properties of MFA networks. o Results on the
set of permutations realizable by particular subclasses of MFA networks and how
the results compare to permutations realizable by other classes of networks. o
Efficient algorithms for routing MFA networks. o Techniques for allowing dynamic
reconfigurations of one network into another better suited for applications at
hand. o Simple modifications of the networks studied, to allow for increased
fault tolerance. o Algorithms for deciding structural and functional equivalence
of networks. This work is expected to produce new classes of networks, as well
as provide a basis for an underlying theory of all interconnection networks. It
is also expected to impact the (d,k) graph problem and the solution of certain
matrix equations.