* 8706305
* Storage Equipment for the Systematic Historic Seneca-       Iroquois Archaeological Collections
* BIO,BIO
* 12/15/1987,05/31/1990
* Daniel Barber, Rochester Museum and Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 05/31/1990
* USD 52,590.00

The Rochester Museum and Science Center seeks support to purchase storage
equipment and equip a conservation laboratory, This equipment will be used to
house the museum's 1,000,000 item collection of historic Senecas-Iroquois
archaeological materials. This systematic collection was excavated over a
65-year period and includes material from every known Seneca village of the
1550-1820 A.D. period. While the collections are already heavily used, the
improvements in storage facilities in light of updated collections management
techniques, will make them available to an even wider anthropological community.
The museum has a long-standing commitment to its collections. It is currently
constructing a new storage and research facility that will replace and
significantly improve the existing facility and equipment that was built in
1940. It is anticipated that the new storage facility and collections
maintenance plan will stop the rapid rate of deterioration currently affecting
the collection. This collection is a major scientific resource and a primary
anthropol- ogical data base. It is unique for researchers in that it represents
the only sequence for a major northeastern tribe which is unbroken and which
contains sufficient materials from multiple sites to allow extensive
documentation and comparisons. The materials tell anthropol- ogists a great deal
about contact between Native Americans and Europe- ans and are the principle
resource for interpreting Seneca-Iroquois culture throughout a period of rapid
change.