* 8706629
* Equipment for the Center for Limnology - Trout Lake Station
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* John Magnuson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 12/31/1988
* USD 50,000.00

The Center for Limnology's Trout Lake Station provides access to Wisconsin's
Northern Highlands Lake District, a region with one of the densest
concentrations of lakes in the world. Aquatic systems within the Highlands
include a broad range of trophic, hydrologic and edaphic conditions ranging from
temporary forest ponds to large lakes. Many of these systems lie within
protected, uninhabited watersheds. Research at the station has an extensive
history and in the last two decades has grown and diversified dramatically.
Current programs include several multi-investigator, ecosystem-level projects
focused on long-term ecological research, lake acidification and cascading
trophic interactions. Additional, smaller-scale projects concern population,
community and behavioral ecology, groundwater hydrology and basic limnology.
This project will provide equipment to improve the station's capacities in three
core areas: capabilities for real-time sensing of the land and aquatic
environments, basic analytical facilities for chemical and biological
parameters, and controlled environmental systems for experimental analyses.
Improvements in these areas will add significantly to the general utility of the
Trout Lake Station as a center for aquatic research and will directly assist
several major programs that are currently under way at the Station.
Specifically, the funds will be used to purchase 1) a land- and water-based
climatic station, 2) a research-quality spectrophotometer, and 3) a portable,
shoreside aquarium-microcosm facility.