* 8706250
* Quantum Theory of Low-Dimensional Condensed Matter          (Materials Research)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Steven Kivelson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 11/30/1989
* USD 73,400.00

With the advent of sophisticated experimental methods for the synthesis of
highly specific epitaxially grown films (such as extremely thin films of
granular metals) and layered structures (such as semiconductor heterojunctions)
it has become possible to explore the properties of a variety of well
characterized two- dimensional electronic systems. Various modern lithographic
techniques further broaden the range of artificial two- dimensional structures
that can be studied. In particular, a variety of experiments at low temperatures
have revealed in these two-dimensional structures a surprising richness of
macroscopic quantum phenomena: the integer and fractionally quantized Hall
effect, quantum effects in the onset of superconductivity, resistance
oscillations in Josephson junction arrays, and resistance fluctuations and
Aharanov-Bohm oscillations in normal metals to name a few. The proposed research
deals with various macroscopic manifestations of quantum phenomena in one, and
especially two-dimensional systems. The work topics fall into four basic
categories: 1) the quantum Hall effect, 2) quantum effects in granular, or
otherwise strongly disordered thin films of superconducting material, 3) model
tunneling problems involving more than one-dimensional configuration space, and
4) the properties of quasi-one-dimensional organic conductors.