* 8706568
* RUI:  Role of Peptides in Modulating the Output of a        Small Neural System
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Patsy Dickinson, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1990
* USD 135,772.00

In recent years, an enormous number of neurotransmitter and neuromodulatory
substances have been identified in both vertebrate and invertebrate substances.
These substances include a number of amines and an ever-increasing number of
neuropeptides, the exact physiological roles of which are still unclear.
However, it appears in many cases that the peptides are modulatory in nature,
provoking relatively long-term alterations of ongoing neuronal activity or
inducing such activity in previously quiescent preparations. Such modification
and modulation of neuronal activity is common to all animals, and is essential
to a wide variety of activities. Studies of the roles of neuropeptides in
modulating neuronal activities will thus serve to clarify further not only the
physiological roles of the many substances found in the nervous system but also
the mechanisms by which neuronal modulation can occur. Perhaps the most amenable
systems for the study of modulation at present are those systems in which a
regularly patterned activity occurs. One such system, in which the role of
peptides in modulating neuronal activity can be addressed readily, is the
stomatogastric nervous system of decapod crustaceans. Questions related to the
peptidergic modulation of neuronal activity, particulary rhythmically patterned
activity, have already been approached from several perspectives. Considerable
effort has been devoted to identifying and localizing a variety of neuropeptides
in the stomatogastric system. In addition, the physiological effects of a number
of neuropeptides on the stomatogastric system have been studied. Furthermore, at
least one modulatory neuron has been identified, and its modulatory effects on
the system have been studied. What is lacking, however, is the synthesis of
these three types of experiments, the positive identification of the
transmitters used by individual modulatory neurons and the effects of these
neurons when fired in a physiologically relevant manner. The present study by
Dr. Patsy Dickinson is designed to begin to fill this gap in our knowledge in
two ways: (1) by identifying and recording from neurons containing
neuropeptides, and (2) by examining modulatory neurons for the presence of these
neuropeptides.