* 8706460
* "Collaborative Research" Chemical &amp; Genetic Modification of Biological Iron-Sulfur Clusters: Azotobacter Vinelandii     Ferredxin I
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1992
* Philip Stephens, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/1992
* USD 228,000.00

Iron sulfur (Fe-S) proteins contain clusters composed predominately of Fe, S2-
and cysteine residues. These proteins are ubiquitous occuring in all known
organisms and are central to every essential biological process. Three types of
clusters containing respectively, 1, 2, and 4 Fe atoms are now well
characterized and recently clusters containg three Fe atoms have been
discovered. The first three exhibit multiple oxidation levels. It has recently
been shown that electron transport is not the sole function of these proteins.
It is now abundantly clear that the variety of Fe-S cluster structures is
greater than previously recognized and continues to expand. The chemistry is far
more extensive than simple, reversible one-electron redox behavior. The goal of
this proposal is to ascertain how the primary sequence determines which type of
cluster is functional in a given protein. To achieve this goal the structures
and reactivities of protein-bound 3 FE and 4 FE (Fe-S) clusters in A. vinelandii
fereedoxin I (AVFD) will be studied in depth. This small protein is ideally
suited for such an investigation, as it expresses multiple forms and X- ray data
is becoming available. Consequently, it is planned to purify and crystallize the
three new forms of AvFdI, characterize them physico-chemically, modify them by
site directed mutagenesis, and purify and characterize the resulting
fereedoxins. This work may prove crucial to our quest to understand nitrogenase
and other multicentered redox proteins containing Fe-S centers. Support is
strongly recommended with a high priority.