* 8706114
* A Theoretical Investigation of Atomic Structure and         Scattering Processes (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Leonard Rosenberg, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles N. Brown
* 06/30/1991
* USD 424,261.00

This grant provides funding for a number of investigations. A study will be
made, based on a suitable generalized version of the Rayleigh-Ritz method, of
relativistic effects, including the virtual creation of electron-positron pairs,
on the structure of multielectron atoms. An attempt will be made to develop a
practical procedure for calculating ground-state energies with the aid of
rigorous minimum principles. A search will be made for an approximation for the
spontaneous emission of two soft photons during a scattering process involving
two charged particles. Such an amplitude could be used, in conjunction with a
modified perturbation procedure derived previously, to obtain an improved low
frequency approximation for scattering in a laser field. This possibility will
be examined, and the modified perturbation theory will be applied to the problem
of multiphoton ionization. The finiteness of the speed of light c can greatly
affect the interaction V(r) of two systems at a large separation r. A study will
be made to obtain one form V(r) valid for many pairs of systems, and to study
the effect of the presence of walls of different materials on the lifetimes of
excited atoms. The beta decay 187Re to 187Os abundance ratio and half life T of
the beta decay of Re help to fix the age of our galaxy. The continuum and bound
state decay rates determine T. The bound state decay rate in interstellar space
differs from the decay rate in the interior of a star. An attempt will be made
to calculate the latter rate.