* 8706262
* Multicomponent Chemical Equilibria and Reaction Processes   in Volcanic Gases
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1990
* William Rose, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 01/31/1990
* USD 113,200.00

The release of various gases at volcanoes is complex and dependent on a large
number of variables. Most studies have used only a few techniques of measuring
and sampling. This research will increase the number of techniques used at a few
active volcanoes where a background of other data exist. Long-range goals of
this project are to: 1) Test and perfect forecasting tools based on gas studies,
2) Evaluate and improve constraints on the conditions prevailing in shallow
magma bodies which lead to eruptions, and 3) Make a better assesment of
volatiles and particles released to the atmosphere by volcanoes. This is a
continuing project, but in the next two years emphasis will be on the
development of a thermodynamic model which includes hundreds of trace species in
volcanic gases. Both homogeneous and heterogeneous equilibrium modelling will be
done, and applied to field data of both the PIs and other workers. Results are
expected to clarify the speciation of trace components in gases and the reaction
processes in gas plumes and at fumarolic vents, as well as what variables
control the concentrations of trace components volatilizing from magmas.
Collection, analysis and geologic interpretation will be done by Rose and
collegues at Michigan Tech. Modelling will be done primarily by Reed and
collegues at Oregon. Results are expected to have applicability beyond the
immediate geologic concerns.