* 8706430
* Collaborative Research:  Systematics, Paleoecology and      Extinction of Late Osagean Crinoids from Iowa, Illinois     and Missouri
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1991
* William Ausich, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 05/31/1991
* USD 61,362.00

The proposed study involves both a detailed systematic revision of the crinoids
from the late Osagean (Mississippian) Keokuk Limestone and the basal part of the
Warsaw Formation in Iowa, Illinois, and Missouri, and a study of their
depositional settings. Crinoids from the Keokuk and basal Warsaw have not
received study in the latter half of this century, despite the fact that
crinoids of this age in other areas are well understood, and these faunas are
from the North American Standard Section of the Mississippian. Re.evaluation of
these faunas will complete our understanding of the systematics, community
paleoecology, and depositional occurences of crinoid faunas from the late
Osagean throughout the east.central United State. This in turn will enable us to
interpret the constraints and controlling factors that were responsible for the
distribution of late Osagean crinoids. We will test these new data against the
environmental controls model, which is based on multivariate analysis of late
Osagean crinoid faunas from the Borden deltaic complex in Indiana and Kentucky.
Documentation of controlling factors operating on late Osagean crinoids is
essential for a fundamental understanding of Paleozoic crinoids. The Osagean was
witness to the maximum diversity known among crinoids, and yet at the close of
the Osagean, crinoids suffered extreme extinction. Crinoid faunas after the
terminal Osagean extinction were very different in taxonomic character and
remained basically the same from the recovery following the extinction event
until the terminal.j.^Paleozoic mass extinction. Results from the proposed study
are prerequisite for posing larger questions on the evolution of Paleozoic
crinoids.