* 8706155
* Impact of Herbivores on a Costa Rican Deciduous Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Daniel Janzen, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Althea Ball
* 07/31/1990
* USD 252,673.00

This is a proposal to continue research in the tropics by one of the, if not the
world's, premier tropical ecologists, Professor Daniel Janzen. This is an
expanding basic research program on animal-plant interactions in the tropical,
dry forests of Santa Rosa National Park in northwestern Guanacaste Province,
Costa Rica, with the results being applied directly to the problem of dry forest
ecological and biocultural restoration (as well as being published and
popularized in traditional ways). Observations and field experiments will be
conducted on: 1. Demography and seed predator specificity of Liomys salvini
(spiny pocket mice). 2. Host-specificity (in the wild) of the 3100-plus species
of caterpillers. 3. Host-specificity of the parasitoid wasps and flies supported
by the wild Lepidoptera fauna. 4. Species composition of the caterpillars
brought to the nestlings of medium-sized birds. 5. Differential food processing
by caterpillars feeding on potentially toxic plants versus those feeding on
plants rich in potential inhibitors. 6. Seed production biology of the trees
Hymenoea courbaril, cyclocarpum, Dioclea megacarpa and Ateleia herbert-smithii.
7. Invasion of pastures, old fields, tree falls and landslides by dry forest
trees. 8. Brief studies: wood increment rates and aging (by growth rings) of the
tree H. courbaril and E. cyclorcarpum, migration of fruit- and flower-visiting
moths in and out of Santa Rosa, dormancy of moth pupae and large tree seeds,
detailed phenology of fruit drop by trees with seeds dispersed by ground-based
large herbivores, use of seasonal changes as cues by insects, escape behavior of
large caterpillars, impact of defoliation on fruit crop production, termination
of caterpillar outbreaks, and caterpillar survivorship in the wild. At a time
when tropical areas are being brutally deforested, this research is of paramount
importance. It stimulated and continues to stimulate generations of tropical
ecologists and is of scientific and practical value in and of itself. The
Ecology Program of the NSF is pleased to support the research.