* 8706826
* US-Hungary Conference on Fructose-2,6-Bisphosphate in Plants(Nyiregyhaza), August 1987
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1988
* Bob Buchanan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 11/30/1988
* USD 3,120.00

Proposal Objectives: The primary objective of this U.S.-Hungary workshop
organized by Dr. Bob B. Buchanan of the University of California at Berkeley and
by Dr. Arpad Balogh of Bessenyei College, Hungary, is to meet and discuss
fructose-2, 6-bisphosphate. This recently discovered metabolite is rapidly
assuming increased importance in plant research because it affects the sucrose
and starch content in higher plants. Advances in the field have not led to a
unified explanation. This workshop will bring together key experts with various
views to explore competing theories. Relevance of Proposal to Program
Objectives: This activity fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge in metabolic biology by enabling leading experts of the U.S. and
Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents, pool resources, and share
research experience in an area of strong mutual interest and competence. Merit:
The proposal ranks in the Excellent category. Its technical merit therefore
warrants NSF support. The U.S. and Hungarian organizers' and participants'
professional credentials are very well regarded and the rationale for
international cooperation is clearly articulated. The workshop should yield new
plans for long-term, mutually beneficial cooperative research projects.
Interrelated Projects: The NSF program in Metabolic Biology supports Dr.
Buchanan's ongoing research in regulatory mechanisms in carbohydrate synthesis
and breakdown (DMB-8314892). Funding: The requested budget covers modest travel
expenses of the U.S. participants, in accordance with program guidelines. All
other costs in Hungary will be covered by the Hungarian Ministry of Education.