* 8706804
* Geochemical Variability of Saline Brines in South Texas
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1987,05/31/1991
* Lynton Land, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 05/31/1991
* USD 103,932.00

Saline brines in South Texas are now known to exhibit wide ranges in salinity,
ionic and isotopic composition. Some formation waters are hypothesized to form
in shale-rich sections as water is released by the transformation of smectite to
illite, and acetic acid is generated from kerogen. Very saline brines are
clearly derived from underlying formations. In one growth fault zone it its
hypothesized that elevated geothermal gradients are due to a vertical flux of
brine from deeper in the basin. Some brines bear evidence of interaction with
basement rocks which underly the Mesozoic-Cenozoic sequence. This project seeks
to test these various hypotheses by carefully and systematically characterizing
the major element, and isotopic composition of brines from producing oil and gas
fields in a 14-county wide area. Spatial variability and relation to structure
are critical variables interpreting the ultimate origin of the formation waters,
and their role in effecting diagenesis. Brine sampling has proceeded beyond the
"reconnaissance" stage in this area (Morton and Land, 1987), and now should be
restricted to manageably small areas known to exhibit significant problems which
can be addressed by future "saturation" sampling. This project will have
significant bearing in our understanding of ore genesis, burial diagenesis,
fluid behavior, petroleum generation and sedimentary geochemistry in a region
close to DOSECC deep-drilling operations.