* 8706814
* Economics of State and Local Government: Levels, Sources,   and Uses of Funds in the Mid-American States, 1790-1980
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* John Legler, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 12/31/1989
* USD 140,000.00

One of the remaining gaps in the quantitative record of U.S. economic history is
the lack of detailed information on the fiscal activities of state and local
governments. Annual time-series data on federal revenues and expenditures are
available from 1798 on, but similar information for state and local governments
is very sparse, particularly before 1900. In the course of the previous NSF
award, the investigators have made good progress in beginning to close this gap.
They have managed to assemble a carefully constructed data-set for the Atlantic
seaboard states from 1790 to the present. The purpose of this project is to
expand this data set to include the sixteen midwestern states. State documents,
published and unpublished, will furnish the basis for complete state level
expenditure and revenue estimates. Local government estimates will be based on
sampling procedures. This data set will be extremely valuable to scholars
interested in the role of government in the economic development of the United
States. It will allow researchers to address, in a quantitative way, a host of
questions regarding the interaction of the public and private sectors over time.
The principal investigators have demonstrated their capabilities to construct
and to begin analyzing this expanded data set. The investigators combine to form
a productive research team, and there is every reason to believe that this
project will prove as successful as the previous one.