* 8706101
* Knowledge and Inference in Probabilistic Environments II:   Learning and Experience in Real-World Contexts
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Joshua Klayman, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/1990
* USD 98,647.00

How does an experienced neurologist learn to determine the cause of a patient's
chronic headaches, a venture capitalist learn to spot a good prospect, or a
teacher learn to motivate students? In all these cases, successful judgment is
part talent, part training, and part luck. But the development of judgmental
abilities over time also requires learning from experience. Because we live in
an inherently probabilistic world, we must try to extract information from
incomplete and imperfect feedback. The research proposed here explores the
processes by which learning takes place in probabilistic environments, and the
strategies by which people try to accomplish that task. The goal of this
research is to provide information useful for both understanding and improving
these learning processes. The results of this work have important potential
applications in practical decision contexts. A great many major decisions are
made on the basis of intuitive judgment, particularly when the situation is ill-
defined, unstable, or novel, or when time, information, and resources are
limited. It would be especially useful to have a better understanding of the
limitations and possibilities of human learning in such situations. A better
understanding of human learning can also guide the development and use of
statistical methods and other decision aids. Such understanding can help clarify
the costs and benefits of reliance on human vs. mechanical judgment, aid in the
design and implementation of interactive man-machine systems, and identify means
by which human learning processes themselves can be improved and facilitated.