* 8706395
* Lower Thermosphere Coupling Study
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1987,08/31/1991
* Jeffrey Forbes, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 08/31/1991
* USD 379,038.00

The atmosphere is in a state of continual motion, and to understand and to be
able to predict its motions we need to be able to make measurements of the
winds, waves, and tides in it. We need to be able to compare the results with
numerical models from large computers that simulate atmospheric dynamics. The
height region 80-150km altitude is one of the hardest to observe, being too high
for balloons and too low for spacecraft. New radar and optical techniques are
being put into the field to obtain data for comparison with global models of the
region and its dynamical coupling with the lower and higher regions. The focus
for these efforts is the interpretation of radar and optical measurements of
winds and temperatures during three or more 5-6 day world campaigns specifically
devoted to the 80- 150km height region. One area of study involves the numerical
simulation of atmospheric tidal propagation from lower to upper levels, and
interpretation of observed wind and temperature oscillations in the mesosphere,
lower thermosphere, and upper thermosphere. The way in which
ionosphere/thermosphere interactions affect the coupling between the low and
upper thermosphere will also be investigated. The Principal Investigator is
playing a leading role in the organization of this campaign, and will coordinate
the assembly of results for comparison with models.