* 8706553
* Development of CAD (Charged Coupled Device) Multiple-Valued Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1987,03/08/1988
* Jon Butler, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 03/08/1988
* USD 73.00

Recent advances in multiple-valued logic have inspired research on the use and
design of these new logic devices. The principal investigator has a specific
interest in multiple-valued programmable logic arrays (PLA's), a standard
building block of VLSI circuits. He has developed a PLA design in collaboration
with a research group at the Twente University in Holland. They have implemented
test circuits in the charge coupled device (CCD) technology, which is capable of
extremely small circuits. The goal of the proposed research is to expand the
principal investigator's research to the area of developing computer- aided
design (CAD) tools for the design of multiple-valued logic PLA's and to find
improved PLA designs. The research will devise minimization techniques
especially well-suited for CCD PLA's, as well as new CCD/CMOS PLA's being
considered. The principal investigator will also participate in the new Center
for Integrated Microelectronics Systems at Northwestern. VLSI (very large scale
integration) is a recent field that explores how to design highly complex
integrated circuits and related electronic systems. Research is needed because
VLSI devices have become increasingly complex and the industry more competitive.
Development of the field is important to the nation's competitive lead in
electronics. A research question that is becoming more important in this field
as optical and superconducting materials are introduced is that of using
multiple-valued logic (as opposed to the standard, binary logic). While there
has been a significant amount of research on multiple-valued logic, results have
been primarily theoretical. Now that the foundations are understood, the need is
for investigations into tools for design of multiple-valued logic circuits. This
is the focus of this proposal. The principal investigator has made important
conceptual advances in this area and will further develop them toward practice
in his research. The budget does not request funds for travel; the principal
investigator has a separate grant.