* 8706935
* Colloborative Research on Social Influence in an Election   Campaign
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* John Sprague, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 02/28/1991
* USD 64,107.00

This investigation addresses the issue of how the social context in which
citizens live, work, and play is transformed into social influence on voting
behavior in an election campaign. Questions that follow from this include: What
mechanisms promote homogeneity or heterogeneity in political choice in
neighborhoods or work groups? In what ways do the social contexts of work,
recreation, or neighborhood life filter the perception of politically relevant
information coming from the mass media or other persons? What mechanisms of
social interaction enhance or inhibit social influences on political choice? In
the highly dynamic context of a political campaign, how does the political
influence of social context evolve over time? What mechanisms govern the
changing course of social influence on political choice during a campaign? To
address these questions the investigators have undertaken a three wave panel
survey of 1,500 voters in South Bend, Indiana, before, during, and after the
1984 election campaign. A supplemental survey of almost 1,000 persons identified
by respondents as political discussion partners was also completed. This survey
employed a research design and sampling technique that differed markedly from
traditional practice. Extensive scientific study of mass political behavior,
especially voting behavior, has been undertaken over the past four decades
utilizing national random sample survey techniques. The current investigation
differs from this methodology in two important respects. First, the research
site is a particular urban community. Second, the sampling design randomizes
respondent selection, but within purposefully chosen neighborhoods that differ
systematically in social and economic composition. A high sampling rate within
each neighborhood allows the investigators to characterize each neighborhood
environment. This design is believed to be unique in the study of voting
behavior in that it provides for direct, comprehensive measurement of the
social, attitudinal, economic, and political characteristics of the voter's
immediate social milieu. The data set resulting fom these procedures provides
analytic opportunities unavailable in the usual national election studies. In
the determinants of voter choice or policy attitudes, measurements of
respondents' social contexts may be introduced directly into the analysis. The
relative importance of individual properties compared with the political
influence arising from the social composition of the respondent's neighborhood
can be assessed. For example, a body of evidence suggests that vote choice by
working class respondents is heavily influenced not only by their working class
membership but also by the concentration of working class families in their
living areas. This classic effect of social context on voting behavior can be
specified in extraordinary detail with the data set now available from South
Bend. What mechanisms of social interaction drive this observed amplification of
working class influence on individual members of the working class? Is it the
composition of their political discussion networks? Is it the composition of
their work groups? Is it the homogeneity of other social cleavages within their
neighborhoods - - race, religion, ethnicity? Such questions can be raised, and
given answers in first approximation, with these data.