* 8706541
* The Commercial Tradition in the Development of Mathematics
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1989
* Warren Van Egmond, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 06/30/1989
* USD 17,640.00

Mathematics is widely accepted as the most "pure" of the sciences. Its origins,
of course, have long been related to the needs of surveying, etc. in ancient
Egypt and Babylonia; but from that time on, it has been assumed that mathematics
has developed largely independantly from the "crass" world of everyday life.
"Imaginary numbers" or "non-Euclidean geometries" would seem not likely to have
developed when they actually did from any practical application. Astonishingly,
however, Dr. Van Egmond has discovered the development of very esoteric
mathematics out of a commercial tradition. His discovery has radically shaken
our long held understanding of the history of mathematics and the nature of its
growth. With this grant, Dr. Van Egmond will prepare an edition and study of the
remarkable text which he discovered in 1983. The work which he will edit is a
14th century algebra text attributed to Dardi da Pisa. This work is the single
most important text of Algebra written in Europe in the Middle Ages to be
discovered to date. Not only does it provide the most comprehensive, advanced,
and competent treatment of algebra produced by a European writer before the 16th
century, it also contains the correct solution to equations of the third and
fourth degrees. This anticipates by more than two centuries the published
solution of the cubic and quartic equations which had hitherto been taken to
mark the beginning of algebraic studies in Western Europe. The discovery of this
work thus shatters the prevailing view that European algebraists were
incompetent mathematicians constrained to copying the work of the Arabs and
incapable of doing original work of their own, and forces significant revisions
in our understanding of how mathematics developed in Europe before modern times.
In his study of this work, Dr. Van Egmond will put it in the tradition in which
it developed--not that of the academic in the new universities in Europe but
that of commercial arithmetic written in the native Italian language. This non-
university tradition has remained almost entirely unknown in the history of
science. This project thus will not only help us to appreciate the work of one
of the most able of medieval mathematicians, but will also shed light on a
previously unknown tradition. The study further helps us to understand the
nature of science and its growth. Commercial needs clearly drove this work, not
the abstract work of the academics. In our quest to understand why science rose
to its place of prominence in the West rather than other, previously more
scientifically sophisticated civilizations of the East, the research of Dr. Van
Egmond will surely play an important role.