* 8706722
* Architectures for Higher Speed List Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Andrew Pleszkun, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 07/31/1991
* USD 315,923.00

With the recent interest in Artificial Intelligence, nonmumeric (specially list)
processing has been brought to the forefront. This has led to a demand for
computer architectures that are suited to nonnumeric processing tasks. In this
research proposal, the researchers identify four major area in the list
processing paradigm namely: 1) function calls, 2) environment maintenance, 3)
data structure access and 4) garbage collection. They propose to investigate
methods that a) allow fast and efficient implementations of function call and
environment maintenance mechanisms, b) allow streamed access to data structures
and c) reduce the burden on the garbage collection process. For the efficient
implementation of function call and environment maintenance mechanisms, they
will investigate new cache management strategies for the stacks that are used to
implement the mechanisms. Since streamed access to data is crucial to a
pipelined implementation of list-processing architecture, they will investigate
representations of list structures that allow streamed access. Current list-
processing architectures are constrained to accessing list structures serially.
They also will investigate strategies that reduce the overhead due to garbage
collection by reclaiming some garbage cells without passing them on to garbage
collection process.