* 8706167
* Design of Porous Inorganic Membranes for Chemical           Sensor Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Thomas Bein, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 02/28/1991
* USD 281,200.00

This proposal is being awarded under the Materials Chemistry Initiative.
Detection of chemical species using solid state devices is an emerging field of
both fundamental and applied interest. Chemical sensors based on several
different physicochemical principles have been developed. One major challenge is
to design these devices such that they respond selectively to only very few
chemical species. The proposed research program comprises a collaborative effort
between Sandia National Laboratories and the University of New Mexico. It is
aimed at the development and exploration of a new generation of well-defined,
inorganic membranes that will allow us to fine-tune interactions of molecules
with surfaces. Applied to sensor surfaces, these structures with channel
diameters in the one- nanometer range can be used to first selectively admit
certain molecules into the membrane, and if so desired catalytically convert the
adsorbed target molecules within the channel system. The experimental approach
includes the hydrothermal formation of oriented molecular sieve channels on
single crystal planes, exploration of zeolite-amorphous microcomposites, and the
use of organic templates in the sol-gel formation of thin porous metal oxide
films. This research is a novel application and combination of chemistry that
has been explored in other systems. The collaboration allows them to employ a
unique combination of analytical techniques for the characterization of these
systems, including thermodesorption, EXAFS, x-ray diffraction, electron
microscopy, small-angle scattering as well as various spectroscopies.