* 8706697
* Late Prehistoric Archaeology of Hispaniola
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Kathleen Deagan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1990
* USD 60,000.00

This grant permits Dr. Deagan and her colleagues to continue archaeological
research at the site of En Bas Saline which is located about 10 kilometers east
of Cap Haitien, Haiti. It is believed that this marks the location of La Navidad
the settlement established by Christopher Columbus from the timbers salvaged
from the Santa Maria. Dr. Deagan's past work at the site has focussed on this
early European presence. (While the site contains early Spanish remains, it is
still not certain whether it is, in fact, La Navidad.) Excavation has clearly
demonstrated however the presence of an earlier native American village and it
is possible to trace the history of this village through pre and post contact
periods. This grant will allow Dr. Deagan to focus on this non.Spanish component
of the site. Based on an electromagnetic survey, anomalies which indicate
subsurface disturbance have been located. A selected sample of these will be
excavated and are expected to yield ceramic and other cultural remains as well
as fauna and human skeletons. Analyses of materials will permit estimation of
population size and how this changed over time, of settlement organization and
of diet. It should be possible to establish a pre Hispanic baseline and then
examine the effects of contact with the Spanish. Through analysis of the
skeletons, one can determine how diet and disease patterns changed during this
period and what the biological response was. This research is important because
it will shed light on human response, both cultural and biological, to severe
stress. Hispaniola, prior to European contact contained one of the largest
population aggregates in the New World. It had achieved a complex chieftan level
of organization. Within a century of European contact these people had become
extinct through Spanish action and through exposure to disease. Hoepfully we can
gain insight into human adaptation from this unfortunate case.