* 8706229
* Advanced Techniques in Interprocedural Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1988,02/28/1991
* Peter Callahan, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* John D. Gannon
* 02/28/1991
* USD 203,985.00

This work is a continuation of work on interprocedural data-flow analysis and
optimization in a programming environment. The new work will emphaize three main
directions. 1. Algorithms for interprocedural analysis that produce sharper
information than standard techniques. This includes formulations of the side
effect problems that determine the largest subsection of an involved array,
improvements to constant propagation to retain valuable information discarded by
current methods, and approximation methods for flow- sensitive sets. 2.
Incremental methods for returning a program to a consistent state after a change
to one or more of its constituent subparts. In a compiler that uses
interprocedural information, three distinct problems arise: correcting the
interprocedural information to reflect the new state of the program, determining
which modules must be recompiled because of changes to the interprocedural
information, and regenerating compiled code for those modules. 3. A global
approach to optimization that uses interprocedural information to direct the
optimization of the program as a whole. In such a scheme, the compiler examines
the entire program to plan application of optimizations like linkage tailoring
or active record merging, and determines what levels of optimization are merited
for individual entry points. The setting for this research will be the
compilation system of the Rn FORTRAN Programming Environment. The environment
has been designed as a test bed for research into whole program analysis and
optimization. Currently, it is being extended to perform incremental dependence
analysis in support of parallel programming research.