* 8706052
* Development of Image Processing Software for Quantitative   Electron Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* John Langmore, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 10/31/1991
* USD 419,111.00

Remarkable progress has been made in the application of the scanning
transmission electron microscope (STEM) to the quantitative analysis of the mass
distribution within individual biological molecules. The STEM has been used to
measure the molecular weights of a number of proteins, fragments of proteins,
and nucleoprotein complexes. This project will bring STEM-like capabilities to
conventional microscopes, especially those capable of electron imaging
spectroscopy (EIS), such as the Zeiss EM902. Image acquisition, display, and
analysis programs will be developed using an existing Silicon Graphics IRIS and
commercially available inexpensive C subroutines that are portable to Masscomp,
Silicon GRaphics, and IBM PC AT computers. The software will allow the low-loss
electrons to be used to determine absolute mass, mass/length, and mass
distributions of isolated biological molecules in the dehydrated or frozen-
hydrated states. In addition, multiple high-loss energy filtered images will be
used to map the distribution of major elements in the samples. The programs will
be used to further characterize the structure of chromosome fibers. Other users
will also have access to our developments. The developmental work and the
biological problem on which it will be carried out are of far- reaching
importance. It is likely that a significant fraction of NSF-funded biological
research will benefit from the availability of these quantitative techniques.