* 8706192
* Improvement of Laboratory Facilities and Equipment for      Research at the H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Frederick Swanson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 01/31/1990
* USD 85,000.00

The H. J. Andrews Experimental Forest, Blue River, Oregon is a US Forest
Service property dedicated to research and education. It is jointly managed by
the College of Forestry, Oregon State University, and the US Forest Service's
Pacific Northwest Research Station. Established in 1948, it has become one of
the most heavily utilized Experimental Forests in the country, with more than
100 separate research projects annually during the last 4 years. About 85
scientists and 30 graduate students were involved in research at the Andrews
Forest in 1986. Three factors contribute to this heavy use: 1) quality and
variety of the natural resources/habitats available; 2) numerous long-term data
sets and permanent plots; and 3) a tradition of collaborative research on a wide
range of biological and ecological topics. The scope of the research program at
the Andrews Forest is currently limited by lack of equipment and physical plant
resources. This project will provide funds to: 1) help equip a laboratory for
soil and tissue analyses; 2) acquire streamflow and temperature data loggers; 3)
help construct a Research Support Building; and 4) add a large (24x36 in)
plotter to the computer facilities. Substantial cost sharing funds will be
provided by Oregon State University and the US Forest Service.