* 8706532
* Prehistoric Pueblo Organization, Goodman Point Locality,    Southwestern Colorado
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Bruce Bradley, Crow Canyon Archaeological Center
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1989
* USD 73,749.00

In this project Drs. Lipe and Bradley will continue their archaeological
research in the Goodman Point region of the McElmo district in Southern
Colorado. In addition to numerous surface scatters and smaller sites, this area
contains the Sand Canyon Pueblo, a large 13th century A.D. settlement. This
apparently single-component single-story walled site has 250-300 surface rooms,
ca 90 kivas, at least 14 towers, several informal plazas and at least one
associated reservoir. Clearly it was a central focus for the region. During one
season of field research, the investigators will continue excavation at the Sand
Canyon site, survey the 7.5 km surrounding area, and excavate at two smaller
sites which date from a slightly earlier period in time. The Goodman Point
region, during this period formed an outlier of the Chacoan culture which was
centered in New Mexico. This culture which unified a large portion of the
Southwest U.S.A. seems to have developed quickly and then rapidly disappeared.
Although a great deal of work has been done in the heartland of the Chacoan
region, much less has taken place in the outlying regions. This project should
provide insight into how this complex, spatially extended culture arose, was
maintained and then declined. It will provide a model of sociopolitical and
economic organization. Anthropologists are interested in the process which leads
to the development of complex societies such as our own. Archaeological data,
because of the long term perspective they provide, offer a unique insight into
this question.