* 8706960
* Late Silurian Hypersaline Seas in the Michigan Basin and    Their Impact on Ancient and Modern Groundwater
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1987,10/31/1990
* Karen Cercone, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 10/31/1990
* USD 37,480.00

The presence of hypersaline ocean water in the Michigan Basin region
approximately 400 million years ago can be tied to the deposition of thick upper
Silurian salt sequences, to the plugging of porosity by ancient saline
groundwater in nearby middle Silurian hydrocarbon reservoirs, and perhaps to the
development of extremely saline and metal-rich modern groundwater brines. In
order to determine whether the ancient saline sea was isolated, with its surface
well below the level of surrounding seas, both internal and external carbonate
units will be analyzed for primary stable carbon and oxygen isotopic ratios.
Carbon isotopic signatures will be used to deduce the depth of the saline sea
whereas oxygen isotopic signatures will be used to deduce its regional extent
and evaporation state. The presence of ancient saline groundwaters in middle
Silurian hydrocarbon reservoirs will be documented by microthermometric analysis
of trapped ancient fluids, which can reveal their temperature of formation,
total salinity and cation content. Finally, the recent theory that saline
seawater evolved into modern brines will be tested by reconstructing the late
fluid history of middle Silurian carbonates located throughout the Michigan
basin region. Both the timing of brine development and the extent to which
basinal brines traveled out of the basin will be documented by analyzing both
oxygen isotopic trends and the chemistries of fluid inclusions trapped in these
rocks. The project will benefit undergraduate instruction through acquisition of
equipment, rock samples and involvement of students in development of senior
these topics.