* 8706416
* Optical Transitions, Energy Transfer and Laser Operation of Electronic and Molecular Defects in Ionic Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Fritz Luty, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/1990
* USD 437,400.00

An extended study of vibrational and electronic transitions, relaxation and
energy-transfer processes of simple and complex defects in alkali halides is
planned. Isolated molecular defects, excited with various ir laser or electronic
excitation techniques, will be explored in the spectral and temporal domains for
ir vibrational fluorescence, existing in weak or strong competition to multi-
phonon or multi-roton relaxation or intermolecular vibrational energy transfer
processes. Association of molecular defects with F centers form pair-
configurations, which under F-electron excitation can produce efficient
electron-vibration (E-V) energy transfer into the molecular modes leading to
multi-step vibrational emission. Under variation of host materials, molecules
and optical techniques the kinetics and physical mechanism of the E-V transfer
process will be studied and clarified. The ability of these defect-pairs to
produce vibrational superfluorescence and visible-light-pumped vibrational solid
state lasers will be systematically explored and developed. Besides these
vibrationally emitting systems, strong electronic transitions of new F-aggregate
centers will be studied with the aim of developing color center lasers with
improved-stability cw as well as psec mode-locked operation over an extended
near ir tuning range. Single mode operation of these lasers will be used for
high-resolution hole-burning experiments in various vibrational and electronic
defects. Their active work on order/disorder transitions of pure and mixed
alkali-cyanides will be extended, particularly towards new optical questions and
techniques.