* 8706117
* Collective Phenomena at Low Temperatures in  Novel Ternary  Silicon Compounds
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Robert Shelton, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Carol A. Savory-Heflin
* 06/30/1991
* USD 218,800.00

In this experimental research program the discovery and synthesis of novel
ternary silicides are integrated with a systematic study of the low temperature
properties of these materials. The emphasis is on three distinct classes of
ternary silicides (silicon plus two other elements). Within each class of
materials, they select compounds where two or more collective states compete for
stability. An extensive variety of experimental techniques are utilized to
explore and clarify the properties of these low temperature states. First they
propose an in-depth study based on their recently discovered heavy fermion
compound with silicon, platinum and cesium. In addition, they will examine four
isostructural ternary silicides containing cesium and nickel which show behavior
typical of dense Kondo systems. The experiments are designed to test the
stability of the heavy fermion or Kondo lattice state against various
perturbations such as atomic order, interatomic distances and tendency to
magnetic order. Our second project focuses on the critical interplay between the
superconducting or magnetic state and the charge-or-spin-density wave formation
in silicon, cobalt and scandium. In a third set of compounds, they investigate
the importance of iron to superconductivity in lutetium-ion-silicon ternaries.
For all three projects, they emphasize experiments to explore the relative
stability of the various competing collective states.