* 8706724
* Eolian Compound Crescentic Dune (Draa) Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Gary Kocurek, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1990
* USD 102,697.00

Deposits of compound-complex bedforms form a significant portion of the eolian
rock record, yet the actual dynamics of their airflow and bedform behavior have
not been addressed. This obviously handicaps our ability to understand these
modern bedforms and to interpret their deposit. Work here constitutes the first
detailed study of these features. The results of this proposed work will be a
four-year study consisting of monitoring bedform processes and migration, plus a
documentation of surface airflow and of the structure of macro-turbulence of the
lee-face airflow. This research represents a continuation of studies already
completed, in progress, and proposed here. Surface processes and bedform
migration will be mapped from the air on the ground. Anemometers and microvanes
will be used to document surface airflow. Balloons and a tower with mounted
instruments will be used to study the overall secondary lee- slope airflow. The
significance of this study will be the first documentation of the relationship
of primary and secondary airflow on a large complex bedform and the resulting
bedform response. The study site includes the Algodones Dune Field bordering S.
California and Nevada. Applications of the research include dune migration,
erosion/deposition in farmland, shoreline dune processes, and interpretation of
paleoeolian features and wind regimes.