* 8706859
* PRE Scientist Supplement: Molecular Interactions in Binary  Mixtures of Surfactants
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Milton Rosen, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 06/30/1990
* USD 148,000.00

Research Summary: This is an investigation of conditions under which mixtures of
two surfactants exhibit synergism, i.e., show properties that are better than
those of the individual surfactants by themselves. There are three foci of the
research: (1) Synergism is dynamic surface tension. Here the principal
investigator is investigating the rate at which surface tensions are reduced.
(2) Negative synergism. This is a novel phenomenon recently observed where the
mixture demonstrates an interfacial property to a smaller extent than the
individual surfactants by themselves under similar conditions. (3) New equations
for calculating the molecular interaction parameters that are the basis for
synergism. Synergism is investigated by measuring various interfacial properties
(surface and interfacial tension, contact angle, foaming) of the individual
surfactants and their mixtures. Dynamic surface tension will be investigated
with their new apparatus. Significance. Surfactants, which are used in a vast
number of industrial processes and consumer items, are generally mixtures
containing at least two surface-active components. This research will provide
guidelines for the selection of surfactant pairs that can optimize their
performance in those products and processes. From the relevant properties of the
individual surfactants by themselves and the value of an easily-measured
interaction parameter, this treatment allows one to predict: (1) whether a
synergistic interaction will occur when two surfactants are mixed and, if so,
(2) the ratio of the two that will show maximum synergism, and (3) the
properties of the system at that point. This means that we now have a powerful,
new tool for improving performance in a multitude of industrial processes and
products.