* 8706514
* Documentation of the Utilization of DSV ALVIN
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1987,02/28/1990
* Victoria Kaharl, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 02/28/1990
* USD 154,000.00

The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution proposes to write an informal history
of the ALVIN deep submergence program suitable for wide dissemination to a lay
audience. For more than two decades, ALVIN has served as the principal deep
submergence facility for ocean science and has proved to be an essential tool
for the investigation of ridge crest processes and a wide variety of other deep
ocean phenomena. In addition, ALVIN has received wide publicity for two major
non-science missions: the search for a hydrogen bomb lost in the crash of a B-52
aircraft off the coast of Spain in 1966, and her historic dive to the wreck of
the TITANIC in 1986. The ALVIN submersible has evolved significantly since her
initial certification in 1964, including the addition of a titanium personnel
sphere to permit a 4,000-meter dive capability, an entirely new propulsion
system, exceptionally sensitive video equipment, and the almost continual
evolution of her external sampling and grappling gear. In fact, improvements to
the original submersible have been so complete that not a single part of the
early ALVIN remains in the present-day submersible. As significant as ALVIN's
contributions have been to date, there is reason to expect continued -- perhaps
even increased -- attention to the ALVIN program in the future. The recent
conversion of R/V ATLANTIS II to replace R/V LULU as ALVIN's support ship now
provides the program with a new worldwide capability as well as significantly
enhanced laboratory support, maintenance facilities, and improved accommodations
for scientists and the ALVIN team. The upgrade of ALVIN's support ship seems
certain to spur a major new era in ALVIN investigations. Consequently, a history
of the ALVIN program is particularly appropriate at the present time, and its
publication will coincide with the 25-year anniversary of the ALVIN program. The
principal investigator has an excellent record of science publications for the
lay audience, and her previous publications have focussed particularly on marine
scientific research. Ms. Kaharl's position at WHOI provides her with
particularly good access to many of the principal figures in the history of the
ALVIN program. Reviews in general were highly favorable, with some concern
expressed regarding the high cost of this proposal in a period of tight budgets
in NSF ocean science. However, the reviewers were not aware that support of this
proposal is to be a joint effort among the agencies which support the ALVIN
program: the Foundation, the Office of NAVAL Research, and the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration. In addition, Program has negotiated a reduced
budget which institution's representative has agreed is sufficient for this
project to proceed. Program has also expressed to institution's representative
the particular importance of emphasizing the contributions of the ALVIN program
to ocean science in addition to her well-known technological significance and
her previously well-publicized achievements in ocean exploration. ALVIN has
served with a remarkable record of safety, reliability, and effectiveness as the
pre-eminent U.S. national facility for deep submergence research. This is a
story that fully deserves to be made publicly available. Program recommends that
an award be made at this time in the amount of $60,000. This amount includes
$15,000 from the National