* 8706403
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Program to Search         for Gravitational Radiation
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Peter Michelson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1990
* USD 36,684.00

The objective of this two-year U.S.-China research project on gravitational
radiation between Peter Michelson, Stanford University and Enke Hu of Zhongshan
University is to coordinate experiments to detect gravity waves between existing
detectors at Stanford and Zhongshan University. The ultimate objective is to
establish the existence of gravitational radiation, a fundamental form of
energy, whose existence was predicted by Einstein and others over sixty years
ago. The investigators will continue collaboration that began two years ago
under the U.S.-China Program. They propose to carryout a long-term (one-year)
coincidence observation with existing detectors, work on improving technology of
cryogenic (cold temperature) detectors and begin a feasiblity study of a low
frequency gravity wave detector. The establishment of a detector in Southeast
China is signi>icant for this international experimental effort since it is
essential for the successful detection of gravity waves that geographically
dispersed detectors be used to establish simultaneous coincidences. The
establishmen> of a base in Southeast China fills a geographical gap in the
worldwide detector network. Results from the coincidental experiment are
expected to contribute to the advancement of detector technology as well. This
project fulfills the U.S.-China Program's objective of promoting mutually
beneficial research to advance scientific knowledge through the combined efforts
and abilities of American and Chinese scientists.