* 8706310
* Metal-Oxo and Metal-Peroxo Intermediates in Oxidative       Catalysis (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1987,03/31/1993
* John Groves, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* E. Kent Barefield
* 03/31/1993
* USD 713,770.00

The goals of this research program are to elucidate the mechanisms of metal-
catalyzed atom transfer reactions. The general approach is to characterize
reactive intermediates in proposed catalytic cycles and to isolate the
elementary steps in catalysis. Reaction stereoelectronics and ligand design are
used to explore strategies to impose selectivity on these catalytic reactions.
Specific goals for the next grant period are: (1) to continue the elaboration of
the chemistry of peroxometal and oxometal complexes; (2) to design and prepare
catalysts for site-selective, shape-selective and enantioselective molecular
recognition and catalytic oxygenation; and (3) to extend the metal nitride and
metal imide chemistry which was developed in the previous grant period toward
catalysts which activate and transfer nitrogen. Most reactions of other
substances with oxygen from the atmosphere are catalyzed by metal ions, present
either as constituents of proteins or as trace constituents of water solutions.
Better understanding of the mechanisms of metal-catalyzed oxidation reactions is
important both for the development of more efficient catalysts for industrial
utilization of oxygen and for a deeper understanding of how some important
enzymes work. During the previous grant period this research group has
synthesized catalysts which are very efficient in causing some organic chemicals
to react with oxygen in such a way that only one of several possible products
are formed, as well as metal- containing compounds which are models of some
enzymes that catalyze biological oxidations.