* 8706081
* RUI: Facilities Improvements and Scientific Equipment for   the Research Laboratory of the Bowdoin Scientific Station
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* Nathaniel Wheelwright, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 12/31/1988
* USD 35,000.00

The Bowdoin Scientific Station (BSS) is a biological field station located on
Kent Island in the Bay of Fundy. BSS contains over 125 ha of boreal forest, old
field, and marsh. Since 1935 the field station has fostered research in
terrestrial ecology, resulting in usage of the station by over 3000 people and
the publication of over 55 scientific papers. Current research programs at BSS
include long-term population censuses, behavioral ecology, mate choice, lifetime
reproductive success and developmental biology of birds; acoustic communication
in colonially breeding birds; and the effects of herbivore grazing and fog-borne
pollutants on forest dynamics. BSS offers an excellent opportunity for
integrative, multi- faceted research in terrestrial biology because of its
habitat diversity, 50-year data base on climate and populations, and recent
initiation of new research directions at the site. This project will provide
funds for improvements in facilities and scientific instrumentation to modernize
the field station and enhance the research programs of all station users,
especially undergraduates. Three general improvements are included: 1)
electrification of the research laboratory; 2) upgrading of equipment, including
a microcomputer and data loggers with environmental sensors for on-site data
entry and analysis; 3) insulation of the laboratory and dormitories to extend
the useful season of the station.