* 8706738
* Metal- and Nonmetal Boron Clusters: Synthetic, Chemical and Mechanistic Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Donald Gaines, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John B. Hunt
* 12/31/1990
* USD 265,028.00

Boron-hydrogen compounds and adducts of these containing metals (metalloboranes)
or carbon (carboranes) exhibit unusual types of chemical bonds which are of
considerable interest to theoretical chemists. These compounds are also of
growing importance as precursors to new solid state materials. This project is a
continuing investigation of the mechanisms of structural transformations of
boron compounds. The chemical knowledge gained will guide the development of new
synthetic routes to metalloboranes and new applications of these molecules in
other areas of chemistry. The mechanisms of reactions and rearrangements of
model borane and heteroatom borane clusters will be determined using
stereospecific boron isotopic labeling as a primary diagnostic probe. Examples
include rearrangement studies of closo-carboranes and nido- and arachno-
hexaboranes, mechanistic studies of polyalkylation of boranes, and
characterization of long lived intermediates formed during the reduction of
boron- halogen bonds by trialkyltin hydrides. Group V heteroatom- borane
clusters will be prepared and their chemical, spectroscopic and structural
features established. The scope of reactivity of several classes of
metalloboranes including some containing Zn and Mn will be determined. The
syntheses of high boron content polymers will be developed for possible
applications in energy storage and solid state materials.