* 8707098
* Estimation of Structural Damage Through System              Identification
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Garrett Jeong, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/30/1990
* USD 59,898.00

This research project considers buildings and structures which are damaged or
fail during a strong earthquake. The behavior of damaged or failed structures
often becomes highly nonlinear and dependent upon the history of loading. A
common technique that is used to describe the dynamic behavior of such
structures, including the nonlinear and history-dependent characteristics, is to
use a mathematical model with parameters that change as the load is applied. The
parameters are estimated using some system identification technique in
conjunction with the recorded response of the structure. Many identification
techniques have been developed but a comparison and evaluation of the various
techniques is lacking. The purpose of this project is to compare and verify the
various identification techniques. As a result, one or more of the techniques
will be used to assess the damage in a structure. In particular, an attempt will
be made to relate the changes in the identified parameters to the damage as it
accumulates in a structure. The goal is to develop a mathematical model that
will assist in making decisions regarding the safety, or reliability, of a
structure and the need for repair or demolition. The design of a structure for
earthquake resistance includes consideration of the interaction between gravity
loads and lateral displacements. This interaction, known as the P-Delta effect,
refers to a tendency for unidirectional yielding of the structure, which can
lead to dynamic instability and collapse of the structure. A methodology to
consider P-Delta effects in the design of seismic resistant structures is
lacking. The objective of this research is to develop such a methodology to
consider the P-Delta effect and dynamic instability. The approach is based on
the definition of the inelastic spectrum. The premise is that P-Delta effects
can be included through spectrum modification, in a way that is similar to the
methods used to incorporate the effects of ductility and damping.