* 8707807
* Infuluence of Joint Flexibility in Tubular Structures for   Offshore Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1987,04/30/1991
* Kye Han, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* William Hakala
* 04/30/1991
* USD 60,000.00

Tubular steel frames, which are extensively used in offshore applications, are
usually analyzed by ignoring the flexibility of joints. Nevertheless, the
flexibility of chord walls at brace connections may have profound effects on the
behavior of tubular structures; it influences displacements of the frame,
distributions of stresses, fatigue lives of joints, buckling capacities of
compression members, and the dynamic response of the structure. The flexibility
of joints must be considered in the analysis. This research will develop two
analytical models. One will be suitable for the global frame analysis, and the
other, a local analysis. The former will provide an efficient tool to compute
nominal member forces and moments, similar to the conventional rigid frame
model, except that the new model will account for joint flexibilities. The
latter will consider a partial frame to facilitate a more detailed analysis; in
addition to reflecting the flexibility of a joint and the frame actions of the
adjoining members, this model will enable the detailed description of the joint
geometry, including weld profiles, to predict the distribution of stresses in
tube walls. These two models, when developed, will facilitate highly accurate
analyses of tubular frames. The two models will be utilized to investigate the
influence of joint flexibilities in various tubular structures. For this
purpose, three types of jacket frames will be considered, and each frame will be
analyzed for two different heights, 400 and 800 feet high. This study will
provide insights and useful guidance to design engineers regarding the effects
of joint flexibility for tubular frames frequently encountered in practice.