* 8707548
* ROW:  Fish Nests and Aquatic Vegetation:  Testing Resource- Based Competition and the Intermediate Disturbance          Hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* Nancy McCreary Waters, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 12/31/1988
* USD 12,000.00

The roles played by disturbance and competition in providing structure to
ecological communities have been heatedly, debated. Contrasting hypotheses of
resource-based competition and the intermediate disturbance hypothesis provide a
theoretical framework for empirical studies of a variety of ecological
communities. In particular, the littoral zone communities of oligotrophic lakes
present ideal systems to experimentally address the mechanisms maintaining
species coexistence. The submersed aquatic plant community of oligotrophic lakes
is dominated by vegetatively propagating perennials. Although widespread in
nature, these plants figure in relatively few demographic studies. As such, they
represent an important group whose ecology is poorly known. By understanding
community processes in less environmentally variable habitats such as
oligotrophic lakes, predictive models can be generated for other types of more
complex and variable systems. This project concentrates on the ecological
processes controlling aquatic plant distributions in oligotrophic lakes in the
Pocono Mountains (Pennsylvania). Observational and experimental data will be
combined to test hypotheses on the role of macrophyte communities, particularly
with regard to fish netting. The pilot work conducted through this project will
enable the P.I. to construct a more compelling and developed proposal with which
she can compete for federal research support.