* 8707615
* A New Technique Combining Boundary Integral Equation and    Hybrid Ray-Mode Method for Wave Scatters in Layered         Background with Applications in Optical Microscopy
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* I-Tai Lu, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 06/30/1990
* USD 75,000.00

This work is funded as an Engineering Initiation Award (EIA). Optical wave
scattering phenomena for scatters embedded in a multilayer background will be
studied using a new technique which employs boundary integral equation to
formulate the interaction processes and hybrid ray- mode method to provide the
Green's function of the background. This method is numerically efficient in a
broad range of parameter regimes and also provides cogent physical
interpretations for the computed result. Structures of interest in the optical
microscopy of integrated circuits and integrated optics will serve as test
cases. The dependance of the scattering properties on the shapes, sizes and
dielectric constants of the scatters and the response of the scanning microscope
to the scattering fields are to be investigated. The results gained from this
research may enable the scanning microscopy to assess quantitatively objects
whose dimensions are on the order of, or less than, the wavelength. Potential
application is to the use of a scanning optical microscope for automated
nondestructive evaluation and inspection of sub-micron structures in integrated
circuits and integrated optics devices. This study will be also beneficial to
other engineering disciplines such as nondestructive testing, exploration,
geophysics and underwater acoustics, etc., where similar structures are
investigated using elastic and acoustic waves. A new theoretical technique will
be employed to study wave scattering phenomena of those structures that are of
interest in scanned optical microscopy of integrated circuits and integrated
optics. Such structures are composed of material formed in layers which often
have embedded inhomogeneities, different from the background layered structure.
One of the most versatile methods to identify and evaluate them is based on the
use of the transmission and scattering bounded beams incident on the
multilayered structure that are scanned over the region containing the scatter.
In order to use the scattered fields to identify the properties of the scatter,
it is essential to solve the direct problem of wave scattering by an object in a
multilayer structure. This proposal addresses a use of the combination of
boundary integral equation and the newly developed hybrid ray-mode method to
solve the wave scattering problem.