* 8707089
* EIA: Lithography for All-Vacuum Integrated Circuit               Fabrication
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1987,09/30/1990
* Michael Kozicki, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Queen
* 09/30/1990
* USD 59,524.00

Integrated circuit fabrication is still widely carried out by transporting the
substrates between individual pieces of equipment in a "cleanroom" environment.
Since it is impossible to fully control the contaminant content of the air,
there is ample opportunity for particulates or vapors to impinge on the
materials being processed, thereby altering device characteristics and reducing
product yield. A complete fabrication process, including product transfer,
carried out under vacuum would result in a significant reduction of substrate
contamination. Many process steps may be carried out under vacuum or at reduced
pressure but one critical operation, namely lithography, may not. This is
currently a barrier to the realization of all-vacuum processing. The objective
of this program is to investigate As-S/Ag resist system deposition, exposure
(optical and electron-beam), develop, and strip, under vacuum conditions to
create a lithographical process which may ultimately be used in all-vacuum
applications. Extensive microfabrication facilities will be used including
equipment for evaporation and sputtering, direct step on wafer and contact
exposure, high resolution e-beam lithography, parallel plate and reactive ion
etching, and materials analysis by EDXA, WDS, and AES. The resulting high
resolution process will be compatible with multiple exposure methods under
vacuum and will allow considerable progress to be made in all-vacuum processing.