* 8707345
* RUI:  Collaborative Research:  Metamorphism and Deformation Associated with Late Cenozoic Strike-Slip Faulting in the   Philippines
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1987,05/31/1992
* Robert Miller, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 05/31/1992
* USD 64,790.00

The Philippine Fault, an active, left-lateral strike-slip fault, transects
almost the entire length of the Philippine Archipelago. It is one of several
major strike-slip fault systems worldwide that occur at obliquely converging
intra-oceanic plate boundaries. This and a collaborative project (EAR87-07951)
will study the genesis and emplacement of metamorphic rocks that occur along the
fault. Some of these metamorphic rocks-- greenschist-facies metavolcanics,
amphibolites and serpentinites-- may be created at convergent suture zones, but
we will test the hypothesis that at least some of them were generated entirely
as a result of strike-slip related processes. We will use structural,
geochronological and geochemical techniques to determine if the deformational
and metamorphic history of metamorphic rocks is consistent with their creation
along the Philippine Fault, rather than by collisional process. The common
occurrence of major strick-slip faults at modern obliquely converging margins
suggest that similar structures should occur as terrane boundaries in ancient
active margin assemblages, but few such structures have been recognized. This
may be because many petrologic and structural associations common to both
convergent and strike-slip "sutures" are generally believed to be associated
only with the former. By studying the origin of metamorphic rocks along an
active strike-slip fault that also acts to juxtapose disparate terranes in the
Philippines, we hope to establish a framework for recognizing such structures in
old arc terranes.