* 8707436
* The Evolution of Reefs and the Dispersal of Reefal Biotas:  A Preliminary Synthesis Focusing on the Wrangellia Terrane
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1989
* George Stanley, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 06/30/1989
* USD 30,000.00

This project concentrates on field investigations of five crucial localities
within the Cordilleran region of the United States and Canada. It will provide
meaningful data on the evolution of late Triassic reefs and reeflike carbonate
rocks within a number of displaced terranes accreted to western North America.
Utilizing the dual approach of microfacies analysis and detailed paleontological
study of calcareous algae and diverse benthic faunas of foraminifers, sponges,
corals, molluscs and echinoids, the research will test ideas about the dispersal
of the biota and the movement of accretional terranes in Alaska, the Canadian
Northwest, and Oregon. The proposed project will build upon a foundation of
prior research on Upper Triassic faunas and carbonate rocks of central Peru as
well as recent reef discoveries at localities in Idaho and northeastern Oregon.
The project will benefit from collaboration with alpine workers of Europe,
pooling their knowledge to bring current understanding of the North American
Triassic to levels approaching those of well-known counterparts of Europe. The
formulation of a viable model for the dispersal of the biota in light of terrane
theory and reef evolution, along with integration of data acquired from other
regions of the world, will permit a general synthesis for global Triassic
paleogeography, allowing the type of detailed resolution not currently available
in either reef studies or terrane analyses in North America.