* 8707169
* Conditional Quantile Methods in Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Roger Koenker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 06/30/1990
* USD 78,548.00

This support is for the continuation of a very interesting and important line of
research in theoretical econometrics. Most applied econometric research involves
using a statistical estimation technique known as "least squares" to analyze
data. In essence this technique acknowledges that there are errors in the data,
and these errors can derive from many sources. For instance, reported
measurements of prices or incomes might be rounded to the nearest dollar rather
than being exact. National economic data are highly aggregated, and survey data
might include various types of clerical errors. An analyst, of course, knows
that errors will exist in the data, but does not know their magnitudes. However,
in order to draw consistent and unambiguous conclusions, any analysis of such
data must incorporate the capability to account for the potential effects of the
errors inherent in the data. Fortunately, the size of the errors can be
estimated statistically, and the distribution of the errors can be assumed.
Typically errors are assumed to follow the normal distribution. A proven
analytical technique computes results by choosing parameters such that the sum
of the squares of the estimated error values is at a minimum, hence the name
"least squares". This technique forms the basis for virtually all economic
analysis, thus knowing its inherent drawbacks is very important. Much research
has shown the results of least squares estimation not to be robust if the true
distribution of the errors is not normal. This project, and the line of work to
which it belongs, presents an alternative to least squares estimation that is
not so dependent on the errors being normally distributed, and so represents an
important contribution to econometric analysis. Technically, this project
develops a method of statistical estimation and inference based on regression
quantiles. These are linear combinations of statistics based on data which have
been ordered in some way. By studying these combinations, Professor Koenker
derives estimation techniques robust to distributional errors. He also extends
his analysis to estimation of summary statistics and confidence intervals.