* 8707357
* Stratigraphic Evolution of the Haslingden Group in the      Leichhardt River Fault Trough, Mount Isa Orogen, Australia: Implications for Rift Tectonics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1990
* Kenneth Eriksson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Whitcomb
* 05/31/1990
* USD 60,100.00

The Haslingden Group is the oldest cover sequence in the Mount Isa Orogen; it
is ca. 18 km thick and accumulated in the Leichhardt River Fault Trough (LRFT)
between 1800 and 1710 Ma ago on ca. 1860 Ma-old continental crust. The volcano-
sedimentary Haslingden Group has previously been interpreted as a single-stage
rift sequence and an overlying sedimentary package, the Quilalar Formation, as
the sag phase associated with subsequent thermal contraction of the lithosphere.
Our preliminary work on the Haslingden Group suggests a more complex evolution
involving at least two stages of rifting. This hypothesis will be evaluated by:
i) constraining the stratigraphic evolution of the Haslingden Group through a
detailed sedimentological/paleogeographical analysis including quantitative
analysis of shallow marine sediments of probable tidal origin; ii) contrasting
the stratigraphic evolution of the Haslingden Group with documented rift
sequences in the geologic record; and iii) quantitatively modelling the
subsidence history of the LRFT within the constraints of the stratigraphic
analysis and the geochronological framework. An understanding of the
stratigraphic evolution of the Haslingden Group will enhance the understanding
of less well-exposed rifts such as the North Sea and Keweenawan Rifts and of
rifts in general. The proposed study is part of a multidisciplinary
investigation of the Mount Isa Orogen, including a structural analysis of the
LRFT, by the Bureau of Mineral Resources, Australia. As part of this project we
will be able to evaluate the evolution of the LRFT within its own tectonic
context as well as within the framework of surrounding tectonic processes. The
results of the analysis of the Haslingden Group will be integrated with ongoing
structural-metamorphic, geochronologic, geochemical and sedimentological studies
to formulate a comprehensive tectonic model for the Mount Isa Orogen. Subsidence
modelling and integration of various disciplines in developing a tectonic model
for the Mount Isa Orogen will be undertaken while the PI is on study leave at
the BMR for the duration of 1988.