* 8707967
* Very Precise Dating of Prehistoric Earthquakes in Southern California Using Tree-ring Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Gordon Jacoby, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Patty Brooking
* 12/31/1988
* USD 55,000.00

It is proposed herein to continue sampling along the San Andreas fault in order
to find more old-aged trees that have been disturbed by earthquakes. These
disturbed trees can provide information about timing and extent of prehistoric
earthquake events as their records of annual growth rings are dated and
deciphered. Previous tree-ring ssampling and new samples from the first
supported part of this project confirm the effects of the 1857 earthquake in
certain trees in southern California. Samples along a 10 km length of the San
Andreas fault just northwest of Cajon Pass show evidence of strong disturbance
between the growing seasons of 1812 and 1813. A reported great earthquake in
1812 encourages the interpretation that tree-ring data can define the location
of this earthquake, which is known in time but not in space. Further sampling
and study will ensue in this area, because the interval of only 44 years,
between 1812 (December) and 1857 (January), is much shorter than previous
estimated recurrence intervals along this segment. Precise delineation of extent
of rupture in late 1812 will be the primary focus of this research. Studies will
also continue on samples from other segments of the San Andreas fault. Within
constraints of time, efforts will continue in northern California. The
concentration there will be on the extent of the 1838 event in the Bay Area
region.