* 8707592
* Surfactant-Mediated Protein Chromatography
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Donald Wetlaufer, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 01/31/1990
* USD 115,523.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of separation science. The objectives of this research are (a) to
solubilize and separate, by hydrophobic interaction chromatography, protein
mixtures without denaturation, and (b) to explore and exploit changes in
chromatographic selectivity due to mild surfactants. Mobile chromatographic
phases containing n-octyl glucoside, CHAPS, or Triton X-100 will be examined
over a range of concentrations below and above the respective critical micelle
concentrations. The dependence of protein retention on surfactant concentration
and ionic strength will be determined by isocratic chromatography for an
ensemble of proteins. Isotherms for the binding of surfactants to stationary
phases will be determined. The effects of surfactants on chromatographic
efficiency, resolving power, and linear loading capacity will also be
determined. Protein recoveries (native and total) will be ascertained and
indications of on-column denaturation will be tested by measurements of specific
activity, circular dichroism, or intrinsic fluorescence. The correlation of
solvent strength with interfacial tension measurements will be explored and
convenient means will be devised for the separation of surfactant from protein
following chromatography. The results of these studies will be of broad and
significant potential impact in protein chemistry and biotechnology.