* 8707827
* Research Initiation Award:  Investigation of the Effects of Dissolved Oxygen and Dissolved Carbon Dioxide on            Embryogenesis and the Competence for Embryogenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Stowell Davison, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1989
* USD 60,000.00

Narrative: The somatic embryogenesis of carrots will be used as a model to
quantify the effects of dissolved oxygen and dissolved carbon dioxide on
undifferentiated cell growth and embryogenesis. This model has been selected
because extensive information regarding somatic embryogenesis of carrots already
exists in the literature. Embryos are thought to originate from single cells, or
a small number of cells associated with a cluster of cells. After induction, the
embryos progress through several stages of development. Recognition of the
various stages of embryogenesis and plantlet regeneration will comprise the
major analytical procedures for assessing embryogenesis for this project. Gases
of various composition will be used in shake flask studies and the information
will then be transferred to the more industrially applicable system of an
agitated, scalable reactor. The oxygen and carbon dioxide effects will be
studied to develop a bioreactor that can be operated at controlled levels of the
gaseous components. This development will provide a valuable tool for further
investigations that will require the cultivation of embryos under well defined
nutritional conditions.