* 8707620
* Engineering Initiation Award:  Time-Average Markov Decision Processes:  Theory Algorithms and Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Keith Ross, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 06/30/1990
* USD 60,000.00

Engineering Initiation Abstract - Ross This research will investigate Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs), particularly as they relate to telecommunications.
MDPs have been proposed for a variety of fields in which decisions must be made
sequentially in the presence of uncertainty: communication networks (routing,
flow control, multiplexing); operations management (inventory control, machine
replacement, highway maintenance, hospital admission scheduling); and statistics
(sequential hypothesis testing), among others. However, industrial
implementations of MDPs are surprisingly few, particularly in the
telecommunication industry. The principal investigator will study a new
formulation for time-average MDPs that could overcome some of the apparent
reasons for the lack of their application. It should lead to simpler and more
elegant proofs for the classical results, and should also be a powerful
technique for obtaining new results and algorithms with a wide range of
applicability. Regarding telecommunication systems, the study will address the
application of time-average MDPs to a variety of queueing models, based on the
researcher's previous work with optimal flow control and optimal multiplexing
for integrated communication networks. It is also anticipated that the new
formulation will broaden substantially the range of applicabability of MDPs to
telecommunications. Another important aspect of the research is the simultaneous
study of concrete applications of MDPs along with the mathematical theory of
MDPs, thereby increasing synergistically the quality and quantity of the
results.