* 8707959
* Immunological and Electrophoretic Studies of Systematic     Relationships of the Poaceae (Grasses)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1990
* Asim Esen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 03/31/1990
* USD 125,908.00

The grass family (Poaceae) is economically the most important plant family,
being the source of cereal grains such as wheat, corn, rice, barley, sorghum,
and millets. Sugar cane and lawn grasses are also members of this family. In
addition, grasses constitute the fourth largest flowering plant family and
comprise over one-fourth of the world's vegetation. Unfortunately, the phylogeny
(genealogy) of this family is merely speculative; numerous groups such as genera
and tribes are still unclassified, and the boundaries and naturalness of several
tribes are questionable. These difficulties arise from the extreme reduction and
consequently limited usage of grass floral morphology in classification and
suspected parallel evolution where two unrelated species superficially look
alike becasue of adaptations to the same environment. Drs. Hilu and Esen of
Virginia Polytechnic Institute will be using the molecular size and
immunological properties of a class of storage proteins called prolamins as a
measure of genetic distance between various groups of grasses. The prolamins are
found only in grasses and are known to be little affected by environmental
conditions. When these virtues are combined with refined molecular
methodologies, the P.I.s have an effective approach for assessing the genomic
relationships between various groups of grasses. Preliminary work on
representative grass genera using prolamins clearly demonstrates the far-
reaching applications of this molecular approach. The potential impact of the
research is two-fold. First, it will increase our understanding of the biology
of this large and important plant family. Second, since all of the cereal grains
will be included, this study will help to define the gene pool of grasses that
can be used in improved breeding of cereal crops.