* 8707842
* Semi-Analytical Univariate Perturbation and Implicit        Differentiation Formulations for Structural Sensitivities of3-D Solids Using Boundary Elements
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Sunil Saigal, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* La Tanya Darby
* 08/31/1989
* USD 33,000.00

The analytical formulation of accurate and efficient techniques for obtaining
structural design sensitivities of three-dimensional solid objects using the
boundary element approach will be developed. A new design sensitivity analysis
(DSA) will be formulated by performing implicit differentiation of the three-
dimensional boundary integral system equations. This efficient DSA will be
developed to allow the use of the same triangular factors of the system matrix
that are formed in a previous stress analysis step. The right-hand side vectors
required in this approach will be derived by two different strategies and their
respective performances will be investigated. A semi- analytical univariate
perturbation/finite difference algorithm and a formulation involving
differentiating boundary integrals will be developed. Algorithms for recognition
and exploitation of significant matrix sparsity that occurs in DSA of objects
with geometrically insensitive regions will be developed. Accurate numerical
integration algorithms using appropriate orders for efficient evaluation will be
developed for the new matrices associated with three-dimensional DSA. A
formulation for the efficient calculation of sensitivities of all components of
the stress tensor on the surface of an object will also be developed. This
approach will use boundary displacement and traction solutions and avoid the
need for any additional numerical integrations. The above developments will be
integrated in a unified systems for DSA research for complex three-dimensional
components.