* 8707758
* Wage Rigidity in Historical Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Steven Allen, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1991
* USD 86,140.00

This is an interesting and important project, which investigates the sources of
unemployment arising from economic rigidities in the wage system used to
compensate labor. Early classical models of the economy assumed that wages and
prices adjusted easily to changes in economic variables, and that the labor
market always employed all workers willing to work at the going wage. The Great
Depression provided overwhelming empirical evidence that those models were not
correct. Most modern models of employment include, either implicitly or
explicitly, the concept of a natural rate of unemployment. This is the rate
which would exist if everyone who is willing to work at a given wage can find
employment. That is not to say unemployment will be zero. Some jobs are
seasonal. For instance, construction is more prevalent in the spring and summer
than in winter. In northern climates some construction workers will be
unemployed, at least part of the time, during the winter months. Such structural
unemployment is inherent in any advanced economy, and for the sake of conceptual
clarity in labor market models, is considered to constitute the so- called
natural rate of unemployment. A fundamental question of concern to analysts and
policy makers is why the actual unemployment rate might be greater than the
natural rate. A reason suggested by economic theory is that employment cannot
adjust to changing market conditions easily, in particular real wages (that is
the purchasing power of wages) do not adjust quickly. The most prominent
theories of wage rigidity focus on such factors as overlapping contracts between
labor and employers, efficiency wages, and, especially, incorrect expectations
of the future purchasing power of wages. This research examines wage rigidity in
the United States over the past century, and by doing so, it extends our
empirical knowledge of wage rigidity in several ways. First, a much wider range
of indicators of rigidity is analyzed than in any previous study. It
incorporates cross industry variation in wage structure. Another innovation of
this project is the use of U.S. industry wage data dating back to 1860 to
explore in depth whether there have been structural changes in the labor market,
to document the sources of those changes, and to analyze their macroeconomic
impact. Little comparative analysis of labor market performance across
historical periods has been done previous to this work. Professor Miron is a
talented young empiricist, and has done fine work in analyzing the labor market
in the past.