* 8707055
* Heterometallic Polyhydride Compounds: Synthesis and         Reactivity (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Kenneth Caulton, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* John B. Hunt
* 06/30/1991
* USD 361,704.00

Hydrogenation, the addition of hydrogen to other atoms or molecules, is an
extremely important chemical process. For example, hydrogenation is involved in
the conversion of corn oil to margarine and in the utilization of coal for
chemical synthesis, and will undoubtedly be involved also in future practical
schemes for the utilization of solar energy. The focus of this research project
is the synthesis of metal-hydrogen compounds of metals which can hydrogenate
other compounds or catalyze hydrogenation reactions. This project involves the
synthesis and investigation of the reactivity of compounds optimized for
hydrogen transfer to reducible substrates such as CO, carbon dioxide and
olefins. Such compounds contain two different metals, either two transition
metals or a transition metal and a highly electropositive metal (Zn, Y, Sm
....), as well as numerous hydride ligands. Three different classes of synthetic
procedures will be used for these heterometallic hydrides. In preliminary work
the reduction of carbon dioxide by one heterobimetallic polyhydride has been
observed. Since it can be argued that unpaired electron density should promote
such hydrogenations from both a kinetic and a thermodynamic point of view,
monomeric metallic polyhydrides with unpaired electrons will also be
synthesized. Both monomeric and heterobimetallic polyhydrides will be
characterized in terms of their dynamic processes ( e.g. by EPR spectroscopy )
and their chemical reactivity.