* 8707992
* RUI: Reinforcement and Control of Behavioral Variability
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Allen Neuringer, Reed College
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 06/30/1991
* USD 185,962.00

Operant behaviors are learned and repeated when they are followed by
reinforcers. For example, the learning by a student in a classroom or job
performance by a worker in a factory partly depend upon reinforcing
consequences. The question asked in the present research is whether variability
is a dimension of behavior that is also controlled by contingent reinforcers.
If, for example, only unpredictable patterns of activity are followed by
reinforcement, will behavior become unpredictable and such unpredictability be
maintained? Little is known about the control exerted over behavioral
variability by contingent reinforcers and, indeed, some researchers doubt that
such control is possible. Previous research in Dr. Neuringer's laboratory showed
that variability can be reinforced. That research involved an animal model to
explore these basic questions. Dr. Neuringer found that sequences of responses
on two operanda by pigeons became highly variable when reinforcement depended
upon such variability. The present research continues to test whether
variability is, in fact, an instrumental dimension of behavior controlled by
contingent reinforcement. If it is, then a number of predictions should be
supported. For example, reinforcement should exert precise control over the
degree of variability in behavior; animals should be able to choose between
different degrees of variability, with these choices controlled by reinforcers;
and discriminative stimuli should produce variability or stereotypy, depending
upon the contingencies. Dr. Neuringer's research also will compare the
reinforcement of repetitive and habitual behaviors with the reinforcement of
variable behaviors in seeking to distinguish between laws of habit and laws of
variation. Other studies will explore whether and how the reinforcement of
variability contributes to learning generally. These basic experiments should
help to define important functions of instrumental variability. They may help
researchers and educators produce variability when it is desired, for example,
in learning, problem-solving, creativity-demanding, or competitive situations.
And the studies may provide assessment methods to help physicians and health-
care workers factor out the relative effects on behavioral variability versus
learned habits of drugs, brain damage, motivational states, and psychological
deficiencies.