* 8707336
* Regulation of Transferrin Receptor mRNA in HL-60 Cells
* BIO,DCB
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* Caroline Enns, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 10/31/1990
* USD 57,936.00

The transferrin receptor is the cell surface protein responsible for iron
transport into mammalian cells. In this study the regulation of the transferrin
receptor at the mRNA level will be studied. A myeloid cell line, HL-60, will be
used as a model system. Transferrin receptor levels are known to be sensitive to
differentiation, exogenous concentrations of non- transferrin iron and iron
chelators. It has been hypothesized that receptor levels fluctuate during the
cell cycle. A cDNA probe for the receptor will be used to measure the levels of
mRNA. The size of the mRNA will be determined by Northern analysis.
Transcriptional activity and the stability of mRNA will also be analyzed. These
methods will be used to evaluate the level at which transferrin receptor mRNA is
controlled when HL-60 cells are induced to differentiate along a monocytic
pathway (with 12-0-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate) or along a granulocytic
pathway (with dimethyl sulfoxide). The effects of externally added iron sources
and iron chelators on the regulation of transferrin receptor mRNA levels and on
the intracellular iron pools will also be measured, and the relationship between
cell cycle phase and transferrin receptor mRNA levels and synthesis will be
determined. This is a Research Opportunities for Women Career Advancement Award.
This award will permit Dr. Enns to extend her studies of the control of cellular
transferrin uptake to the level of receptor gene expression by enabling her to
gain experience in techniques of molecular genetics.