* 8707492
* Theoretical Analysis of Economic Rationality
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Robert Frank, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1990
* USD 83,026.00

This interesting project examines the basic behavioral foundations of economic
analysis. The fundamental concept underpinning economic theory regarding the
purchase of consumer goods and services, participation in the labor market, and
the establishment of contracts between people or institutions is the
maximization of utility. That is to say, people make choices which they perceive
will bring them the most satisfaction, and in doing so they forgo other choices.
This seeming truism is both self-evident and profound at the same time. The
approach has provided insights into many important questions. For instance,
faced with a given wage rate, how much will people work? What fraction of their
incomes will they save? What effect will a tax on gasoline have on the purchase
of automobiles or on the number of miles driven. Clearly these are important
questions to policy makers, producers, consumers, and other economic agents. The
approach of utility maximization is, however, sometimes not readily applicable
to observed human behavior. Many times people continue in behavior which to an
observer appears irrational. Economists and psychologists who study such
behavior often explain it as the result of human beings' inability to process
effectively the ocean of information available to them. Thus they implicitly
derive rules of thumb, or other shortcuts which allow for reasonably rapid
decision making, but might not result in the choice which truly gives the most
satisfaction over the long run. Economic agents enter into long term contracts
with each other, even though in the short term each agent might be able to do
better by acting independently. That is to say, each party to a contract might
have the incentive to cheat, particularly if the cheating cannot be detected.
This very innovative project explores the incentives to cheat on contracts, the
types of information conveyed by individuals entering into contracts, and
mechanisms which might diminish the incentive to cheat. Professor Frank uses a
game theoretic framework to analyze the so- called prisoner's dilemma in a
variety of interesting settings. In this manner he gains a great deal of insight
into the information processing mechanisms of human behavior, and ultimately
into the ability of economic agents to act in a rational manner.