* 8707311
* Phosphoinositide Metabolism in Olfactory Transduction
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1987,12/01/1988
* Richard Bruch, Monell Chemical Senses Center
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 12/01/1988
* USD 88,200.00

This is a project to study biochemical events in the early stages of detection
of chemicals by odor receptors. The project will be directed by Dr. Richard
Bruch, who will be using catfish as the organism under study and amino acids as
the odorants. The reasons are that the olfactory receptors of catfish are
conveniently accessible and much is known about their physiological properties.
Amino acids are natural components of foods for catfish, and they have evolved
sensitive and specific receptors for them. The information about basic
mechanisms obtained from this study is expected to find application in other
organisms and for other odorous chemicals. Dr. Bruch's basic hypothesis is that
there are specific receptor proteins for amino acids in catfish olfactory
receptor cell ciliary membranes, and that when these proteins interact with
amino acids the protein/amino acid complex somehow initiates a particular series
of biochemical reactions. These involve the participation of a so-called
"G-protein" (a protein that binds a guanine nucleotide) and leads to increased
metabolism of a certain class of membrane lipids, the phosphoinositides. He will
test this hypothesis by measuring binding of radioactive amino acids to proteins
from the cilia in an attempt to demonstrate that the receptor proteins really
exist. He will measure phosphinositide turnover upon amino acid stimulation,
including the effects of added guanine nucleotides and of modifiers of the
G-protein. He will also study the regulation of the enzyme, phospholipase C,
which initiates phosphoinositide turnover, and attempt to determine its location
in the cell. This project hold the promise of contributing greatly to our
understanding of transduction in olfactory receptor cells and in sensory cells
in general.