* 8707572
* Activity of Premotor Cortex Neurons During Two Dimensional  Movements
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1992
* Timothy Ebner, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1992
* USD 313,070.00

The premotor cortex, one of the major areas of the cerebral cortex is suggested
to be involved in numerous aspects of motor behavior. One idea is that it has a
role in the learning of motor skills. Lesions studies suggest deficits in
recalling movements from memory. Other studies show the involvement of this part
of the cortex in movement preparation. Dr. Timothy Ebner believes this brain
area is concerned with the preparation and visual guidance of the limbs or hands
during voluntary movements into various regions of reachable extra personal
space. His work proceeds under that hypothesis. In primates trained to make
voluntary movements in the horizontal plane which require visually guiding a
cursor into target zones, the discharge of single neurons in the premotor cortex
will be recorded. Four aspects of the cell's activity in relation to complex
movements will be studied. First, is to define the region within two dimensional
space in which a cell is modulated during reaching movements. Second, the
relationship between the discharge pattern of premotor cortical neurons and
movement kinematics will be addressed. Third, the responsiveness of premotor
cortex neurons to "errors" in motor performance and corrective movement will be
evaluated. Fourth, how the discharge of single cells change in the process of
adapting a movement to match externally exposed constraints will be determined.
Overall, these studies will define which features of two dimensional, visually
guided movements are represented in the premotor cortex.