* 8707843
* Engineering Initiation Award:  Multiphase Flow Facility
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Davood Moslemian, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1990
* USD 73,932.00

Narrative: Knowledge on solids circulation, mixing and their relation to heat
transfer in a fluidized bed is of critical importance to the design of fluidized
bed combustors and chemical reactors and to the development of a rational
procedure for scale- up. To date systematic, quantitative data on the subject
have been limited. Accordingly, it is proposed to design and build a radioactive
particle tracking facility in order to study the hydrodynamics, mixing,
segregation and heat transfer in atmospheric and pressurized fluidized beds.
This versatile facility makes use of radioactive tracer particles which are
dynamically identical to the particles to be studied. The motion of the tracer
particles is tracked by an array of scintillation detectors and analyzed by an
on-line computer. The solids velocity and occurrence probability of any
particular species of particles can be obtained by using a tracer which matches
their density, size, and shape. The results are expected to contribute to the
formulation of the scaling laws for fluidized bed design. The proposed
investigation will include: (1) Construction of a 12-inch diameter bed, (2)
Measurements of mean and fluctuating components of solids motion, (3)
Measurements of particle size and density segregation, (4) Measurements of
solids mixing, (5) Influence of bed hydrodynamics on heat transfer to or from
immersed surfaces and (6) Measurements of the hydrodynamics of solids in
pressurized fluidized beds.