* 8707067
* Digital Design Derivation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1990
* Steven Johnson, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 08/31/1990
* USD 205,972.00

This research will apply formal methods in logic, verification and synthesis to
digital design engineering. The work centers on the use of applicative notation
for system description and functional algebras for design derivation. The
general goal is to develop a comprehensive methodology for constructing correct
hardware implementations. Specific objectives are to establish a practicable
algebraic framework for digital design, to clarify its relationship to
conventional design methods, to explore its implications for design automation,
and to incorporate contemporary formalisms for hardware verification. The
principal investigator will base this research on his previous exploration of
functional programming languages in hardware modeling and design-aids
automation. His methodology has been demonstrated in a basic transformation
system for deriving hardware implementations from higher-level behavioral
descriptions. In the period of this research, the system will be refined and
oriented toward a programmable technology (e.g. PLA and gate arrays). The
emphasis will be on supporting engineering expertise in design derivation. Of
particular interest are the problems of descriptive coherence and logical
correctness in the presence of orthogonal design decompositions. VLSI (very
large scale integration) is a recent field that explores how to design highly
complex integrated circuits and related electronic systems. Research is needed
because VLSI devices have become increasingly complex and the industry more
competitive. Development of the field is important to the nation's competitive
lead in electronics. An important research question in this field is that of
automatically translating high-level VLSI circuit behavioral descriptions to
correct and efficient circuit implementations. Solutions to this problem will
permit VLSI design engineers to concentrate on the behavioral and functional
aspects of the design without being encumbered with a mass of low level detail.
This research addresses the need to apply formal methods to VLSI design
engineering in order to bring needed mathematical rigor into the discipline. The
formal methods will then become a basis for automating the design process. The
principal investigator has made important conceptual advances in this area and
will further develop them toward practice in his research.