* 8707752
* An Electrode Array Net for Brain Slice Studies
* BIO,BIO
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1990
* Fen-Lei Chang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1990
* USD 47,654.00

It is now possible to make microelectrode arrays capable of stimulating and
recording from many neurons at intervals approaching the dimensions of the
neurons themselves. The arrays proposed offer an order of magnitude increase in
observational power over conventional techniques, with the promise of
hundredfold improvement in the future. The technology is basic to the study of
neural populations just as the microelectrode is basic to the study of single
cells, and will provide neurobiological systems. Similarly, these tools are
critical to the development of human neural protheses which must have
multidimensional interaction with various neural subsystems. The primary goal of
this research is to develop the planar electrode array as a stimulation and
recording tool for research with the brain slice preparation. Dr. Bruce Wheeler
has successfully applied a planar microelectrode array to the hippocampal brain
slice preparation demonstrating that the array makes it possible to record from
and stimulate a significant fraction of the slice at 200 micro meter intervals
simultaneously or in an arbitrary pattern in time and space. Many experiments
currently done with one or two electrodes can be repeated with much greater
observational power to survey the possible the state of the different slice
subregions. The number of channels is vastly greater than that possible with
microdrives or manipulators. The efficiency of the experiment is multiplied b
the increase in recorded data and the increase in the number of stimulus points,
while the experimenter's efficiency is aided by the fact that all electrodes ate
positioned merely by placing the slice on top of the array. A technical
advantage of the array does not occupy any of the restricted space above the
slice, this leaving room for additional electrodes and probes to stimulate,
record, measure ion concentrations, and administer drugs. Still, the power of
the array lies in its ability to give the experimenter a two dimensional image
of slice activity and the ability to control or stimulate it as a system.