* 8707504
* Long-Term Mobility and Storage of Sediments in Watersheds ofthe Upper Mississippi Valley
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* James Knox, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1990
* USD 129,790.00

The general objective of this research is to quantify the physical processes
that influence the linkages, pathways, and time constants that separate erosion
of sediment at its source and its ultimate removal from watersheds of the Upper
Mississippi Valley. Responses of sediment mobility and storage to environmental
changes in watersheds will be examined on three time scales, including:
historical, Holocene (post- glacial), and late-Wisconsin (late-glacial). Results
of the research contribute to improving the understanding of how environmental
changes, operating at differing time and spatial scales, influence the type of
quantity of sediment that is either stored or transported at various locations
in watersheds of a humid climate region. Methodology includes: (1) field
stratigraphic studies of sediment stored as colluvium, alluvial fan, terrace,
and floodplain deposits, (2) laboratory sedimentological and geochemical
analyses, and (3) statistical analyses that link archival data on climate,
stream runoff, and land use to the field stratigraphic and laboratory results.
The research should provide critical information that tests the hypothesis that
erosion, storage, and delivery of sediment in watersheds is an episodic process
that is dependent upon the occurrence of specific events which influence
thresholds of sediment stability.