* 8707173
* Behavior of Hatchling Sea Turtles During Their Off-Shore    Migration
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,05/01/1990
* Michael Salmon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 05/01/1990
* USD 101,270.00

Sea turtles are large marine reptiles, which are an important source of protein
in many third-world countries. All species of sea turtles are either threatened
or endangered. This unfortunate situation comes about because of overfishing of
adult stocks, nest destruction and poaching of eggs, and because the pristine
oceanic beaches chosen as nest sites are now prime areas for human recreation
and land development. A major conservation thrust involves the protection of the
most vulnerable sea turtles--the small and virtually defenseless hatchlings--by
rearing them for about a year in large tanks before releasing them into the sea.
Under natural conditions, hatchlings emerge from nests at night, crawl down-
beach, and migrate out to sea. Hatchlings released at sea are deprived of this
experience. In many migratory animals, such as birds and salmonid fishes, cues
perceived by young as they migrate are used later by individuals as adults to
find suitable breeding sites. If sea turtles behave similarly, hatchlings
deprived of their off-beach migration may survive but, as adults, be unable to
locate appropriate beaches in which to nest. The long-term goal of the present
research project is also to promote hatchling survival, but Drs. Salmon and
Wyneken believe that sound conservation practices must be based upon a thorough
understanding of how hatchlings migrate and when, during their journey, they are
most vulnerable to predators. Thus, Drs. Salmon and Wyneken will attempt to
determine how loggerhead sea turtles complete their 30-km migration between the
East coast of Florida and their goal, the Sargassum matts of the Gulf Stream.
Drs. Salmon and Wyneken will follow hatchlings bearing radio transmitters to
determine how long the trip takes, will do experiments to determine what cues
guide them, and will determine what predators take hatchlings at various
portions of their journey. Armed with this understanding, Drs. Salmon and
Wyneken should be able to specify under what conditions hatchlings might be
released into the sea at locations where predators are least likely to capture
them, and under conditions that are ideal for the completion of their migration.
The potential benefits are several: reestablishment of sufficient stocks for
intelligent harvesting; insights into the migratory behavior and ecology of a
fascinating and magnificent marine animal; and the implementation of sound
conservation practices based upon a thorough knowledge of the animal's biology.