* 8707071
* Molecular and Genetic Studies on Maize Transposable         Elements-- Paramutation and Directed Transposition
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Drew Schwartz, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1991
* USD 215,687.00

Novel interactions between the transposable elements of the Ac-Ds system in
maize will be investigated. Preliminary studies indicate interaction or some
form of information transfer between Ds elements and Ac-w derivatives on
homologous chromosomes. The presence of the highly methylated wx-m9Ds-cy element
on one chromosome leads to the paramutation-like inactivation and methylation of
an Ac-w element at a distant position on the homologue. The Ds elements in
wx-m6, wx-m9 and the State I Ds in standard position on chromosome II 9 do not
inactivate but, in every heterozygote, cause Ac-w to move along its chromosome
and be reinserted at the site occupied by the Ds element on the homologue. The
small Ds I element in the wx-m1 allele does not act in trans and must be on the
same chromosome to effect the migration of Ac-w. Molecular evidence indicates
that Ac-w is reinserted in the wx-m1 gene. These interactions are limited to
elements on homologous chromosomes. These studies will be extended and the
interactions by genetic and molecular analyses wil be investigated. While much
is known about transposable elements on the molecular level, this study is the
first to suggest that directed transposition and site-specific insertion can and
does occur. The continuation of this project will allow further information to
be gathered on what could be a potential breakthrough on attempts to understand
what, if any, function is performed by transposable elements in the normal, non-
stressed genome of corn.