* 8707124
* Petrology and Geochemistry of Marginal Basin Volcanics from the Bransfield Strait
* O/D,OPP
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1988
* William White, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 11/30/1988
* USD 34,000.00

This study is a geochemical investigation of ocean bottom rock samples obtained
in 1985 from the Drake Passage and Bransfield Strait under a cooperative program
with the Federal Republic of Germany on R/V POLARSTERN. The objectives concern
the formation of back-arc and marginal basins and their associated volcanic
rocks. Major elements and trace elements will be analyzed to establish the
extent to which subducted sediment is incorporated into the generation of mantle
basalts, and how the subducted material has affected the composition of the
mantle beneath the Bransfield Strait and the South Shetland Islands. Mineral
chemistry and glass inclusions of phenocrysts will be analyzed to evaluate the
extent of magma mixing, the depth of magma chambers, and the kinetics of magma
eruption. The rock samples to be studied were obtained by the principal
investigator, and include fresh basalts recovered from two seamounts and from
volcanic hills in the Bransfield Strait. Older more weathered basalts were
dredged from the basin between Low and Deception Islands. The Bransfield Strait
is a young marginal basin that was formed by rifting and subsidence of the
Antarctic Peninsula. The geochemical processes associated with this subduction
are not well understood; neither is the transport of material from the
subducting slab to the arc magma system. The slab may melt and intrude into the
overlying mantle wedge with the mixture forming the island arc magma source, or
the source may be the subducting slab itself. It is expected that the trace
element analysis will point to one or the other of these processes.