* 8707963
* Organometallic Chemistry and Photochemistry of Supported    and Unsupported Metal-Metal Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/1987,04/30/1991
* Clifford Kubiak, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 04/30/1991
* USD 284,359.00

Compounds containing two metal atoms directly bonded to one another are of great
current interest because of their catalytic properties and also because of their
utility as models of species which occur at the surfaces of heterogeneous
catalysts. Many of these metal-metal bonded compounds are highly colored and
consequently are susceptible to light induced reactions, so that they have
potential for use as catalysts for photochemical or photoelectrochemical
applications. The focus of this project is the chemistry and photochemistry of
metal-metal bonded organo-transition metal complexes. Two classes of complexes
will be studied: i) those which contain unsupported M-M sigma bonds, and ii)
those which contain M-M bonds supported by bridging CO, CNR or di-phosphine
ligands. New organometallic chemistry will be developed based on excited states
of d-10-d-10 binuclear complexes with a single bridging ligand (CO, CNR, or
NO+). The roles of excited states in activating the bridging ligand toward
bimolecular alkylation or condensation reactions will be determined. The formal
ı2+2! photocycloaddition chemistry of olefins, acetylenes, and cumulenes with
the bridging ligand will be explored. New classes of bridging ligand
cycloaddition reactions of the ı4+2! and ı2+2+2! types will also be developed.
The ı4+2} additions of dienes to bridging CO and CNR ligands and ı2+2+2!
condensations of olefins with a pair of bridging CO and CNR ligands will be
examined. New chemistry of carbon dioxide will be developed, including
exploration of its cycloadditions to bridging CO and CNR ligands, as well as
O-atom transfers and reductive couplings to oxalate derivatives.