* 8707594
* Sedimentary-tectonic Evolution of Cretaceous-early Tertiary Basins in the Hinterland of the Sevier Orogenic Belt, East- central Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* James Schmitt, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 12/31/1989
* USD 58,600.00

Little is known of the depositional histories or tectonic settings of
Cretaceous-early Tertiary sedimentary basins which formed in the hinterland of
the Sevier orogenic belt. Numerous structural studies suggest that the
hinterland was influenced by Mesozoic-early Tertiary compression and thrust
faulting. Others suggest periods of extension and normal fault development. In
addition, preserved hinterland basin sedimentary sequences are extremely rare.
Very little detailed stratigraphic, sedimentologic, or provenance analysis has
been conducted on hinterland basin deposits. The goal of this research is to
better the understanding of the sedimentary- tectonic history of these
hinterland basins. For this project, Cretaceous-early Tertiary hinterland basin-
fill in east-central Nevada will be subjected to detailed lithostratigraphic,
biostratigraphic, and petrographic analysis. Classical field methods involving
detailed section measurement, description, and facies mapping, biostratigraphic
and lithologic sample collection, paleocurrent measurement, and conglomerate
clast counts will be combined with standard laboratory petrographic procedures.
Synthesis of the data collected will be used to discern as completely as
possible the following parameters concerning such basins: 1) types of
depositional environments and their geographic and temporal distributions, 2)
location and composition of sediment source areas as inferred from provenance of
terrigeneous clastic units, 3) age relationships within the basin-fill, 4)
possible changes in rates of basin subsidence as indicated by changes in fluvial
style and architecture, 5) styles of tectonism in the source areas as reflected
by vertical and lateral changes in sediment composition and depositional
environments, and 6) geographic extent and temporal duration of individual
basins.