* 8707604
* Mode Coupling and the Significance of the Helical Beam-     Electron Trajectories in Gyrotrons
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Robert Schill, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/1990
* USD 60,000.00

This work is funded as an Engineering Initiation Award (EIA). The objective is
to investigate the effects due to the helical beam electron trajectories in the
electron cyclotron maser. Using a Maxwell- Vlasov theory and the telegraphist
equations, the maser interaction from a cold tenuous annular electron beam in a
lossy cylindrical waveguide (gyrotron amplifier) and a complex cavity (gyrotron
oscillator) is to be analytically examined. Coupling among the beam, the higher
order TE(mn) mode and space charge effects (to a first approximation, the TM(rs)
mode) in the gyrotron amplifier is expected to be demonstrated at all
frequencies, including the fundamental and harmonic cyclotron frequencies. The
significance of the TM(rs) mode is to be examined. Growth rate and amplitude
threshold dependence on the magnetostatic guide field, wall radius and
wavenumber will also be examined. Mode coupling and competition will be analyzed
in a gyrotron oscillator comparable to experiment. Field correctly satisfying
boundary conditions will be used. From a total power analysis of the Beam-wave
interaction, the significance of a parasitic TE mode or a space charge TM mode
will be investigated. Understanding these coupling effects will provide more
efficient, accurate and possibly more flexible gyrotron designs. The theory has
potential for futuristic amplifier designs. This work involves theoretical
investigations of the electron cyclotron maser (gyrotron) aimed at improving its
performance as a amplifier for coherent radiation in the far infrared. The
cyclotron maser has important potential applications in short-wavelength radar,
communication links, spectroscopy, advanced accelerators and plasma heating in
thermonuclear fusion reactors.