* 8707041
* Tectonic Significance of Lower Cretaceous Gravels, Western  Interior:  Quantitative Modeling of Subsidence and Paleo-   topography
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Paul Heller, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 06/30/1990
* USD 63,741.00

Lower Cretaceous gravels of the western interior have traditionally been used
to date the initiation of thrusting in the Sevier orogenic belt. However, these
gravels are anomalously widespread, extending over 500 km from the leading edge
of the nearest thrust sheet. In contrast, synorogenic conglomerates in modern
and ancient foreland basins are usually confined to within 70 km of the thrust
belt. The goal of this project is to determine if these Lower Cretaceous gravels
were indeed derived from the Sevier thrust belt or from some other tectonic
event. The University of Wyoming will use a new multidisciplinary approach
combining stratigraphic and sedimentologic observations with established
paleohydraulic and geophysical modelling techniques. These techniques will be
used to distinguish among four hypotheses for the origin of the Lower Cretaceous
gravels: (1) a small incipient foreland basin developed as the thrust was
emplaced but was filled and overtopped by the gravel; (2) the gravels were
deposited immediately after thrusting began but before a foreland basin could
develop; (3) the gravels were deposited during a broad uplift event that
immediately preceded thrusting; and (4) the gravels were derived from west of,
and are unrelated to, the thrust belt. By testing these four hypotheses we hope
to determine if the widespread Lower Cretaceous gravels were derived from the
early uplift of the Sevier belt and, independently, if the gravels were
deposited in, or preceded formation of, a foreland basin. Thus the results of
this study will advance our understanding of the timing and mechanics of the
nascent Sevier orogeny by using quantitative basin analysis. In addition, the
integration of diverse and independent modelling techniques with ground truth
observations in order to constrain sedimentary-tectonic models is a potentially
powerful approach to answering questions concerning how and when basins develop
adjacent to thrust-belt systems and in other tectonic settings.