* 8707035
* A Detailed Mapping of Uppermost Mantle Pn Velocities in     Western North America and Other Continental Regions Located Behind Convergent Plate Boundaries
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Thomas Hearn, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Patty Brooking
* 01/31/1990
* USD 150,000.00

We propose to map in detail uppermost mantle Pn velocities beneath western
North America and other elevated continental regions located behind convergent
plate boundaries, such as the Tibetan, Turkish-Uranian, and the Altiplano-Puna
plateaus on a scale comparable to the major tectonic provinces. This mapping
will provide critical constraints on the structure and origin of continental
plateaus. Such results can be used to answer an ongoing debate over the "double"
Moho beneath the Great Basin. We propose to use the massive digital ISC data in
a simple but effective way to obtain thousands of Pn velocity determinations,
which will be based on the reports of Pn arrival times from about ten thousand
events recorded at hundreds of seismic stations in western North America. We
plan to use the two- station method in which the source is located at epicentral
distances where Pn is the first arrival and the source is in, or very near, the
azimuth of the two-station pair. The station pairs are selected to be within
definable tectonic provinces. A pilot study to map Pn velocity beneath the
Colorado plateau produced very encouraging results with about a thousand Pn
velocity determinations. We plan to extend our efforts to the rest of the
provinces in western North America, and to other elevated continental regions
located behind convergent plate boundaries. We also propose to use all available
Pn velocities and source and station delays, using the procedure of Hearn and
Clayton. Because of the large variations in the spatial distribution of stations
and sources, the resolution of this method may vary from one province to
another. The combined results of the two-station and tomography methods will
provide a detailed map of uppermost mantle velocities.