* 8707577
* ALEUTIAN ARC MAGMATISM IN SPACE AND TIME: A GEOCHEMICAL     AND PETROLOGIC STUDY
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Robert Kay, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 12/31/1989
* USD 179,000.00

Magmatic processes occurring over an entire island are crustal section are
reflected in rock units found in the Aleutian arc, Alaska. These processes
assume more than local importance in that they have shaped a large proportion of
terrane collagesw, and perhaps the continental crust in general. In the Aleutian
arc, most on-going magmatic studies emphasize recent volcanic rocks. To complete
the crustal cross-section, this project will focus on the more voluminous
subvolcanic levels as represented by plutons and xenolithic fragments. Specific
studies are proposed for plutonic xenoliths from Tertiary volcanic rocks on
Kanaga Island and the Hidden Bay pluton on Adak Island in the central Aleutians.
These rock units indicate a buried oceanic crustal component in the Aleutian
lithosphere and record details of the processes of magmatic segregation in the
crust. In the western Aleutians on Attu Island and in the Komandorski Islands
(USSR), a striking pattern of Tertiary magmatic evolution reflects changes in
plate convergence. On Attu, specific studies are planned to study these changing
magmatic conditions as reflected by Oligocene rhyolites, lower-Miocene alkaline
rocks, and upper- Miocene calc-alkaline lavas. The evolution of subcrustal magma
sources (including alkaline sources) and the crustal assimilation and fractional
crystallization of calc-alkaline magmas intruding back-arc crust will be
studied. Analytical studies include mineralogical analyses of major and trace
elements as well as isotopes (O, Sr, and Nd). These are to be used uespectively
as tracers of physical conditions (P, T, volatile fugacities) and isotopically
distinct tectonic units.