* 8707466
* Crustal Structure of the Central California Margin from     Deep Seismic Data
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1989
* Alan Levander, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Brooking
* 06/30/1989
* USD 56,997.00

The Rice geophysics program has acquired a unique set of deep crustal marine
seismic reflection and onshore-offshore seismic reflection-refraction data in
the area of the Santa Maria basin along the continental margin of central
California. The data will provide information on the deep crustal structure of
the Salinian and Sur-Obispo terranes, and the shallow to deep crustal structure
of the strike-slip terranes between the coast and the abyssal plain. The data
should provide both a reflection image and a velocity-depth profile in the area
at the coast allowing us to tie the reflection data taken offshore to that
already available onshore. We propose a one year study of the two data sets to
determine the strructure of the strike-slip terranes adjacent to and within the
continental margin. The study includes standard and specialized seismic
reflection processing and interpretation of 165 km of marine seismic reflection
data, and processing and interpretation of the 120 km reflection-refraction
seismic profile. The goals of the research are: 1) to understand the Neogene
tectonics of the margin as expressed in the sedimentary structures in the Santa
Maria Basin and particularly, 2) to determine if major thrusting has and is
occurring in the offshore terranes, 3) to determine the lower crustal structure
in the oceanic-continental transition zone of an active transform margin, 4) to
determine the depth to and structure of the Moho in the oceanic-continental
transition zone of an active transform margin, and 5) to form an image of the
Moho and a laterally limited, deep crustal low-velocity zone believed to lie
beneath the continental margin.