* 8707162
* A Computational Approach to Designs and Correlative         Descriptions
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1987,09/30/1988
* George Stiny, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/1988
* USD 29,936.00

Over the past years, research in architecture has demonstrated that some
classes of designs can be generated according to rules. These designs may be
viewed in terms of a number of interrelated, multi dimensional descriptions,
where descriptive rules determine specific aspects and features of the object.
For example, these descriptive rules might generate geometrical aspects from the
plan, elevation, and section of a building or might generate functional aspects
pertaining to the use or purpose of it. As the descriptive rules are exercised,
the design is built up along many interrelated dimensions. The principal
investigator proposes to study how the rules for generating designs can be
extended beyond the field of architecture. The formal character of these rules
lend themselves to a domain independent view of design. The research will
contribute to our understanding of formal design specifications and may enable
specialists to communicate across disciplinary specifications and may enable
specialists to communicate across disciplinary boundaries to produce designs
that are coherent from multiple perspectives. The principal investigator is a
well.known researcher in the field of architectural design and a forerunner in
the field of shape grammars.