* 8707678
* Characterization and Optimization of Recombinant Cell       Fermentatio Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1990
* Jin-Ho Seo, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/1990
* USD 69,801.00

The proposed research is aimed at maximizing the performance of recombinant cell
fermentation processes through optimizing environmental conditions. This goal is
to be achieved by investigating two model systems: - alpha-amylase production
from recombinant E. coli. - invertase production from recombinant Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Environmental conditions strongly affect the transription efficiency
of the genes under the control of regulated promoters, and consequently the
expression level of the target proteins. Growth temperature and medium
osmolarity affect the expression and transport of alpha-amylase. Invertase
synthesis is influenced by the glucose content of a fermentation medium, which
influences the SUC2 promoter transcription efficiency and hence the invertase
expression level. A slowly metabolized inducer like sucrose monopalmitate may be
more effective in increasing invertase production. Model equations describing
responses of the recombinant cell to various culture conditions will be
formulated and incorporated into fed-batch fermentation processes in an effort
to search for an optimum operation strategy. The mathematical modeling and
optimization theory developed for nonrecombinant cells will be readily extended
to recombinant cell cultures after taking into consideration unique features of
recombinant cells such as plasmid stability and promoter induction. The PI is
considered to be well qualified to carry out the proposed research and I
recommend funding of this proposal.