* 8707979
* Inflation and the Measurement and Impact of Fiscal Variables
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Robert Eisner, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1991
* USD 166,990.00

Budget surpluses, deficits and underlying fiscal variables in the U.S. and other
developed industrial nations are modified and supplemented to reflect changes in
the real value of government financial assets and liabilities. This project
develops complete and detailed inflation corrections to government outlays and
receipts so that adjusted budget deficits correspond to increases in the real
market value of net government debt. During the two-year period of the original
grant, the project assembled quarterly data to complement earlier annual time
series, refined the measurement methodology, especially with respect to the
construction of par-to-market indexes, and updated from 1981 to 1984, with 1985
nearly complete. Under the present grant the investigators will develop all the
series for deficits and balance sheets through 1986 and 1987 as data becomes
available. In HOW REAL IS THE FEDERAL DEFICIT (1986) the investigator presented
some striking results obtained from analyzing these data. For example,
inflation-adjusted or real federal deficits as a percentage of GNP were sharply
positively related to increases in investment as well as in consumption. Over
the period of estimation, 1962 to 1984, large government deficits appear to have
been "crowding in" rather than as is now believed by most economists crowding
out savings and investment. This book has been hailed for developing sounder and
more economically relevant measures of government budgets, but the provocative
results are vulnerable to the criticism that they may be spurious reflections of
real causative variables which have been ignored and excluded. This grant
permits the investigator to specify and estimate structural equations which
would show whether or not this criticism is valid. More specifically, parameters
of single structural equations and reduced forms relating adjusted budgets and
their various components to real GNP, unemployment, inflation, investment,
consumption and the balance of payments are estimated. Relations involving the
adjusted measures are introduced into major macroeconometric models. Estimated
parameters, simulations and predictions, utilizing original and adjusted
variables and relations, are compared. Adjusted variables for government budgets
and balance sheets are also related to the Total Incomes System of Accounts
(TISA), focussing on nonmarket components of consumption and investment in
financial, tangible and human capital by government and households as well as by
business.