* 8707556
* ROW:  Paleoecologic and Paleobiogeographic Analysis of the  Heceta Limestone, Alexander Terrane, Southeastern Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1990
* Constance Soja, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* James H. Whitcomb
* 03/31/1990
* USD 60,000.00

This project will investigate the Heceta Limestone, which is a deposit of
Early-Late Silurian age preserved within an ancient island arc sequence in
southeastern Alaska. This formation occurs within the Alexander Terrane, which
is one of the many accretionary terranes forming part of the continental margin
of western North America. A main objective of this research is to determine the
depositional environments represented in the Heceta Limestone. Documentation of
the lithofacies and biofacies will be based on petrologic, petrographic, and
paleontologic data derived from rock samples and fossils collected mainly on
Heceta, Kosciusko, Marble, Orr, Tuxecan, and Prince of Wales Islands. Another
major goal of this project is to determine the paleoecology of the preserved
macroinvertebrate populations, in particular the brachiopod- dominated
communities, and the paleobiogeographic affinities of these faunas. The
development of a model that explains the provincial affinities of the fossil
assemblages that occur in the Heceta Limestone and the evolution of the
paleoenvironments these faunas inhabited should aid in refining our
understanding of the island arc system preserved in southeastern Alaska. The
results of the proposed research should also help to define more completely the
geotectonic history of the region and lead to a better assessment of
paleogeographic and paleobiogeographic reconstructions of the Alexander Terrane.