* 8707422
* Constraints on the Choice of Work Hours
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1989
* Kevin Lang, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 06/30/1989
* USD 35,652.00

This is a very interesting and important research project in the study of the
U.S. labor market. It addresses several questions about the way workers perceive
the number of hours they would like to work versus the amount of time they
actually spend at work. Intuitively one might think that for a given wage, most
people would prefer more leisure time than they have. However, past empirical
work by Professor Kahn and Professor Lang has provided strong evidence that just
the opposite is true. Using questions from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
they estimate that almost 75% of the people interviewed have constraints on the
amount of time they spend at work. One half of those workers would prefer to
work a different number of hours than they actually work, and surprisingly,
nearly 90% of them would spend more time at work if they were able. The project
is important in that such a result provides strong indications of significant
hours of work constraints and underemployment in the U.S. This project examines
the constraints inherent in the labor market which keep people from making the
tradeoff between leisure time and work time which they perceive to be best for
them. Specifically Professor Kahn and Professor Lang examine two analytical
models of labor force participation. Both models incorporate contracts which are
implicitly understood between firms and workers, and both can be tested by
seeing how hours constraints vary with worker tenure. Cross sectional data from
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics include questions that allow researchers to
ascertain whether for a particular worker that person had more work available,
wanted to work more, or wanted to work less. A series of studies have shown a
correlation between job tenure and the constraints on hours of work. Low tenure
jobs typically have a constraint wherein workers spend more time at work than
they wish, while in high tenure jobs people are constrained from working as much
as they would like. This project also tests the correspondence between job
tenure and time at work, as well as the relationship between hours of work and
union participation. Professor Kahn and Professor Lang verify their results by
comparing them with similar studies using different data sets, and by conducting
their own in-depth survey of the respondents in the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics.