* 8708008
* Investigation of Comagmatic Complexes Using Isotope         Systematics
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1992
* Kenneth Foland, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 01/31/1992
* USD 120,500.00

This proposal is a request for continued funding to carry out an ongoing
research program on the genesis of comagmatic igneous rock associations. The
primary aim of this research is to clarify the petrogenesis of igneous suites
and to examine modifications of mantle-derived magmas with the continental crust
environment. An auxiliary goal is to determine the character of the magma source
regions and the temporal nature of the magma production events in order to
advance our understanding of intraplate magmatism in a geodynamic context. The
localities of study are alkaline complexes in New England, southern Quebec, and
Zimbabwe. These are generally small, epizonal bodies composed of successive
intrusions of varying composition. The methodology uses petrographic, major and
trace element, and stable and radiogenic isotopic relationships with close
temporal control to formulate specific petrogenetic models. Recent research
efforts have yielded valuable information on the nature and details of the
general open- system evolution of these magmatic complexes and on the nature of
the sources and the timing of magmatism. Continued research should be highly
rewarding not only for the specific localities and provinces under study but
also for analogs elsewhere.