* 8708360
* Economic Consequences of Nonexpected Utility Theory: A Game Theoretic Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Edi Karni, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1990
* USD 95,813.00

Recent years have witnessed a growing interest in models of decision making
under uncertainty that do not assume the independence axiom of the von Neumann-
Morgenstern utility theory. The interest in these theories is motivated by the
large body of experimental evidence suggesting that decision makers
systematically violate the independence axiom. Nonexpected utility theories have
been shown to be capable of explicating this experimental evidence, and, at the
same time, under appropriate assumptions, of preserving many of the useful
economic implications of expected utility theory. The contribution of this
project comes in identifying the economic implications of this theory that are
different from expected utility theory. The project explores two main areas
using the new theories of individual decision making under uncertainty: auction
theory and bargaining theory. In both cases the project defines the equilibrium
of the relevant game and establishes the conditions for its existence. The
differences in the formulation and in the outcome of the games resulting from
the nonlinearity of the preferences over the space of probability distributions
is examined. A by product of this effort is the reexamination of the formulation
of extensive form games made necessary by the introduction of preferences that
are not representable by expected utility functionals. This is done in the
context of specific games, but the results should be relevant to extensive form
games in general.