* 8708524
* Paleomagnetic Studies of Transitional Field Behavior with   Emphasis on the Comparison of Different Types of Recordings
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1987,05/31/1991
* Kenneth Hoffman, California Polytechnic State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 05/31/1991
* USD 117,278.00

Paleomagnetic observations of transitional field behavior come from a wide
varkety of igneous and sedimentary structures. Yet it may be that no one rock
type possesses the capabilities to render idea√ï recordings, both in terms of
vector field changes as well as temporal accuracy. Indeed, each type of
recording appears to have its own set of advantages as well as limitations. The
two studies planned promise not only to shed light on the geomagnetic reversal
process, but also to enhance our knowledge regarding the relationship between
record fidelity and rock type. The first project, presently ongoing, involves
the attainment of the polarity transition corresponding to the termination of
the Olduvai normal polarity event from lavas on Moloka, Hawaii. The derived
record, when complete, will be rigorously compared to a published record of the
same transition obtained from nearby deep-sea sediments. The second project
involves the attainment of detailed paleofield behavior of sequential reversals
recorded in exposed, rapidly-deposited marine sediments along the Mangapoike
River on New Zealand's North Island. The sequence has been well-correlated to
the late Miocene. Akaroa Volcano, on New Zealand's South Island - the previous
focus of transitional field studies by this P.I. - appears to have been created
contemporaneously with the marine sediments. This situation provides a rare
opportunity to compare transition records derived from two paleomagnetically
distinct, yet desirable rock types. As has been the case with past paleomagnetic
projects at Cal Poly, several undergraduates will take part throughout the
proposed projects, from assistance in the field to laboratory analysis. Some
will undertake an aspect of the original research as their own and produce a
senior project.