* 8708959
* Laboratory Study and Mathematical Description of Enhanced   Subsurface Biorestoration
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Robert Borden, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherri Swann
* 12/31/1989
* USD 69,740.00

Spillage of gasoline and other petroleum derived hydrocarbons is a major source
of ground water contamination. One potentially effective tool for restoring
gasoline contaminated aquifers is stimulation of the native microorganisms to
use the hydrocarbons as a food source. This is typically accomplished by
circulating ground water containing oxygen or hydrogen peroxide and inorganic
nutrients through the formation using injection and production wells or
infiltration galleries. At present there are over a dozen documented cases where
enhancement of the indigenous population has been attempted to clean up aquifers
contaminated by hydrocarbons and related organic compounds (Lee et al., 1986).
In general subsurface biorestoration has been found to be effective although not
always reliable. The major problem with the technique appears to be in the
design of the physical facilities, particularly in heterogeneous, low
permeability formations where circulation of the oxygen-nutrient mixture is
difficult. The research described in this proposal is aimed at developing a
numerical model capable of simulating the subsurface biorestoration process.
Once completed, the model could be used by designers to determine the optimum
location and spacing of wells, flow rates and nutrient mixtures. The proposed
research will involve: 1) operation of a series of chemostats to determine
microbial kinetic parameters and identify the optimum nutrient mixture; 2)
operation of laboratory column microcosms to study the dynamics of
biorestoration in a one dimensional flow system; 3) development of equations for
simulating the biorestoration process; and 4) numerical solution and testing of
the quations.