* 8708625
* Sulfur and Ylide Coordination Compounds - Mono-, Bi- and    Trimetallic Organometallic Reactions and Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1987,08/31/1993
* John Fackler, Jr., Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 08/31/1993
* USD 421,000.00

Compounds of the metals copper, silver, gold, nickel, palladium and platinum
are very important catalysts and are becoming increasingly important as solids
with desirable magnetic or electrical properties. This research project, the
focus of which is the synthesis and characterization of new compounds of these
metals, is expected to result in new catalysts and interesting new solid
materials, such as one-dimensional conductors. The research may also provide a
better understanding of the metal-sulfur clusters in enzymes and of the way in
which gold binds to biological tissues. The influence of transition metal ions
and ligand bonding on the structure and reactivity of coordination compounds
broadly describes this work. In particular, the focus will be on transition
metal compounds primarily of the nickel and copper triad elements which contain
sulfur and ylide ligands. Specific studies of importance relate to M-M, C-S, S-S
and M-S bond formation and rupture, and the properties of the transition-metal
organometallic species produced. Structural studies using X-ray crystallography
form an important part of this work. Of special interest in this proposal is the
development of new understanding concerning the role of a second metal center in
influencing the oxidative-addition, reductive-elimination reaction chemistries
at metal centers with 8, 9 or 10 d-electrons. The addition of small molecules
across the M-M bond also is to be explored. The new heterotrimetallic species
containing a linear Au.....Pt.....Au arrangement will receive special study due
to its oxidation properties and linear stacked arrangement in the solid state.