* 8708287
* RUI:  Late Pleistocene Animal and Plant Associations and    Extinctions on the Central Colorado Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1990
* James Mead, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 05/31/1990
* USD 98,650.00

This is a proposal to study the relationships between animals and plants and
their interactions with the earth during the late Pleistocene and at the time of
megafaunal extinctions on the Colorado Plateau. Two study areas in the central
Colorado Plateau will be investigated: Forty Mile Canyon (containing principally
BF Alcove and Grobot Grotto) and White Canyon (Bare Ladder Ruin). Drug of
mammals (mammoth, cf. camel, cf. shrub-ox, mountain goat, bison, among others),
dating +39,000 to 11,000 yr. B.P., will be analyzed for radiocarbon, size-weight
ratio, size-fractional content, pollen, microhistology, and biochemical data.
These data will provide producer identifications, age, and diet. Independent
paleoenvironmental reconstruction will generated with the analysis of
sedimentary history (23 m of stratified sediments in one alcove), pollen from
stratified alluvium and cave sediments (regional and local environments), and
packrat middens (macrofossil; local communities). The multidisciplinary approach
will produce plant and animal data in direct association with each other. Diets
of extinct mammals will be documented, as will the time of their local
extinction. Northern Arizona University will provide: 1) the salary of J.I. Mead
(half-time academic) and L.D. Agenbroad, 2) the Bilby Research Center laboratory
facilities, 3) curatorial space for dung and hair remains, 4) modern comparative
collections of dung and hair, 5) the salary for chemist D. Russell, and 6) a
modern organic chemistry laboratory.