* 8708295
* Adaptationist Explanations in Biology: A Case Study
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* Elisabeth Lloyd, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 12/31/1988
* USD 30,000.00

Science is a social phenomena, i.e. it is done by women and men who come to
their subjects with prior scientific and social commitments. Dr. Lloyd, with
this grant, will be studying the affects of these prior commitments on the
development of scientific theories. Her preliminary study shows that their
impacts can best be seen in the gaps which necessarily exist between theoretical
explanations and the available evidence. Given that there frequently is not
enough evidence to firmly ground a theoretical explanation, a scientist brings
to the problem both prior scientific beliefs and an inclination which has been
cultivated in the society in which the science is developed for one kind of
explanation over another. An example of such a development is the field of
eugenics. Scientists took the available evidence from genetics and assimilated
it with the racial and cultural biases which were cultivated in late 19th and
early 20th century society and developed a theory for the "purification" and
perfection of the human race. While consequences are not normally as extreme as
in the case of eugenics, these factors clearly have an effect to a greater or
lesser degree throughout science. Dr. Lloyd is examining the impact of the prior
commitments of scientists in the development of their scientific explanations in
evolutionary biology. The theoretical commitment which she is examining is that
of "adaptationist" explanations. "Adaptive" stories in which a particular trait
or property is assumed to have resulted from the direct operation of natural
selection are the most prominent sort of evolutionary explanations. The traits
themselves are seen as adaptations and the explanatory game is to provide a
description of the environment and lifestyle of the organism which reveal how
the possession of the trait would have contributed to the reproductive success
of its owner. There can be a number of rational sounding adaptive explanations
developed to explain a particular trait. Evidence is rarely sufficient to be
determinative in such a situation. It is in such a situation that social
orientations, biases if you will, lead scientists to prefer one explanation over
another. In the case which Dr. Lloyd is studying, the unique aspects of female
sexuality in humans, both male scientists and their feminist critics have used
differing adaptive arguments for their respective positions. Dr. Lloyd will
analyze these explanations in the context of a more general discussion of the
use and abuse of adaptive explanations in evolutionary biology. Her study
promises to be of great interest not only for the philosophy of science, but
also for evolutionary biology and the social sciences.