* 8708871
* Thermomechanical and Interfacial Behavior of Concentration  Protein Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Andrew Zydney, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 12/31/1989
* USD 62,433.00

Research Summary: The objective of this research is to develop a more
fundamental understanding of the thermodynamic and mechanical properties of
concentrated protein solutions, including protein gels, under conditions where
both inter- and intra-molecular interactions are important. Experimental
studies, employing bovine serum albumin as a model system, will involve both
osmotic pressure measurements and tracer solute partitioning during osmotic
equilibrium. In combination, these data can be used to evaluate solution non-
idealities and the compressive pressure, a parameter used in the thermodynamic
model to characterize the contribution of both inter- and intra-molecular
interactions. Theoretical analyses of solution non-idealities will involve
application of polymer lattice models, for example, Flory-Huggins theory, to the
concentrated protein solutions. Inter-molecular attractions and repulsions will
be modelled using McMillan-Mayer solution theory. Potential Impact: The results
from the current study, as well as those from future investigations, will have
applications in the analysis of a variety of protein separation processes in
which inter- and intra-molecular interactions are thought to be important, e.g.,
protein crystallization and precipitation. The thermodynamic data and models
will also provide insight into the use of liquid-liquid extraction for protein
separations. The results from this study can also be used to analyze selective
protein filtration, the use of membrane ultrafiltration to separate proteins of
differing molecular weight on the basis of size.