* 8708370
* Firms' Choice of Method of Determining Pay:  Evidence from  the Industry Wage Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1990
* Charles Brown, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 03/31/1990
* USD 88,886.00

Monitoring the performance of workers is a costly and difficult procedure for
many firms and, thus, the information about worker productivity is often very
imperfect. While this fact is fairly obvious, the implications of this for the
way in which workers are compensated is not. Because compensation schemes can
have an enormous impact on worker productivity, the implications of worker
compensation arrangements have been an important theme in labor economics and
economic theory generally. The extent to which employers monitor workers and use
what they learn from monitoring in setting wages is a topic which has been
tackled from a number of theoretical perspectives. Of these, the literature on
piece rates vs. salaries is closest to the framework developed in this study. In
order to better reflect choices actually faced by firms, this project will
extend this two-way choice situation to a three-way choice situation of piece
rates, merit pay (which links wages to supervisory ratings) and standard rates
(in which there is only a weak link between pay and performance). Within this
framework, some of the key insights of the related principal-agent and
efficiency-wage literature will be incorporated. This framework will be
developed using data from the Industrial Wage Survey, the Census of
Manufacturing and the Dictionary of Occupational Titles.