* 8708597
* Combined Normal-Incidence and Wide-Angle Reflection Studies of the Lower Crust and Moho
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Scott Smithson, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 09/30/1991
* USD 270,272.00

The nature of the lower crust, Moho, and upper mantle is the major uncertainty
in the genesis of continental lithosphere, and recent studies have indicated
major differences in these among different tectonic provinces. A series of
normal incidence and wide-angle recording experiments involving discontinuous
expanding spread profiles around common depth points. The normal-incidence data
will determine the detailed layering and the wide-angle data will resolve the
velocity structure and whether it is sharp or gradational. S-wave data will be
recorded to make combined P-and S-wave interpretations for fluid content and
lithology. Areas to be studied include the Basin and Range where strong
subhorizontal lower-crustal and Moho reflections are found, an accreted terrain
in NE Washington where many arcuate lower crustal reflections and some clear
discontinuous Moho reflections occur, Archean-Proterozoic transitional crust
(overprinted during the Laramide?) in SE Wyoming with sporadic lower crustal and
questionable Moho reflections, Proterozoic crust in Kansas with abundant arcuate
lower crustal reflection pattern and no Moho reflections. These areas provide
widely varying tectonic regimes, ages, and differences in reflection response
that must indicate different structure. Completed pilot studies show that lower
crustal velocity structure can be resolved in NE Nevada to address the question
of the "double Moho reflection," and that a Moho reflection is seen at 80 km
range in SE Wyoming but not observed at normal incidence. Processing will be
based on a combination of standard reflection processing and new approaches for
improving S/N, tau-P analysis, and migration. These studies will provide a
relatively accurate and detailed velocity profile and also mean crustal velocity
which can be related to tectonic history and continental growth.