* 8708960
* Realistic Modeling of Residual and Thermal Stress in        Electronic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1987,05/31/1990
* Jeffrey Eischen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Dianne McCormick
* 05/31/1990
* USD 60,000.00

The primary objective of the research is to develop reliable methods to predict
residual (fabrication) stress and applied thermal stress levels in
microelectronic device structures. In addition, the research will also suggest
ways to systematically reduce stresses arising during fabrication. The types of
structures for which this research will be applicable are: semiconductor wafers,
integrated circuit chips, hybrid circuits, and heterojunction lasers. Stresses
induced during forming can adversely effect reliability of the end product and
cause premature failure of devices via fracture, anomalous diffusion of dopants,
or deleterious electromigration. Furthermore, high stresses also occur during
subsequent operation due to substantial temperature gradients within components.
Both fabrication and operating stresses arise because of the wide disparity of
thermal expansion between various device materials, such as silicon and various
thin film oxides or metals. Current methods for predicting such stresses are
very approximate. The research will use a variety of solid mechanics principles
to address some unsolved problems regarding layered electronic structures,
particularly interfacial stresses in wafers. Simple but useful stress analysis
formulas will be developed to assist preliminary mechanical design of electronic
devices, while finite element stress analysis will be employed to study the
detailed nature of complex singular stress systems which must exist at material
interfaces.