* 8708734
* Phase Diagrams of Fluid Mixtures by Simulation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Athanassios Panagiotopoulos, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1989
* USD 70,000.00

Research Summary: The objective of this project is the investigation of phase
equilibrium properties of fluid mixtures by computer simulation in a new
ensemble. The Gibbs ensemble Monte Carlo simulation technique enables the direct
determination of the properties of two coexisting fluid phases (e.g., a liquid
at equilibrium with its vapor) from a single computer experiment. The first part
of this project will be the extension of the Gibbs technique to multicomponent
systems. The method will then be applied for the determination of the effect of
intermolecular potential parameters (size, shape and polarity of the components
of a mixture) on the mixture critical curves and the presence of azeotropes,
liquid-liquid and fluid-fluid immiscibility gaps. By selecting appropriate
models for the intermolecular interactions, the behavior of systems that
approximate real mixtures of engineering interest will then be studied. Finally,
a comparison between direct computer simulation results and theoretical or semi-
empirical models will be performed. Innovation/Novelty: The Gibbs method
(recently proposed by the PI) is the first practical technique available for
exact determination of phase equilibria in complex systems with given
intermolecular interactions. Until now, the calculation of phase equilibria from
simulation was extremely difficult because a large number of laborious free-
energy determinations was required. This research will provide extensive phase
equilibrium data on well-defined model systems. Such data are not currently
available, despite the significant role they can play in the development of
improved theoretical and semi-empirical models for the thermodynamic behavior of
fluids. In addition, realistic mixtures of engineering importance will be
studied for the first time by exact simulation methods. Technical Impact and
Significance: Detailed knowledge of the phase behavior of fluid mixtures is
needed for the efficient design and operation of many separation processes in
chemical engineering (e.g., distillation, liquid-liquid extraction, enhanced oil
recovery), but similar needs may arise in many other fields, including
geophysics, biomedicine and the study of dense planetary atmospheres. The
proposed research will significantly contribute to the development of molecular
simulation techniques (to complement experiment and theory) for this purpose.
The new simulation methodology can also find applications for the molecular-
based study of a wide range of industrially important phenomena. Examples of
such possibilities would be the study of adsorption by solids and physical
equilibria in microporous catalysts (relevant for the oil and chemical process
industries), micelle formation and stability in surfactant sytems (important for
the cosmetics and pharmaceuticl industries, as well as for the study of living
systems), and equilibria in the presence of semi-permeable membranes
(significant for the development of new separation methods for the biotechnology
industry).