* 8708170
* An Observational Study of Intramonthly Quasi-Periodicities  in the Northern Heimsphere, Extratropical Geopotential      Height Field
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Anandu Vernekar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 01/31/1990
* USD 47,800.00

This research is aimed at investigating 10-30 day quasi- periodic phenomena in
the extratropical, cold season tropospheric geopotential heights of the Northern
Hemisphere. The search for such phenomena is justified on experimental,
theoretical and observational grounds. They will be examined using theory as
guidance. A variety of statistical techniques will be utilized in order to
assess the significance and quantify the importance of such phenomena. Unlike
most other studies of this type the non-stationarity of these phenomena will be
incorporated directly into the analyses and significance testing. Also, the
analyses will allow for regionality and will be based on a much larger sample
than most prior studies of this nature. Rotated complex principal components
(RCPC's) will be used in this study. The RCPC analysis technique, which is a
powerful statistical tool, has been introduced to meteorologists only very
recently. This and several simpler approaches will yield time series of
amplitude and phase. The statistical tests will be performed primarily on these
time series. The results of this study should put into prospective various
aspects of the variability of tropospheric heights in the 10-30 day range,
including regularity, duration and relation of the quasi-periodic phenomena to
the quasi-stationary state. This research is important because it applies
rigorous statistical analysis to a long-term, high quality set of atmospheric
circulation observations to seek answers to the question of the importance of
intraseasonal oscillations on climate characteristics.