* 8708515
* Development of Cortical Afferents
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Charles Gorenstein, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Steven C. McLoon
* 02/28/1991
* USD 256,839.00

In the mature nervous system, cortical area 17 (primary visual cortex) receives
afferent projections from the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus and the
cholinergic basal forebrain system. This project will use light and electron
microscopic techniques in laboratory rats to study development of each
projection system, and to study how the two systems may interact during
development. Dr. Robertson and his colleagues have preliminary evidence
suggesting that the geniculocortical system expresses acetylcholinesterase
(AChE) transiently during the time when geniculocortical axons are invading the
cortex and undergoing synaptogenesis with cortical neurons. The function of the
transient AChE is unknown, but is of interest because: (1) it appears to serve
as a reliable endogenous marker for developing geniculocortical axons, and (2)
the presence of AChE suggests that the developing geniculocortical axons may
interact with the developing cholinergic afferents from basal forebrain.
Particular attention will be paid to time of arrival, laminar and areal
patterns, and ultrastructural morphology of each afferent system. Possible
interaction between the two afferent systems will be determined by studying the
development of one system in the absence of the other. Possible functions of the
transient AChE will be studied by determining the effect of AChE inhibition on
development of normal morphology and by biochemical characterization of the
transient AChE and its possible endogenous substrate. Dr. Robertson is an
experienced neuroanatomist who has made substantial contributions to our
knowledge of transient AChE expression in development. The results of these
studies will provide new information about the formation of thalamocortical
connections in the developing nervous system, and about the role of AChE in
development.