* 8708076
* Partial Oxidation of Propylene to Acrolein over             Single-Crystal Cuprous Oxide
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* David Cox, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 11/30/1989
* USD 69,999.00

The objectives of this project are: (1) to determine the sites for propylene
adsorption and activation on cuprous oxide (Cu20) surfaces, (2) to determine the
degree of charge transfer between the catalyst and the adsorbed intermediate,
(3) to determine if the promotion effect of methyl bromide is due to a chemical
effect or a "macroscopic" electrical effect associated with Fermi level pinning
on this semiconducting catalyst surface, and (4) to study the reaction kinetics
under realistic (one atmosphere) reaction conditions to test the usefulness of a
metal-oxide single crystal as a model catalyst. The work will combine ultrahigh-
vacuum surface science techniques with high pressure reaction measurements. Low
energy electron diffraction (LEED), x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and
ion scattering spectroscopy (ISS) will be used to determine the site for
propylene activation. Four-point probe conductivity measurements will be used to
determine the partial charge on the reaction intermediates and to study the
behavior of the catalyst Fermi level in the presence of methyl bromide. A
combined high pressure reaction cell/UHV surface analysis system will be used to
characterize the reaction kinetics of the system and to perform post-reaction
analysis on the surface. The work is aimed at resolving questions about the
nature of the reaction mechanism and intermediates. Besides being an important
industrial reaction in its own right, this system may serve as a model for other
allylic oxidations of olefins.