* 8708282
* Synchronous Packet Networks with Priority Queueing          Disciplines and Applications to Flow Control
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Audrey Viterbi, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 12/31/1990
* USD 63,939.00

The principal investigator (PI) will study synchronous store-and-forward
networks involving packetized messages of varying priority classes. The
priorities may be established by transmission needs, as in the case of
integrated voice and data networks in which voice transmission needs higher
priority to ensure reasonable quality. Priorities may also be determined by
other disparate requirements and assigned according to other criteria such as
length of message or distance from source to destination. The priorities may
also be established by transmission importance. The PI will also compare the
effectiveness of flow control schemes which control congestion in these priority
queueing networks. To this end, she has developed a Markov model and analytical
techniques to determine the average delay and buffer occupancy of a single-queue
multi-priority system in steady- state. The PI will extend this local analysis
to treat priority networks and various associated flow control schemes. She will
also develop a simulation package that allows the observation of both the
transient and statistical behavior of these networks. The results of this
proposed research would be applicable to the design of a wide class of networks,
ranging from satellite packet networks to networks of multiprocessors.