* 8708615
* Sellers and Heterogeneous Bidders at Auctions: Non          Cooperative and Collusive Strategic Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1987,04/30/1990
* Daniel Graham, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 04/30/1990
* USD 182,930.00

Most of the existing research on auctions has been conducted within a non-
cooperative framework with homogeneous risk neutral bidders where the risk
neutral auctioneer can announce a reserve price. The contribution of this
project comes from working in the relatively unexplored areas of heterogeneous
bidders and bidder collusion. This research is motivated by observed behavior at
auctions such as nested buyer ring formation, non-inclusive rings and lift-
lining (phantom bidding) by auctioneers. The previous work explained the
generation of phantom bids by practicing English auctions and the durability of
bidder collusion. Further research is needed to generalize these results to more
complex and realistic environments and to study other aspects of auctions. The
high quality of the investigators' past research shows that they have the
ability to do the work. The project investigates the behavior of heterogeneous
bidders and the auctioneer at first price, Dutch, and second price auctions.
Distributional information regarding bidders is usually unknown by the seller,
so the processing of bid data by a Bayesian auctioneer and consequent strategic
behavior are explored. The project explains why only all inclusive bidder
coalitions are viable at first price and Dutch auctions and why coalitions of
all sizes are observed at English auctions. The project investigates if certain
bidder types are either undesirable to, or, unwilling to join a coalition in an
English auction. Finally, the project explains how bidder coalitions try to
avoid the incentive problems created by sharing the gains of coalition
formation. Both simultaneous and sequential game models are used to study
nesting of bidder coalitions and other ways of efficiently sharing the gains.