* 8708244
* RUI:  Motion History and Tectonic Significance of Major     Faults in Southeastern New England
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Arthur Goldstein, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 12/31/1989
* USD 47,046.00

The goals of this project are to define the thermal history, direction, sense
and timing of motion(s) on potential terrane-bounding faults in the northern
Appalachians. The regional geology is reasonably well known with the exception
of fault motions. The fault system to be studied marks the western boundary of
the Avalon zone in southeastern New England and may be a segment of a fault
system which spans the northern Appalachians. Although the faults have been
proposed as marking a Permian collisional suture, preliminary results suggest
that various segments have experience different motion histories. The entire
system of faults may have experienced Silurian (430-400 Ma.) left-lateral motion
with a thrust component and some segments were reactivated in Permian time as
low-angle normal faults. Additional work is required to define the motion
histories of fault segments not yet studied, to establish relationships between
segments with different motion histories, to investigate possible relationships
between fault motion and deformation in isolated occurrences of Pennsylvanian
metasedimetary rocks and to integrate these results with the regional geology.
Techniques to be used will be standard detailed structural analysis in the field
and microstructural analysis on oriented thin sections. Thermal histories will
be established by characterization of temperature dependent microstrutures
corroborated by phase equilibria where applicable. Timing of motions will be
established by structural analysis of dated igneous rocks. Student involvement
will take the form of two undergraduate field assistants for each of the two
field seasons and several "senior honors theses". Results are expected to help
constrain the tectonic history of some of the terranes in New England.