* 8708120
* DeFinetti and the Development of Contemporary Foundations ofProbability and Statistics
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Richard Jeffrey, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 12/31/1988
* USD 9,000.00

Bruno de Finetti is widely regarded as the leading 20th century statistical
thinker about Bayesian ideas. A number of issues which he raised are still
matters of controversy among Bayesians: e. g. interval valued probabilities and
related issues of imprecision and indeterminacy; resiliency as a hallmark of the
subjectivist substitute for objective chance. De Finetti's work played a
critical role in the development of work in this area primarily through the
intermediary of L. J. Savage in the 1950's and later through translations of
several of his works by Kyburg and Smokler in the 1960's. Professor Jeffrey,
with several Italian collaborators, has completed an English language
translation of de Finetti's early seminal work, "Probabilismo," or "Critical
Essay on the Theory of Probability and on the Value of Science" (1931). Under
this grant Professor Jeffrey will prepare a long interpretive/critical essay
outlining the importance of "Probabilismo" and relating it to the development of
contemporary developments in subjective probability. This 1931 study is a
detailed philosophical exposition of the probabilistic epistemology that
motivated de Finetti's work on the foundations of probability and statistics
over the next half-century. It presents his subjectivism in the framework of a
close critical survey of other views, carefully qualifying the relationship of
his position to other contemporary philosophical stances: pragmatism,
positivism, etc. It is of considerable systematic and historical interest, e.g.,
for its treatment of such topics as resiliency, objectivity, and indeterminacy
vs. inaccuracy of probability judgements, and for the extreme projectivism on
which de Finetti takes his stand. Professor Jeffrey's critical essay will place
de Finetti's views in a much needed historical and philosophical perspective.
His essay coupled with the English translation of "Probabilismo" promise to be
of great interest within the philosophy of science and statistics communities.