* 8708494
* STABLE ISOTOPE SYSTEMATICS OF MANTLE PERIDOTITES IN THE     CONTEXT OF THEIR TECTONIC HISTORY
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Russell Harmon, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 11/30/1989
* USD 70,000.00

It is generally agreed that fluids play a critical role in mantle enrichment
processes and that mantle enrichment events frequently are superimposed in a
complex manner on peridotitic mantle that has been depleted in incompatible
trace elements and light rare- earth elements through prior partial melting.
Chemical and radiogenic isotope data suggest that such metasomatic fluids may be
derived, in part, from recycled crustal materials and that some form of fluid
metasomatism may be a necessary precursor to intraplate alkalic magmatism.
Stable isotope studies provide a unique means of addressing mantle heterogeneity
and enrichment/depletion processes because, 1) oxygen is a major element in
terms of its behavior, whereas hydrogen is a trace element that is concentrated
in aqueous fluid phases, and 2) the mantle has been shown to be heterogeneous in
terms of both its O- and H-isotope compositions. This project will undertake a
detailed stable isotope study of four regions in which mantle peridotites of
distinctly different petrological, chemical, and radiogenic isotope character
have been erupted in Late Tertiary to Recent alkalic basalts. The four gerions
also are characterized by having sub-continental lithospheric mantle with
differing tectonic histories. The focus of the research is an understanding of
the causes of stable isotope variations in the different types of peridotites
present within each region, and a comparison of the isotope systematics of
peridotites from the four gegions in the context of their different tectonic
histories.