* 8708342
* Synaptic Plasticity at the Mammalian Neuromuscular Junction
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* David Van Essen, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Steven C. McLoon
* 02/28/1990
* USD 140,792.00

During normal postnatal development, mammalian skeletal muscles undergo an
orderly process of synapse elimination, whereby each muscle fiber begins in a
state of polyinnervation but eventually loses all except one of its inputs. Dr.
Van Essen will study several aspects of synapse elimination and plasticity of
connections in the soleus muscle of the rabbit. In one set of projects, Dr. Van
Essen and his colleagues will examine the role of nerve and muscle activity in
this process of synapse elimination. Previous studies have shown that increased
activity accelerates the overall rate of synapse elimination, while differential
activity among competing synapses confers an advantage to the less active
inputs. Dr. Van Essen is interested in clarifying the mechanisms whereby
activity exerts these dual influences and also in ascertaining whether natural
activity patterns contribute to sculpting of the distribution of motor unit
sizes in the adult. Another set of projects is aimed at understanding the basis
of fiber-type specificity, whereby fast- and slow-contracting muscle fibers are
selectively innervated by fast and slow motor neurons. Dr. Van Essen has made a
number of important contributions to this field over the past ten years. The
results of these new studies will certainly add fundamental information about
the important developmental phenomenon of synapse elimination.