* 8708079
* Fellowships to the Third International School of Space      Simulations
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1988
* Robert Strangeway, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joelee Joyce
* 11/30/1988
* USD 16,000.00

This grant will provide partial support for fifteen students and young
researchers to attend the Third International School for Space Simulations to be
held in La Londe-les-Maures and Beaulieu, France from June 15 to 27, 1987. The
school will include both tutorials on the use and development of simulation
codes and presentations of the most recent research carried out in space plasma
physics with the aid of computer simulations. The school will be of particular
benefit for young researchers, both in terms of gaining experience in
simulations, and in the opportunity to interact closely with experts in the
filed. Since the meeting will also be attended by European and Japanese
scientists, the recipients of fellowships will be able to develop important
contacts with the international research community, which should be of
considerable benefit in the future. The major objective of this grant is
educational. Two previous schools have been supported by NSF with great success
and have helped establish a U.S. pre-eminence in the area of S/T simulations. A
second objective is that of advanced code development. Modelling of the S/T
environment requires sophisticated code development of 3rd plasma simulations in
realistic geomagnetic field geometries. This is a difficult problem relying
partly on advances in numerical techniques e.g. adaptive grids. Finally this
effort will lead to advances in modelling the S/T system.