* 8708242
* Pareto Optimal Organizations and Allocations with Private   Information, Limited Communication, and Other Impediments toTrade
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Robert Townsend, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1990
* USD 163,636.00

The project addresses core economic issues associated with developing tractable
economic models of environments with uncertainty and with private information.
Despite past advances much work is needed to make these models of economies more
like the environments of actual economies. The project contributes to resolving
this problem in three ways. First, it extends theory to include more realistic
and more complicated private information possibilities and various additional
impediments to trade, e.g., limited communication, spatial separation,
indivisibilities, and limited commitments. Second, it investigates numerical
methods to map the parameters describing the environments to outcomes even if
strong qualitative theorems are not readily available. Numerical methods are
used to see how the time series of currency, prices, interest rates, incomes,
and consumption vary with the parameters of the environment. Third, historical
material and panel data from contemporary village economies are used to test
predictions from the theory with actual observations. The new theory is used to
address issues such as optimal information acquisition; the implications for
volatility of optimal learning; group accounting systems and financial
instruments as communication devices; the information and store-of-value roles
for currency; the role of financial intermediaries and optimal regulation of
intermediaries; the intertemporal and asset pricing implications of indivisible
and nonretradable durable goods.