* 8708363
* Calcium and Neuron Function
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Katherine Graubard, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1989
* USD 20,000.00

The long-term objective of this study is to derive general principles for the
functioning of local circuit neurons, especially those cells which have synaptic
output from their integrating regions (e.g., dendro-dendritic synapses) and
which may use graded synaptic transmission below the threshold for spikes. The
immediate objective is to understand the functioning of an invertebrate system,
the stomatogastric ganglion of the crab Cancer borealis. The focus of this study
will be experiments designed to elucidate the role of calcium in stomatogastric
cell function. Questions will include: 1) When is voltage-dependent calcium
influx due mostly to graded voltage changes ( the pyloric rhythm) and when is it
due mostly to spikes? Does calcium influx vary with the cell type, the location
within the neuron, or with synaptic or neuro-modulator activity? 2) How do
neuromodulators affect the resting internal calcium concentration and the
voltage-dependent calcium influx in different regions of identified cells? 3)
What is the electrotonic organization of stomatogastric neurons and how is it
influenced by active conductances, neuromodulators, and synaptic inputs? Methods
to be used in this study include: intracellular somatic and neuropil recording,
simultaneous measurements of internal calcium fluctuations in different regions
of single photodiode array, and measurements of resting internal calcium
concentrations with Fura 2 and CCD cameras. Of necessity, most studies of neuron
function have been constrained spatially: intracellular electrodes are placed in
only one or two simultaneous locations in single cells, typically the soma. This
entire neuron during its normal range of behaviors as it uses what might be
considered its most interesting ion, calcium.