* 8708340
* Explaining Asset Price Movements: An Unobserved Components  Approach
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* John Campbell, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 12/31/1989
* USD 45,862.00

This interesting and important project concerns the analysis of the movements of
prices of long-term assets. Many economists and other financial analysts have
tried to explain the movements of prices in the stock market. To do this they
have introduced the concept of an efficient market, that is a market where the
supply and demand forces are not inhibited in any way and which equilibrates
very quickly. However, it is clear that the stock market often seems to
fluctuate without any obvious external stimulus, and explaining price movements
is often very difficult even after they are observed. Prediction is yet more
difficult. Stock prices share some important characteristics with other
macroeconomic variables such as the long-term bond yield, the exchange rate, and
the level of private consumption expenditure. These variables play a key role in
macroeconomic theory and policy, and they are greatly affected by the market
participants's expectations about the future. Thus explaining their behavior is
important. However, they display movements which are not driven by events
elsewhere in the economy. The major goal of this project is to explain why long-
term asset prices move as they do. The project consists of two main sections: 1)
the development of a framework in which asset price levels, as well as expected
asset returns can be explained, and 2) derivation of measures of the economic
importance of the possible determinants of asset prices. Technically, Professor
Campbell uses an analytical framework known as unobservable components, in which
the unobservable state of the entire system evolves according to a transition
equation, and the observed data are considered to be discrete realizations of
the underlying continuous transition process. An important aspect of this
research is that Professor Campbell compares the results of the unobserved
components analysis with those of other standard techniques, such as Vector
Autoregression analysis and general equilibrium models. He also extends the
framework to include continuous time models.