* 8708130
* Synthetic Applications of the Aza-Achmatowicz Reaction      (Chemistry)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,10/31/1990
* Marco Ciufolini, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* John S. Showell
* 10/31/1990
* USD 146,800.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program suppports
research by Dr. Marco Ciufolini. The methodology being developed by Dr.
Ciufolini has the potential for becoming a new standard route for the synthesis
of nitrogen containing materials. This class of materials is extremely important
in substances found in both medicine and agriculture. The rearrangement of
N-acyl-2-furylamines to N-acyl-2-alkyl-piperidin-3-ones (termed the "Aza-
Achmatowicz" reaction) will be developed into a general method for the total
synthesis of optically active nitrogenous substances. A key step of the new
technique involves enzymatic resolution of racemic furylglycines. The resolved
aminoacids, which will be stereochemically correlated with (L)-Serine, are
readily and efficiently transformed into valuable building blocks for the
synthesis of structures as diverse as, e.g., azasaccharides, beta-lactams,
unusual aminoacids, and amphibian alkaloids. A number of issues in organic
methodology will be confronted in connection with the total synthesis of members
of those general classes of compounds. The stereochemical course of enolate
alkylations, conjugate additions of organocopper reagents and oxidation
reactions will be investigated in detail using the rearranged materials as
substrates. The directing effect of N-centered functionalities on the
stereochemical course of reactions at neighboring olefinic subunits will be
studied. New methodology will be developed based on the chemistry of enamides.
Ultimately, the Aza-Achmatowicz reaction will be refined enough to be used for
the construction of N-containing carbon frameworks considerably more complex
than the ones planned in this research.