* 8708402
* Collaborative Research in Experimental Studies of Choice    Behavior in the Presence of Incomplete Information
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,09/30/1991
* Raymond Battalio, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 09/30/1991
* USD 149,924.00

This project continues a series of fascinating experiments in four important
areas of economic behavior: 1) consumer choice between alternatives in which
risk is inherent, 2) the output decisions of firms when the number of competing
firms is very small, 3) welfare and income distribution, and 4) labor supply
decisions made by individuals choosing between work time and leisure. The first
is a topic which has occupied the attention of economists and other social
scientists for a long time. Of particular interest is the observation that human
beings seem to be risk averse in some situations and risk loving in others. For
instance, people avoid risk in some economic situations and even pay insurance
premiums so as not to incur losses in income. In other situations people gamble
and take risks. This seeming paradox is very difficult to explain with existing
theories of utility maximization. This project examines two possible unifying
theories, namely prospect theory and expected utility theory, which can
incorporate both types of behavior. Many industries consist of a very small
number of firms. The automobile industry is an example, and some industries can
be realistically modeled by assuming only two competing firms. They are clearly
not monopolists, but through their output decisions they each can affect the
final price of their products. The second part of this research analyzes the
fundamental nature of supply decisions and profit making in the context of a
duopoly. The focus of the third topic is the effects of guaranteed income
programs on labor supply. Past work has indicated that a high level of unearned
income does provide a disincentive to participate in the labor force. However,
the dynamics of that decision process have yet to be explored. This project
analyzes the so called "welfare trap" hypothesis by examining the relationship
of systematic shifts in preferences to varying levels of unearned income in
previous periods. Also studied is the distribution of earnings and inequality of
incomes across individuals in an economy. Finally, this project continues past
work on the choice between time spent earning income and time spent in leisure.
The experimental subjects face varying wage levels, time constraints, and
desired income levels, and respond with labor force participation decisions. Of
particular focus are labor supply decisions when the income level is high. This
project continues the investigators' experiments using both humans and animals
as subjects. For nearly a decade they have shown that in correctly designed
experiments, animals (typically rats and pigeons) will respond to incentives as
predicted by economic theory. They have also replicated many experiments by
other researchers using humans as subjects, and have amassed an astonishing
amount of evidence wherein the results of work based on the behavior of humans
can be duplicated by animals in the laboratory. This research is done in
collaboration with Professor John Kagel of the University of Houston.