* 8708595
* Reactions and Stereochemistry of Organometallic Compounds   Related to Asymmetric Synthesis and Catalytic Activity
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* John Faller, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* John B. Hunt
* 11/30/1990
* USD 310,791.00

Organometallic compounds are frequently used as catalysts for the conversion of
one organic compound into another. Unfortunately, such conversions often result
in mixtures of isomers, i.e., molecules comprised of the same atoms, but
differing in their three-dimensional structures. This project involves the
synthesis of highly unsymmetrical organometallic compounds designed to function
as more specific catalysts to control the three-dimensional structures of
reaction products. The three- dimensional structures of organic molecules are
especially important in biological reactions, and these organometallic compounds
are often used in the laboratory synthesis of natural products. Research will be
undertaken to develop new methods using metal complexes for asymmetric and
regioselective syntheses and to elucidate the mechanisms of stereoselective
reactions which are synthetically useful. The potential utility of higher
oxidation state organometallic complexes for these applications will be
explored. X-ray crystallography has become a routine tool for structural
characterization in solids. However, many organometallic compounds rearrange or
exist as mixtures of conformational isomers in solution. It has been shown in
this laboratory that the stability of these conformers plays a major role in the
distribution of product stereochemistry. Reactive intermediates and catalytic
species often exist in lower concentrations and cannot be isolated as solids. A
new method will be developed to elucidate detailed structural information in
solution. This will involve the design and synthesis of ligands containing
paramagnetic metal ions which bind to organometallics. The isotropic shifts and
the effects of field alignment produced by these paramagnetic ligands will allow
detailed delineation (angles and distances) of intermediates and catalytic
species in solution.