* 8708460
* Floral Structure and Systematics of Mid-Cretaceous          Angiosperms
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Peter Crane, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1991
* USD 110,000.00

Increased paleobotanical activity of the last several years is beginning to
yield new data and new insights bearing on the origin and early diversification
of flowering plants during the Cretaceous Period, 100 million years ago. The
previous database used by paleobotanists focused almost entirely upon leaf
remains. New evidence from fossil pollen and fossilized floral and wood
structures, and new interpretations of leaf anatomy, have greatly expanded the
database. Dr. Peter Crane of the Field Museum, Chicago, will continue this
expansion of the sources of data, by collecting floral remains from rich
Cretaceous deposits of the Potomac Group of eastern North America. Detailed
descriptive examination of well-preserved floral material will permit
recognition of the major taxonomic groups living at this early time in
angiosperm history. Studies of flowers with pollen in place will permit
integration of the extensive dispersed palynological record of early angiosperms
with the fossil record of other plant organs. Information on floral structure
will provide an improved basis for interpreting the pollination and other
biological aspects of the life of early flowering plants. Dr. Crane's studies
are important in developing corroborated hypotheses about the evolutionary
relationships between major groups of early angiosperms.