* 8708834
* The Influence of Chemical Contaminants on Permeability and  Effective Porosity of Clay
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Jay Meegoda, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 06/30/1990
* USD 77,950.00

This proposal investigates the influence of chemical contaminants on
permeability and effective porosity of clay to predict the in- situ input
parameters of chemically contaminated clay. Mathematical models are adopted to
solve the problems of ground water contamination. The effective porosity,
permeability and chemical dispersion coefficient of soils are the required input
parameters for these models. These input parameters must be post-contaminated
in-situ measured vales. The current in-situ test methods are not capable of
estimating these input parameters. The electrical properties of clays will be
utilized in this investigation. Fluid flow occurs only between the clusters
formed by mixing of clays with electrolytic solutions, and the cluster volume
changes with the passage of chemicals due to physico-chemical interactions. The
electrical properties of soil exhibiting such interactions can quantify the
cluster volumes. Previous studies by the author showed the feasibilty of
predicting in-situ permeability by determining the electrical properties of
soil. Therefore, the non-destructive in-situ electrical method will be used to
predict in-situ effective porosity and change in soil permeability during the
passage of chemical contaminants. The research results will enable a better
prediction of local contaminant plume and a prediction of regional flow
computations under certain conditions.