* 8708425
* U.S.-Japan Photoconversion Program: Effect of Solution Medium on the Efficiency of Excited-State Electron-Transfer Reactions
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Morton Hoffman, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 12/31/1990
* USD 28,110.00

This award will enable Professor Morton Z. Hoffman and an assistant from Boston
University to collaborate with Professor Takeshi Ohno and his research group at
Osaka University, Japan over a period of two years. They will investigate the
effect of solution medium on the efficiency of excited-state electron-transfer
reactions involving transition-metal coordination complexes using fast kinetics
photochemical techniques, such as pulsed-laser flash photolysis and time-
resolved spectroscopy. The investigators will try to determine the yield of
release of redox products from a solvent cage upon the oxidative and reductive
quenching of electronically-excited RU(II)-polypyridyl complexes, and the
reductive quenching of excited Cr(III)-polypyridyl complexes as a function of
type of solvent, ion-pairing, presence of sacrificial reagents and solution
organizates, and temperature. The purpose of the research is to gain insight
into the events that occur between geminate radical pairs within the solvent
cage, especially the back electron-transfer reaction. The research will benefit
from the complementary skills of the research groups in the United States and
Japan. Dr. Hoffman's expertise is on the effect of ion pairing on reaction
dynamics and Dr. Ohno is skilled in the theory of back electron-transfer
reactions. Together they will try to understand the experimental conditions
necessary to optimize the generation of high-energy charge-carriers from
excited-state electron-transfer reactions. This work has major implications in
the future design of solar energy conversion and storage systems. This
cooperative project has received the approval of cognizant Japanese Government
Agency representatives for support under the U.S.-Japan Program of Cooperation
in Photoconversion and Photosynthesis.