* 8708387
* The Role of Somatomedins in Mediating Growth Hormone        Feedback
* BIO,DCB
* 10/15/1987,09/30/1989
* Sonya Conway, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 09/30/1989
* USD 12,000.00

This proposal requests a planning grant to establish techniques and collect
preliminary data to investigate the role of hypothalamic and pituitary
somatomedins in modulating growth hormone release. The techniques to be
established in this laboratory include specific radioimmunoassays, preparation
of dispersed adenohypophysial cells and standardization of a perifusion system
for measuring hormone release. The hypothesis to be tested is that local
somatomedins play a role in the negative feedback regulation of growth hormone
on its own secretion. If the preliminary data support the hypothesis, a detailed
investigation of the mechanism of in situ somatomedin activity will be
undertaken, and a regular grant application will be submitted. The rhythmic
pattern of secretion of growth hormone significantly influences this important
hormone's effectiveness in peripheral tissues. The pulsatory pattern of
secretion is known to be controlled by a combination of hypothalamic releasing
and inhibiting peptides and by growth hormone itself which limits its own
secretion by a short-loop negative feedback circuit. The mechanism of action of
the negative feedback circuit remains to be clarified. Somatomedins are a family
of low molecular weight peptides secreted in response to growth hormone which
are now generally believed to be involved in mediating the growth promoting
effects of GH. There is, however, substantial evidence that GH secretion also
may be influenced by somatomedins. The long range goal of this research is to
elucidate the mechanism of growth hormone's negative feedback on its own
secretion and, in particular, to examine the possible role of somatomedins in
this effect.