* 8708399
* Real and Financial Models of Real Exchange Rates and        Competitiveness
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Edward Leamer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1991
* USD 164,919.00

The continuing integration of the international economy requires that economic
analysts take into account the potential effects on trade relationships of the
various policies and incentives affecting production. Empirical research has
shown that the goods produced by a country can be categorized by one of two
groups. These are tradeable goods, which occupy a place in the international
market, and nontradeable goods, which for many reasons, for example consumer
taste or nontransportability, are sold only domestically. For instance, if the
preferences of the consumers in a country do not include eating certain kinds of
meats or dairy products, that country will not purchase them on the world
market. To a country producing those goods, they are considered nontradeable.
However, there might well be a spirited domestic market for the same goods in
the producing country. Likewise goods like services, houses and buildings,
scenic areas, and many other commodities cannot be traded amoung countries. This
project examines the prices of traded goods relative to prices of nontraded
goods and develops models of the international economy more detailed and
informative than were heretofore available. Porfessor Leamer has developed the
concept of a "real exchange rate" for goods. In essence this rate is the overall
price of traded goods relative to the price of nontraded goods incorporating the
effects of inflation. Variation in the real exchange rate can account for much
of the international economic status of a country. For instance, if the real
exchange rate declines, producers of exports and import- competing goods realize
smaller and smaller profits, and are unable to compete with foreign producers.
In a word, the country loses its "competitiveness" on the world market. This
might be due to real events inherent in the economy, or it might be the
undesireable consequences of government policy. This project makes an important
contribution to the literature on international ecomomics by deriving
statistically consistent measures of the real exchange rate. Professor Leamer
applies these models to various government monetary and fiscal policies to test
their effects.