* 8708034
* The Rupture Mode of Earthquakes and Fault Zone Properties                                                                                             >
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Karen McNally, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Brooking
* 12/31/1989
* USD 117,155.00

This study emphasizes the relationship between the rupture mode of earthquakes
and the nature and distribution of heterogeneities along a fault plane. A
primary objective is to determine whether heterogeneities are structural
features or are features induced by stress and slip variations that change with
time. We will investigate the rupture mode of earthquakes relative to the fault
heterogeneities through analysis of waveforms of the largest events and their
aftershocks. Heterogeneities are mapped along the length and depth of a fault
plane by analyzing refracted waves generated by local seismicity. This
information reflects the velocity contrast between differing materials that are
juxtaposed in the fault zone. Our analyses reveal that the velocity contrasts
are not randomly distributed, but rather occur in patches where one range of
values predominates. We propose to extend our dataset of relocated earthquakes
and to refine the refraction angle analyses for mapping patches of velocity
contrast. Finite-difference modeling of the waveforms will better define the
nature of the heterogeneities that are mapped by refraction analysis.
Preliminary results indicate that the largest earthquakes in the study region
(San Andreas fault, central California) since 1936 nucleate in the vicinity of
small patches with high variance of velocity contrast and rupture into larger
patches of more homogeneous velocity contrast. Combined with waveform analysis
of the mainshocks, we may be able to characterize fault zone heterogeneities and
the mainshock rupture process to a greater degree than has previously been done.