* 8708938
* The Design of a Polymeric Piezoelectric Actuator for and    Anthropomorphic End Effector
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1990
* James Blechschmidt, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* K. (Cheena) Srinivasan
* 08/31/1990
* USD 60,000.00

The primary objective of this Engineering Initiation Award research project is
to design, build and test an actuator for a dexterous light weight mechanism
which is to be used as an end effector for a robot. This end effector will be an
anthropomorphic hand similar in design concept to the UTAH/MIT hand except that
the actuators will be fabricated from polymeric piezoelectric materials. In
order to achieve the above, the following research objectives have been
established for this project: (1) Using the UTAH/MIT and Hitachi hands as a
guide for finger and wrist design, determine the actuating forces and
displacements that are required to carry reasonable pay loads, (2) Design an
actuator with the required displacement and load carrying capacity determined
above using a piezoelectric material such as poly(vinylidene fluoride). Included
in the design phase will be the development of the theory for analysis and
control of such an actuator, (3) Build the actuator and determine its
performance. Included in the performance evaluation will be the determination of
displacements, forces, response times, and life, and (4) Develop the plan for a
research program to design, build, and test a dexterous hand using polymeric
piezoelectric actuators. An actuating system using a polymeric piezoelectric
material is potentially more lightweight, compact, sensitive, compliant, and
responsive than present systems which are based on pneumatic and heat sensitive
devices. Since polymers are both flexible and capable of being molded into
complex shapes, the actuating system can be placed closer to the anthropomorphic
end effector resulting in shorter tendons (force transmission elements) and more
positive control. In addition, since a piezoelectric actuator is an electrical
device, digital computer control using digital to analog devices are more easily
developed and lighter in weight than electrical to pneumatic or electrical to
temperature based devices that are required on current anthropomorphic hands. A
successful design for robot applications will also have application to
biomedical devices such as artificial limbs.