* 8708462
* A Comprehensive Study of Precursory Quiescence Before       Great and Large Earthquakes in the Central Aleutians and    Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1988
* Ray Habermann, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Brooking
* 01/31/1988
* USD 0.00

Four large and great earthquakes have occurred in the Central Aleutians and
Valparaiso, Chile regions since 1971. All of these events have had precursory
quiescence reported prior to them. Several observations sugget that the reported
precursors to events in these regions during 1971 reflect systematic changes in
teleseismic magnitude estimates rather than real changes in seismicity rates.
These include: 1) Both seismicity rate decreases can be observed in regions
which are much larger than the rupture zones of the events; 2) the distribution
of the rate changes in the Chile region in the magnitude domain can be well
modeled as being due to changes in magnitudes; and 3) the change in the
Aleutians is strong in sets with a magnitude cutoff and a weak in all events, a
characteristic expected for changes in magnitudes. The average number of
stations used for teleseismic magnitude estimates in Chile is less than 10,
which is probably too small to provide magnitudes which are independent of
station biases. We propose to redetermine the teleseismic magnitudes for these
regions using station magnitude corrections and to re-examine the seismicity
patterns prior to the large events to determine whether the reported precursors
are real or due to systematic changes in magnitudes. We plan to integrate these
observations with local seismic network data from each region to increase our
understanding of the magnitude distribution of real precursory rate variations
if they exist. This work is crucial for understanding what precursors exist
prior to these events. More importantly, it is critical for understanding the
strengths and weaknesses of seismicity data and avoiding making serious errors
in interpreting these data for earthquake predictions.