* 8708014
* Regulation of Serotonin Release in Mammalian Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Sidney Auerbach, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1991
* USD 193,000.00

The research by Dr. Sidney Auerbach examines the role of serotonin in mammalian
physiology. There are two conflicting views of the functional organization of
serotonin-containing nerve cells in the brain. Some evidence indicates that
separate groups of these cells are involved in specific processes such as
control of pain. In opposition is recent evidence that the discharge rate of all
serotonin cells is very regular and is not increased by physiological or
behavioral challenges. To reexamine the controversy raised by the
electrophysiology data, Dr. Auerbach will use intracerebral dialysis to measure
release in four anatomically and functionally distinct brain areas of freely
behaving rats. If release is not affected by challenges such as environmental
cooling or physical restraint, it will corroborate the electrophysiology and
suggest that serotonin is not actively involved in responses to stress. If
serotonin release is increased, it will suggest that release is regulated at
nerve endings independently of cell body discharge. Dr. Auerbach will locally
administer antagonists to vasopressin and opioids to test the possibility that
brain substances released during stress act at serotonin nerve terminals to
regulate serotonin release. The research is expected to yield new insights into
contradictory evidence concerning how serotonin cells function within the brain
to regulate physiology.