* 8708606
* Visual, Spatial and Temporal Filtering and Hyperacuity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1991
* Robert Shapley, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 02/28/1991
* USD 263,300.00

Visual acuity is a measure of how well the eye can resolve very tiny targets,
and is limited by the size and distribution of the photoreceoptor cells in the
eye. However, a slight sideways displacement break in an otherwise straight line
can be detected when the displacement is as much as five times less than the
normal acuity would predict. This discriminability is known as hyperacuity, and
can be demonstrated by this stimulus called vernier displacement, or by
displacement of a grating pattern or by bisection of a pattern. Understanding
hyperacuity is important for understanding visual information processing because
hyperacuity reveals the ultimate precision of visual localization in space. This
project will study how spatial and temporal properties of information channels
in the eye and brain determine the limits of hyperacuity. Single neurons (nerve
cells) in the visual system have particular response properties that
preferentially filter particular frequencies in time (cycles/sec) or space
(cycles/degree, of a grating, for example). Hyperacuity targets or vernier and
grating displacement will be presented to human observers, and then these
targets will be "masked" by the presence of flickering illumination, or
superimposed gratings, or spatiotemporal noise. The discriminations will be
compared for these different cases. To determine the dynamic characteristics of
the neural mechanisms involved will require measurement of displacement
thresholds as a function of luminance contrast, color contrast, mean luminance,
and temporal frequency. Finally, a comparison will be attempted between human
hyperacuity performance and the hyperacute capabilities of single neurons in the
macaque monkey's visual pathway. The goal of this work is a comprehensive
understanding of the neural basis for hyperacuity. The approach combining
psychophysics, physiology and mathematical modelling is rare and powerful.
Understanding this wonderful performance in terms of neural mechanisms will lead
to a better theoretical basis for understanding the ultimate limits of visual
performance.