* 8708068
* Coherent Pion Production in Heavy-Ion Collisions (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1988
* Philip Deutchman, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* John Weiner
* 11/30/1988
* USD 10,000.00

Professor Philip Deutchman is a major contributor to the field of heavy-ion
collisions in nuclear physics, i.e., the study of what happens when you scatter
one atomic nucleus on another. In the last few years he has become an expert
regarding the problem of pion production below the threshold energy from heavy-
ion collisions. In the present proposal he plans to expand his work on this
problem by calculating pion production through the mechanism of delta-hole and
nucleon-hole excitations in peripheral nucleus-nucleus calculations. By
including quark degrees of freedom in his calculations, he hopes to find quark
signatures which experimentalists could look for in heavy-ion collisions at
intermediate to high energies. One of the important fields of nuclear physics is
that of nucleus-nucleus collisions, known as heavy-ion collisions. In these
collisions it is possible to produce pi-mesons, also called pions. Professor
Deutchman has been an important contributor to the area of pion production below
the threshold energy in heavy- ion collisions. He has developed useful computer
codes for computing this process. He now proposes to expand his computer codes
to include more physical processes, such as the formation of delta particles in
the interaction. Quark degrees of freedom will also be included. This research
is important in developing a consistent theory of pion production in heavy-ion
collisions and may predict quark signatures which could be looked for
experimentally in intermediate high-energy heavy-ion collisions.