* 8708094
* Electrical Modernization of the American Household
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1989
* Ronald Tobey, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 06/30/1989
* USD 75,744.00

Between the two world wars, the American home completed the transformation the
industrial revolution had begun. Changing demographic patterns, urbanization,
technological advances, and new economic values combined to produce a household
and a homelife that differed markedly from those of the nineteenth century.
Contemporary observers understandably attached great significance to the changes
they saw in the new style of American family life. Electrical modernization
clearly occurred and both contemporary observers and historians have presumed
that it was a significant part of the household revolution. Electrical lighting
was safer, cheaper, and better than gas illumination and enhanced the comfort of
the home. Electrical refrigeration profoundly affected food management (moreso
than different cooking technologies) and washing machines fundamentally altered
household hygiene. Although electricity has been the principle form of energy in
the twentieth century, historians have not devoted the same attention to
electrical modernization as they have to other technological and social changes.
As a result, historians lack a sense of the timing and course of electrical
modernization. In their investigation of the electrical modernization of the
American household from 1920 to 1954, Drs. Tobey and Wetherell advance our
understanding of the relationship between society and technology by examining
when and how American households adopted one of the century's most important
everyday technologies. Specifically, Drs. Tobey and Wetherell aim to answer the
following questions: When was domestic electrical technology introduced to the
American household? What is the causal relationship between its introduction and
the distribution of labor inside the household, the entrance of married women
into the wage-labor force, and the use of credit financing to acquire electrical
technology? And, what is the relationship between electrical modernization of
the household and the establishment and character of the role of the modern
"housewife"? Using both individual and aggregate-level data, the investigators
illuminate the phenomenon of electrical modernization, its timing, sequence, and
social context.