* 8708757
* Experimental and Theoretical Study of Laser Melting of Thin Semiconductor Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1987,12/30/1989
* Costas Grigoropoulos, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* La Tanya Darby
* 12/30/1989
* USD 69,380.00

This study concerns optically induced crystal growth of thin semiconductor films
on amorphous insulators. Growth of semiconductor films on insulators enables the
fabrication of high-performance electronic devices. Melting and
recrystallization of such layers by scanning light sources is used to improve
their electrical and crystalline properties. However, the development of this
technique has been limited by a lack of understanding of the associated phase
change phenomena. In order to examine the effects of the light source intensity
distribution, total power and motion, both experimental and theoretical
investigations will be conducted. Polysilicon will be used as the basic
material, but work on compound semiconductors, such as GaAs, will also be
initiated. Moreover, many aspects of the study can be directly applied to thin
metal and amorphous semiconductor film thermal processing. The primary
objectives of this project are; (1) to develop an experimental method for in-
situ temperature measurement at the microscale, by acquiring the processing
surface reflectivity data, (2) to numerically simulate thin film melting by
accurately tracking the position of the moving phase boundary, (3) to examine
the local crystal details by direct observations of the growth of interfacial
microstructures, microscopy characterization, and theoretical analysis, and (4)
to resolve the mechanism of radiatively induced in homogeneous film melting by
experimental observation.