* 8708391
* Time Scales for Advance and Retreat of Glaciers in Response to Climate Changes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Charles Raymond, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1991
* USD 98,840.00

Current theoretical understanding of how glaciers respond to changes in mass
balance induced by climate is based on the propagation and diffusion of
kinematic waves as developed by Nye and reviewed in the most recent geological
texts. Application of this theory to several example glaciers indicates that it
should take several hundred years for a typical glacier to complete its response
to a change in climate. However, available evidence about glacier fluctuations
during the "Little Ice Age" and subsequently indicates response times much
shorter than this prediction. Based on theoretical analysis, the discrepancy
arises because the ice volume changes predicted by the theoretical models are
unrealistically large by up to more than one order of magnitude. The over
estimate of volume change arises from assumptions about how wave velocity and
diffusion coefficients vary near the terminus, which cause over estimate of
thickness change in the terminal zone and how the thickness change is spread up
the glacier length. This project will examine elevation change profiles on
actual advancing and retreating glaciers in order to relate volume changes to
changes in length. Available sequential survey data of profile changes over the
last several decades on glaciers primarily from the Alps and Washington will be
used as well as geomorphic evidence for net elevation changes on longer time
scales as recorded by lateral moraines and trim lines on selected glaciers.
These measurements will contribute to a description and understanding of the
relationship of "Little Ice Age" lateral moraines and trim lines to current
glacier surfaces. The up valley convergence of "Little Ice Age" and current
glacier margins is a well known feature of the present mountain landscape which
has not been systematically investigated. The quantitative aspects of this
pattern are intimately tied to the response time for adjustment to climate,
thereby having significant bearing on paleoclimatic interpretation and adding to
our understanding of the behavior of glacier.