* 8708315
* The Historical Evolution of the Female Labor Force in       America, 1790 to 1985
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Claudia Goldin, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 12/31/1989
* USD 72,254.00

This project continues a line of research focusing on the evolution of female
participation in the labor force in the United State from 1790 to the present.
The investigator has produced nine papers under the previous NSF award looking
at various aspects of women in the work force. In particular, the increased
participation of women in the work force over the past two centuries can be
explained, in large measure, by the expanding menu of jobs, a decreased cost of
acquiring skills, and a rise in the return to general knowledge. In addition, a
number of data sets were constructed on female labor-force participation rates,
earnings, occupations, job experience, education, and hours worked. The purpose
of this project is to complete a monograph on the evolution of women in the
labor force, and to continue research on four different topics on the subject of
gender differences in the economy. The four topics are: (1) Develop a long-run
data series on labor-force participation rates, occupations, and hours worked;
(2) Analyze and explain the gender earnings-gap; (3) Analyze sex discrimination
in earnings and occupations, including testing directly the Becker model of
discrimination; (4) Analyze the effects of protective labor legislation on
female employment. This research is important because it will provide a deeper
understanding of the changing role of women in the market economy and the origin
and causes of gender differences in terms of occupations and earnings.