* 8708379
* RUI: Analysis of Antipredator Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Harold Herzog, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 02/28/1989
* USD 28,008.00

There are many unanswered questions concerning the evolution and ecology of
aggressive behavior in animals. It is, for example, unclear why the members of
one species may be typically highly aggressive while those of a closely related
species are relatively passive. Similarly, within a species or even among
littermates, some individuals are frequently much more aggressive than others.
These experiments will explore the causes, development, and function of species
and individual differences in what is perhaps the most critical (and unstudied)
aspect of animal aggression--defensive attacks directed by animals at predators.
The experiments will be conducted using several species of newborn garter
snakes. These animals are excellent for the investigation of defensive
strategies in animals. They have large litters and newborns can be tested from
the day of birth which allows for the study of the influence of heredity on
behavior. They are also, like many newborn animals, preyed upon by a wide
variety of predators from the moment they are born. In this project, the
development of antipredator behaviors, particularly defensive attacks, will be
studied in several species which are known to differ in characteristic levels of
aggressiveness. In addition, the stimuli which cause inexperienced newborn
animals to attack will be explored. Finally, the function of species and
individual differences in defensive tactics will be assessed. In summary, this
research will shed light on the significance of individual differences in
behavior and on the factors that generate such differences.