* 8708369
* Systematic Relationships and Evolutionary Patterns in       Galvezia (Scrophulariaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1987,09/30/1990
* Wayne Elisens, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 09/30/1990
* USD 90,000.00

Dr. Wayne J. Elisens of the University of Oklahoma will conduct a
multidisciplinary study designed to assess taxonomic relationships and
evolutionary mechanisms in a group of long- lived desert perennials. Shrub
snapdragons (the genus Galvezia) occur in desert habitats in continental North
America, the California Islands, coastal South America, and the Galapagos
Islands. Because of their biological characteristics and geographic
distributional pattern, shrub snapdragons represent an ideal group for
investigation of the processes and patterns of evolutionary change in plants
that occur in a) islands and continents, b) an oceanic archipelago and a group
of offshore islands, and c) desert biomes on two continents. Research
methodologies include field study of and collections from natural populations,
investigations of reproductive system and crossing among species propagated in
greenhouses, laboratory studies of chromosomal and genetic divergence, and
numerical estimates of genetic and phylogenetic relatedness. The major goals of
the study are to elucidate evolutionary mechanisms among New World desert
shrubs, quantify genetic differentiation among the species, reconstruct the
evolutionary history of the shrub snapdragons, and propose a formal
classification. This study is particularly significant because evolutionary
mechanisms among desert woody plants are poorly understood and because floras of
islands provide some of the best examples of natural experiments for examination
of evolutionary divergence and processes associated with long- distance
dispersal, establishment, and adaptation. The results of this study are
important for the conservation, management, and utilization of desert woody
plants in North and South America and the Galapagos Islands.