* 8708992
* Mechanism and Kinetics of Selective Tungsten Chemical Vapor Deposition
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Gregory Raupp, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 12/31/1989
* USD 70,000.00

The objectives of this project are to elucidate the mechanisms of adsorption,
desorption, surface reaction, diffusion, tungsten nucleation and film growth in
the heterogeneous chemical vapor deposition of tungsten hexafluoride and
tungsten hexachloride and to develop fundamentally based, non-empirical reaction
rate expressions based on these mechanisms. An experimental approach based on
complementary ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) techniques will be employed so that the
various reaction steps can be isolated and examined individually under well-
defined conditions. Temperature-programmed desorption and reaction spectroscopy
(TPD/TPRS) will be used to separate adsorption from decomposition and desorption
and to determine the rate constants for each step. Rate expressions based on
mechanisms suggested by the TPD/TPRS studies and scanning kinetic spectroscopy
(SKS) experiments will be compared to growth rate curves. Clean silicon and
clean tungsten surfaces will be investigated to establish behavior of the
silicon reduction and hydrogen reduction reactions, respectively, in the absence
of chemical species which may act as poisons or promoters. Impurities, dopants
and surface insulating layers will then be introduced systematically and their
effects on the deposition reactions will be quantified. Successful completion of
this research will lead to a greater fundamental understanding of the tungsten
deposition reactions, particularly with respect to the limits of selective
deposition, the self- limiting growth behavior exhibited on silicon, and to
methods for intentionally promoting or poisoning the surface reactions. The
proposed research is motivated by new demands placed on materials as lateral and
vertical dimensions in semiconductor devices continue to shrink in the drive for
faster, more reliable integrated microcircuits. Tungsten possesses properties
which make it an attractive candidate for a number of technologically- important
applications in very large scale integration (VLSI) circuits. Some manufacturers
are already incorporating tungsten interconnects into their circuits, but
existing technology leaves much room for improvement in quality control and
production of very fine structures.