* 8708233
* Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Interleukin-2          Stimulation of Oligodendrocytes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Etty Benveniste, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1991
* USD 185,427.00

The function of the oligodendrocyte is the ensheathment of axons with myelin in
the central nervous system. Myelin basic protein (MBP) expression in
oligodendrocyte cytoplasm is a prelude to the onset of myelination. Little is
known regarding the regulatory signals that influence the development of
oligodendrocytes and their progenitor cells. Interleukin-2 (IL-2), a molecularly
cloned T-cell derived lumphokine, induces oligodendrocyte proliferation and
maturation (enhanced expression of MBP). The precise biological role of IL-2 in
the regulation of gliogenesis is unknown at this time. The proposed studies will
investigate the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which IL-2 influences the
development of oligodendrocytes and glial progenitor cells. To define the effect
of IL-2 on oligodendrocytes, I will analyze how IL-2 modulates the expression of
myelination-specific antigens at both the mRNA and protein level. The influence
of IL-2 on glial progenitor cell development will be studied as these cells can
differentiate into either astrocytes or oligodendrocytes depending on culture
conditions. The role of IL-2 in regulating their proliferation and
differentiation will be examined. Studies will be done to identify, quantitate,
and characterize the receptor for IL-2 on glial cells. A binding asasy will
determine the number and affinity of receptors, while characterization by
biochemical means will allow for comparison with the lymphoid IL-2 receptor.
Damage to oligodendrocytes and/or myelin leads to various pathological
conditions typified by the demyelinating disease, multiple sclerosis (MS). The
proliferative capacity of mature oligodendrocytes and precursor cells, and their
ability to regulate responses to injury are of extreme importance in wound-
healing events. Understanding the control of normal oligodendrocyte development
by IL-2 will be of value in influencing the course of regeneration and
remyelination in diseases such as MS.