* 8708330
* Behavioral, Reproductive &amp; Neuroendocrine Consequences of   Prenatal Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1989
* Robert Bridges, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 01/31/1989
* USD 30,000.00

Female mammals, particularly rodents, exhibit a number of reproductive deficits
as a consequence of exposure to prenatal stress. Among the most serious are the
effects upon fertility and fecundity. To date, there has not been a systematic
analysis that has delineated those factors responsible for the deficits on
reproductive physiology and possibly behavior in prenatally stressed females. In
the present proposal the reproductive deficits present in the prenatally-
stressed female will be studied with focus upon physiological, i.e.
endocrine/neuroendocrine, and behavioral processes and the interactions between
the behavioral state of the female and her physiological responses. In
preliminary studies, decrements in reproductive success in prenatally-stressed
female rats were found with as many as 80% of these females failing to carry
their pregnancies to term and only 10% of the mated females raising a litter
through the first week of lactation. In addition, prenatally-stressed females
were behaviorally less responsive to their young, and prenatally-stressed
females showed diminished endocrine responses as adults. Since both pregnancy
maintenance as well as the induction of maternal behavior in the rat are under
endocrine (hormonal) control, it is possible that the deficits in pregnancy
maintenance, lactational performance, and maternal behavior in the prenatally-
stressed female, may result from a common underlying deficiency in the female's
ability to secrete hormones, a deficiency brought about by exposure to stress in
utero. In the current research, Drs. Robert Bridges and Craig Kinsley are
studying the potential common underlying physiological mechanisms that
contribute to both the decrements in reproductive physiology and behavior. The
work will focus on whether the detriments in pregnancy, lactation and behavior
result from changes in hormone (prolactin) regulation and action brought about
by the prenatal stress experience. The results of these studies will help to
define those factors responsible for the normal maintenance of pregnancy and
lactation, and will provide a data base for evaluating analogous endocrine and
behavioral deficits in other mammals, including humans.