* 8708383
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  KRISP 88-89:  Kenya Rift           International Seismic Project - An International CooperativeExperiment:  Seismic Array Study
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1993
* Robert Meyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 12/31/1993
* USD 292,770.00

Recent studies on the origin and development of continental rifts have clearly
been hampered by our lack of knowledge on the deep structure of the East African
Rift. This classic rift is the standard by which all others are measured. This
grant is one of five collaborative grants which support U.S. participation in an
international effort to conduct a cooperative study of the Kenyan portion of
this rift. Major funding is being provided by the Federal Republic of Germany
and the European Economic Community, with additional participation by France,
Holland, Spain and Ireland, as well as Kenya. The U.S. Geological Survey also
has a major role, and will provide a large number of field instruments. A
preliminary experiment was completed in 1985. The results of this experiment
suggest that the deep structure of the Kenya Rift is different than anticipated
and that the major phase of the project is both scientifically valid and
logistically feasible. The major seismic experiment is aimed at determining
lithospheric structure in the rift and in adjacent areas. Structure of the sub-
Moho lithosphere along the rift, detailed structure in the axial area of the
rift, and the transition zones between the rift and adjacent areas are the prime
areas of emphasis.