* 8709649
* Agricultural Production and Prehistoric Settlement in the   Jama River Drainage, Manabi Province, Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Deborah Pearsall, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1989
* USD 50,405.00

This grant permits Drs. Pearsall and Zeidler to conduct one season of fieldwork
at the site of San Isidro which is located in the Jama drainage in northern
Equador. They will both continue to excavate at the site and undertake a survey
of the surrounding reigon. San Isidro contains a large, centrally located
earthern mound which suggests that it functioned as a regional ceremonial and
administrative center. The site's size and monumental architecture imply the
existence of surplus production capable of supporting a dense populaation and
materials recovered suggest that San Isidro was a major point of external
contact and commodity flow both along the coast of Equador and between the coast
and the highlands. Because the stratigraphic and chronological sequence at the
site is not well established, the investigators will analyze materials already
collected and conduct archaeological testing to locate areas suitable for
further stratigraphic excavation. Through survey of the Jama drainage they will
locate other sites. Surface collections and limited excavation will be conducted
at these as well. The goal of the research is to study the process of
demographic growth and the accompanying development of cultural complexity which
took place in this tropical area of northern Equador. Although such complex
societies arose in the tropics many times in different parts of the world, the
underlying processes are not well understood. This research will allow the
testing of different models. While Equador is known to be rich in archaeological
remains, little archaeological research has been conducted there. This project
will help to remedy that situation.