* 8709622
* Aerosol Coagulation and Morphology Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Joseph Merklin, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Alexander Garris, Jr.
* 06/30/1990
* USD 160,000.00

Narrative: It is proposed to study coagulation of fine particle aerosols using
static and dynamic light scattering and electron micrography inspection. The
goals are: l. To determine the applicability of the fractal concept to describe
aerosol particle morphology and how this fractal morphology depends on Knudsen
number, particle interactions, and concurrent surface growth. 2. To test
temporal scaling of the coagulative growth of aerosols in the entire Knudsen
regime and determine the dependence of the coagulation kernel homogeneity and
dynamic fractal dimension on Knudsen number, particle interactions, and
concurrent surface growth. 3. To measure the approach of an arbitrary aerosol
particle size distribution to the self-preserving form and study the effects of
fractal morphology on the measurement. 4. To measure the rate of coagulation in
the intermediate Knudsen regime in both liquid and solid particle aerosols. 5.
To characterize the phenomenon of aerosol clumping and determine its effect on
coagulative growth. Aerosols will be created from either oil droplets (DOP) or
solids (NaCl, Ag) and soot from premixed flames. Sizes will be in the 5-100 nm
range before coagulation. An understanding of aerosol coagulation, its rate and
temporal evolution, and its effect on the resultant cluster morphology will help
our fundamental understanding of aerosols and the coagulative process.