* 8709868
* Round Table on Africanisms in Afro-American Language        Varieties to be held in Athens, at the University of GeorgiaOctober 29-31, 1987
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1989
* Salikoko Mufwene, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 03/31/1989
* USD 22,187.00

This grant is for a conference on the foundations of Afro- American speech
varieties (Black English, Gullah, and various Caribbean creole languages). A
basic controversy in the field is the role, if any, of African substrate
influence. Issues to be addressed by a distinguished gathering of creolists,
Africanists, dialectologists, and other experts include: 1) How should the
concept of "African substratum" be understood with respect to Afro-American
speech varieties in light of recent developments in the field? 2) What are the
conditions under which substrate influence is likely to occur? 3) What
correlation is there between linguistic and cultural Africanisms? 4) What other
problems are involved in demonstrating African substrate influence? Mufwene is a
leading scholar of African languages, pidgin and creole studies, and
linguistics, and the two dozen participants who have agreed to participate
represent every point of view taken on the issue. The topic under discussion is
not only of concern to scholars but also to people of African descent in North
America and the Caribbean, since it deals directly with the extent and type of
survival of African language and culture through the experience of dislocation
and enslavement.