* 8709442
* Inventories and Backlogs:  An Analysis of The Business Cycle
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1987,07/01/1988
* Kenneth West, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 07/01/1988
* USD 19,369.00

This project concerns an important and interesting topic, namely the
determinants of production inventories and backlogs. For many years there has
been in economic research the realization that inventories play a central role
in changes in the business cycle. Even though the level of quarterly inventory
investment is, typically, less than one percent of GNP, changes in inventory
investment often are important at cyclical turning points. In fact, empirical
evidence shows that changes in inventory investment account for nearly one half
the total change in business activity for most of the eight post- World War II
recessions in the U.S. Data is limited for the pre-World War II era, but
indications are that the same relationship holds. Thus analyzing changes in
inventories might be a good method to predict wide shifts in business activity.
In spite of the obvious importance of knowing why firms accumulate inventories,
there is little unambiguous evidence as to whether firms are avoiding unforeseen
fluctuations in production costs or in sales of final products when they
increase inventories. In addition, firms can accomplish the same goals by
accumulating backlogs of orders. Thus the models most often used to study
inventory accumulation, namely the production smoothing models, are inherently
flawed. This project studies production inventories from the standpoint of
firms' avoiding the costs of backlog orders. These costs can in general be
greater than those of simply holding inventories, since having unfilled backlog
orders incurs bad customer relations. Technically, Professor West estimates
structural models to test whether backlog costs are numerically and
statistically significant. A production lag is assumed, and a within period
backlog occurs if orders exceed production at the beginning of each production
period. He also does stochastic numerical simulations of the nonlinear model, to
explain the observed facts about inventories, in particular whether the model
predicts that negative demand shocks, that is recessions, induce inventory
liquidations of the sort observed in the post-World War II period.