* 8709194
* Architectural, Parallelism, and Resynchronization Issues in Sequential Decoding
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Jay Harris, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 02/28/1990
* USD 69,986.00

The research aims to improve the architecture of sequential decoders of both the
ZJ Stack and Fano types, to exploit code parallelism for increased decoder speed
and performance, and to establish an objective basis for the jump-ahead
resynchronization method often used in continuous sequential decoders.
Pipelining, branch order and metric increment mechanizations, and a unique
"file-drawer" memory for ZJ decoders are among the architectural issues to be
investigated. A computer search using the San Diego Supercomputer will be made
to find good convolutional codes of rate m/n where n is moderately large and not
necessarily relatively prime to m. The resultant codes will be used in an
investigation of decoder features that permit this intrinisic parallelism to be
exploited. Acceptable compromises in providing partial branch metrics and rank
order for decoders operating in a multiple-branch-per- node mode will be studied
through an anlysis of the impact on the exponental bound parameter, RO. To
determine the optimum size of jump, the resynchronization method will be studied
by simulation using a specially constru ted trial encoder circuit board. A
related analysis of the optimum constraint length of decoders will be made based
on t e tradeoff between undetected error probablility and the error event span
during resychronization. The research will result in improved performance of
this important constituent of many modern telecommunication systems.