* 8709051
* Spatial and Temporal Patterns in Forest Soils: Mycorrhizae  and Energy Flow in Rhizosphere Islands
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1992
* David Perry, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1992
* USD 150,015.00

Roots and associated mycorrhizae are unevenly distributed in the soil. Some
three-dimensional spaces in the soil can be envisioned as "hot spots" or
"islands" of root and mycorrhizal activity. These islands affect soil structure,
soil micro- organisms, and soil processes - forming an interconnected matrix.
The central thesis of this project is that rhizosphere islands are formed in
soils, that islands are dependent upon above-ground energy supply for their
continuation, that mycorrhizae affect islands size and stability, and that
islands change when vegetation changes. Primary research objectives are: to
develop methods to measure patterns of rhizosphere islands in a forest soil over
a range of scales and to develop spatial statistical methods to detect patterns
of islands in soils against a background of pattern created by above-ground
(allogenic) inputs. The below- ground (autogenic) inputs will be characterized
using both conventional measures (e.g., soil pH) and newer, non-invasive methods
of nuclear magnetic resonance. NMR will be used characterize soil organic carbon
(c-13 NMR) and soil organic and inorganic phosphorus (p-31 NMR). Proton NMR
imaging (MRI) will be used characterize spatial 2-dimensional patterns in soils
nondestructively. The significance of this research lies in the quantification
of spatial patterns of physiological activity in soils. By measuring this
essential property one can understand how interacting processes in soils
function to support plant growth. The scientists involved in this collaboration
are excellent. Institutional support is quite good. The introduction of these
new methodologies into ecological research could have a major positive effect.
The Ecosystems Studies Program recommends that this award be made.