* 8709854
* Bird Song:  Learning, Perception and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1989
* Michael Beecher, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 01/31/1989
* USD 75,000.00

Bird song is of considerable general scientific interest because it has proved
to be the single best model system, involving a naturally-occurring complex
behavior, for (a) the study of learning, and (b) the study of brain-behavior
relationships. In addition, there are many surprising parallels between bird
song and human language, including developmental and neurological similarities.
The present research approach is unique in considering the song communication
system from a perceptual point of view. Previous research has focussed on the
signals, and has generally ignored the transformations performed on these
signals by the animal's sensory-perceptual system. This approach is incomplete
and potentially misleading if the animals perceive their signal systems
differently from humans, as is very likely the case for many animal
communication systems, and for bird song in particular. Methods have been
developed in recent years that allow a researcher to characterize the perceptual
dimensions of a set of stimuli for an animal by training it to indicate the
perceived similarity between a pair of stimuli for all possible pairs in the
set. This approach and related methods will be used to map the perceptual
dimensions of the song system of the Song Sparrow, a species with a particularly
complex and varied song. To examine the role of experience in the development of
normal song experience, birds raised with and birds raised without hearing
normal species song will be compared. Preliminary data has shown that the latter
birds sing an abnormal song as adults and it is expected that their song
perception is abnormal as well. In addition, correlations between song
experience, song perception and the relative development of song centers in the
brain will be determined. Therefore this research will advance our understanding
and increase the utility of this model system by providing information on the
heretofore neglected perceptual side of song learning.