* 8709119
* Solution, Analysis and Control of Simultaneous, Nonlinear,  Dynamic System of Equations on CYBER 205 and IBM 3090
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Albert Ando, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1991
* USD 54,049.00

This project brings the power of the vector processor (supercomputer) to bear on
solving large models of the U.S. economy. The supercomputer is playing a more
and more fundamental role in economic analysis. In the past, models which were
built for analytical tractability often incorporated unrealistic behavioral
assumptions. The supercomputer, due to its speed, has decreased the need for
such a high degree of tractability and allowed for more realistic models.
However, a cost is being paid by researchers trying to use the supercomputer.
The programming code used to solve models on a standard mainframe is not readily
transportable to the vector processor, and typically does not make full use of
the computational speed. At present some economic analysts are doing pioneering
work on developing algorithms and codes for the vector processor to solve
economic problems. This project is part of that work. Technically, Professor
Ando compares the computational power of the CYBOR 205 and the IBM 3090
supercomputers for solving large macroeconomic models. He has shown in past work
that the CYBOR 205 is disappointingly slow in carrying out the necessary
computations. There is evidence that the IBM 3090 is much faster and requires
less modification of code to carry out the same computations. This project
compares the speed and analytical accuracy of the two machines by estimating
stochastic nonlinear equations of a very large model of the U. S. economy. If
such differences in computational speed, set up costs, and coding
transportability are inherent in the machines themselves, this work will provide
very useful information to other researchers doing economic analysis.