* 8709357
* Anatomical Basis for Modulation of Somatosensory Processing in the Rat Thalamus
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1991
* Roger Harris, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 07/31/1991
* USD 198,995.00

Neural impulses carrying somatosensory information to the brain arise from many
sources. Several of the pathways carrying such information include the
ventrobasal nucleus as the last relay station before reaching the cerebral
cortex. For this reason, the ventrobasal nucleus is a candidate as a
somatosensory modulator. The ability to modulate the flow of somatosensory
information has long been believed to be an important component of such
phenomena as selective attention and arousal. This project will be a study of
the anatomy of the major modulatory inputs to the ventrobasal nucleus: an
excitatory input from the part of the cerebral cortex devoted to the
somatosensory system, an inhibitory influence from the thalamic reticular
nucleus and several inputs from the reticular formation of the brainstem. The
studies are being done on brains from rats because the neuronal circuitry of the
rat ventrobasal nucleus is relatively simple for a mammal. The procedures will
include injecting tracers into the somatosensory cortex and the three areas of
the brainstem reticular formation. These tracers will be transported into
corticothalamic and brainstem nerves, allowing the pathways to be visualized on
microscopic examination. Tracers will also be injected directly into thalamic
reticular neurons, allowing them to be seen over their entire extent. Thus, the
terminations and synaptic connections of nerves in the ventrobasal nucleus will
be traced for the first time. This information will provide important leads for
future functional studies of the role of the ventrobasal nucleus in modulating
the flow of somatosensory information to the cortex.