* 8709465
* Numerical Studies of Turbulence-Combustion Interactions in  Diffusion Planes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Ahmed Ghoniem, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 02/28/1990
* USD 141,433.00

The method of "random vortices" is used to describe the generation and later
behavior of turbulence in a chemically reacting flow. This method avoids the
steady state assumption which weakens existing models of turbulence. Although it
has some limitations, it is one of the most promising steps forward in the
numerical analysis of reacting flow fields. An extensive range of Reynolds and
Peclet numbers will be tested in various configurations, with a view to identify
and predict such critical phenomena as stability, extinction, flame stretch,
swirl effect, etc... As the field stands today, large sets of experimental data
are waiting to be used for the verification of such improved comprehensive
numerical models. The availability of a reliable predictive model in turbulent
reacting flow fields has been an elusive goal to the combustion community.
During the last twenty years a number of simplified numerical models have been
tried but with little generic success. This new method introduces vorticity as a
fundamental aspect of turbulence generation; in earlier times insufficient
computer performance had ruled out this important refinement. Success in the
development of this program would open the way for computer codes of increased
flexibility and generality.