* 8709939
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies of Arithmetic Automorphic    Forms
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Yuval Flicker, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1989
* USD 26,600.00

The field of automorphic representations is a meeting ground of various
branches of mathematics -- for example, number theory, Lie theory, algebraic
geometry -- and of mathematical physics. Its origins are found in the attempt to
apply the techniques of infinite-dimensional representation theory of groups to
obtain a deeper understanding of L-series, a dominating concept in number
theory. As a subset of representation theory, great progress has been made in
the past few decades. Thus, one now finds a remarkable expanse of technique and
applications involving the analytic theory of modular forms, trace formulas,
techniques of algebraic geometry, combinatorics, and functional analysis. The
research of Professor Flicker deals with the transfer of automorphic
representations between two groups. Recent collaborative work establishes the
metaplectic correspondence relating automorphic forms on the general linear
group and an arbitrary topological covering. This work develops new techniques
while also simplifying computations. Various applications of these results
comprise Professor Flicker's subsequent work. Current plans call for work in
several directions: Lifting theorems for automorphic forms. Transfer of stable
orbital integrals. Matching of orbital integrals of smooth functions.
Computations of characters and twisted characters. Trace formulas. Ramanujan
conjecture for GL(n) over a function field. Congruence relations. Applications
of the Hecke algebra with respect to an Iwahori subgroup.