* 8709037
* Meeting: Differentiation of Normal and Neoplastic Cells -5thMeeting International Society of Differentiation, Co-sponsorRED Committee, University of Colorado, August 3-7, 1987
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1987
* G. Barry Pierce, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 12/31/1987
* USD 5,000.00

Support is requested for travel for participants to attend the 5th Meeting of
the International Society of Differentiation: "Differentiation of Normal and
Neoplastic Cells" to be held at the University of Colorado, August 3-7, 1987.
The meeting is aimed at bringing together developmental biologists and
oncologists. Topics of common interest will be presented in lectures and
workshops, with time for discussion of posters provided. Emphasis will be placed
on genetics, including instability of the genome, imprinting of the genome,
oncogenes, transgenics, and the nucleocytoplasmic interaction. Teratomas,
leukemia, neuroblastoma, and tumors of the central nervous system as models of
neoplastic development will be discussed in relationship to the development of
their normal lineages and to growth factors. Metastasis and cell migration will
be discussed. This meeting is an unusual one in that it brings together two
groups of scientists whose interactions are not ongoing. Much of the current
work in development and differentiation is important to oncologists. In addition
some of the new cancer therapies are raising basic questions on the processes of
normal development.