* 8709378
* Texture Development in Limestones Deformed at Low Symmetry: Experiment and Theory
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1992
* Hans-Rudolf Wenk, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 10/31/1992
* USD 159,947.00

The proposal, "Texture Development in limestones Deformed at Low Symmetry:
Experiment and Theory," submittedfor renewal of EAR-8406070, addresses
geophysical and geological applications of preferred orientation in deformed
rocks and resulting anisotropy. Textures are measured in experimentally and
naturally deformed samples y U-stage, X-ray and neutron diffraction and derive
quantitative orientation distributions. These measured patterns are then be
compared with theoretical predictions based on the Taylor theory but
incorporating new developments such as relaxed constraints, rate sensitivity anc
cluster model, which provide physically more realistic assumptions than rigorous
homogeneous strain. From the comparison of texture patterns we obtain
information about the strain path (e.g. simple versus pure shear which wer would
like to investigate in the belt of core complexes in the Western United States)
but the Taylor calculations can also be used to evaluate plastic anisotropy and
the most economic strain path. New anisotropic flow laws in rocks with preferred
orientatin take account of anisotropy which ranges between 10 and 20% in
calcite, quartz or olivine rocks. Finally, we use orientation distributions to
calculate elastic anisotropy which is known to exist in the crust and the mantle
and of importance in evaluating seismic data. The study concentrates on
monomineralic rocks but also is extended to polymineralic rocks.