* 8709725
* Study of the Structures, Stabilization Energies and Reactivities of Substituted Methyl and Allyl Radicals and Homotrimethylenemethane Diradicals (Chemistry)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Daniel Pasto, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Thomas C. Farrar
* 06/30/1991
* USD 208,250.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the
research of Professor Daniel Pasto, which aims at an experimental and
theoretical study of the electronic and physical properties of highly reactive
intermediates that contain one or more unpaired electrons. This is an important
area of chemistry because it is becoming increasingly obvious that a great many
reactions that were once thought to proceed by pathways involving only paired
electrons are now known to include open-shell species. Our knowledge of such
free radical species is rather limited and methods for describing their relative
energies and those factors that influence their chemistry are fundamental to an
understanding of mechanistic organic chemistry. The calculations will be focused
upon the stabilization energy to be derived from placing various electron-
withdrawing and-donating substitutents on radical centers. The relative
reactivities of a series of mono- and disubstituted methyl and allyl radicals,
and homotrimethylenemethane(HTMM) diradicals will be examined with a particular
emphasis being placed upon the origin of captodative effects in such open shell
intermediates. Experimental studies on the rate of formation of various HTMM
diradicals and the regioselectivity of reactions of stereoisomerically
substituted allyl radicals will complement the theoretical investigation.