* 8709255
* Study of Anomalous Wavetrains Associated with Long-Period   Spheroidal Mode Overtones
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1987,09/30/1989
* Fumiko Tajima, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Brooking
* 09/30/1989
* USD 40,000.00

This is a proposal for a new project in which is studied anomalous wavetrains
associated with long-period spheroidal mode overtones. The proposed projects
include: (A) Observation of anomalous wavetrains using Global Digital
Seismograph Network (GDSN) and GEOSCOPE records. We will use a stacking
technique (UC contours) to separate modes and examine particle motion tracings
to identify anomalies. A compilation of data sets of anomalous wavetrains caused
by the path effects is essential. (B) Analysis of path-dependent dispersion
relations. Our preliminary study of anomalous surface wave overtones indicates
that this problem is spatially dependent on the path. In this case the local
dispersion relation does not determine the modes of waves. Instead we should
consider an expression that depends on the properties of the mode over its
entire range of wave propagation, so we can use the results to construct the
overall eigenvalues for the system. (C) Collaboration through a work station
network. Our proposed study of surface wave propagation requires a knowledge of
the earth's structure which may also be supplied by tectonic, geodetic and
geological studies. We will exchange data, information and ideas related to the
earth's structure with scientists in different fields through a work station
network.