* 8709846
* Characterization of a Germ Line Expressed Gene of           Drosophilia Melanogaster
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1991
* Robert Schulz, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/1991
* USD 249,000.00

Recent molecular studies have identified the interesting phenomenon of
overlapping genes within the 71CD interval of chromosome 3 of Drosophila
melanogaster. The overlapping genes exhibit distinct patterns of expression: the
E600 gene is blastoderm-stage specific, the overlap (ov1) gene is a germ line
expressed gene, and the Eip28/29 gene is ecdysone inducibe. We believe the
analysis of these genes will allow us to address several important questions
from the standpoint of developmental biology. In this proposal, we focus in on
the expression of the ov1 gene. Strategies involving germ line transformation
will be used to characterize the cis-acting regulatory elements controlling ov1
gene expression. These experiments should help us to understand the kinds of
regulation used in the differential expression of this germ line expressed gene.
We will also investigate the potential effect that overlapping gene organization
may have on ov1 gene expression. The unusual sequence organization may provide
an important regulatory mechanism in the expression of this complex gene
cluster. Finally, experiments utilizing in situ hybridization of gene specific
probes to RNAs in tissue and animal sections should yield a detailed description
of ov1 gene expression during normal development. This is a complex and
interesting system of overlapping genes that are apparently under independent
control with respect to expression during development, tissue specific
expression and hormone dependent expression. Overall, information about this
cluster may lead to a better understanding of the processes involved in the
regulation of gene expression during cellular differentiation, during
gametogenesis and embryogenesis.