* 8709627
* The Role of Appellate Courts in Sentencing Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1987,03/31/1989
* Charles Moore, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 03/31/1989
* USD 25,016.00

Appellate processes in state courts have on the whole been woefully neglected
as an area of social scientific research. They have been particularly ignored
with respect to criminal appeals, a vital area to be examined in view of the
wave of reform that has swept over criminal sentencing in many states during the
past few years. Only a handful of empirical studies of these processes exist.
Dr. Moore's research will not only increase our understanding of the criminal
appeal process, but will reveal the kinds of problems that sentencing reform has
created in a state that has been in the vanguard of the sentencing guidelines
movement. The immediate objectives of Dr. Moore's study are to examine 1)
increases in appellate caseload due to the sentencing guidelines, 2) the area of
sentencing policy generating a given appeal, 3) the extent to which factors
other than sentencing policy explain the tendency to appeal, and 4) appellate
court outcomes. Minnesota is an excellent choice as the research site for the
study since this state has been a pioneer in developing sentencing guidelines
and in involving appellate courts in criminal sentencing. Minnesota's reforms
have been a model for other states and knowledge of their consequences for the
state's appellate courts and the reactions of those courts to reforms will add a
valuable dimension to our understanding of changes in criminal sentencing. The
data set to be compiled and archived includes a comprehensive corpus of
appellate court opinions since the initiation of sentencing guidelines, data on
all criminal appeals, and on sentenced offenders. Thus, this research should add
an important component to our scientific understanding of both appellate process
and a major change in American law--the involvement of appellate courts in
sentencing decisions.