* 8709614
* Improved Meteorological Measurements from Ships and         Buoys for the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE)
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1987,10/31/1991
* Robert Weller, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/1991
* USD 3,094,912.00

The goal of this project is to improve the accuracy, reliability, and
availability of meteorological measurements and air-sea flux estimates made from
buoys and ships. Specifically, over the three year period of the project, the
effort would: (l) Focus on improving the sensors used for meteorological
measurements from buoys and ships with emphasis on adding humidity and longwave
radiation, and on reducing and quantifying errors in both long and shortwave
radiation measurements. (2) Use a commercially available, IBM PC compatible
processor and motion and attitude sensors for intelligent data acquisition; and
incorporate commercially available hardware for telemetry of the data from the
buoys and ships. The power and flexibility of the processor would be exploited
to further reduce error in the measurements. (3) Quantify the accuracy of the
basic measurements made by the sensors and of the resulting estimates of the
air-sea fluxes by conducting laboratory, dock, and field calibrations and
intercomparisons. (4) Deploy, on a dedicated, local surface mooring and on
moorings and ships of opportunity, buoy meteorological systems and ship
meteorological systems for longterm testing in order to discover and then
correct problems that would, in such use, reduce the accuracy and reliability of
the measurements. The work on this project includes strong scientific and
technical cooperation with scientists at the University of California at San
Diego and the University of Southern California. That work is supported under
subcontracts. The overall project is a long lead effort of the World Ocean
Circulation Experiment (WOCE).