* 8709276
* An Experimental Investigation of the Reactivation of Coked  Catalysts under Supercritical Fluid Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Bala Subramaniam, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 12/31/1989
* USD 70,206.00

The objective of this project is to experimentally investigate the reactivation
of coked catalysts using supercritical fluid (SCF) solvents. Specifically, the
following points are addressed: (a) How effective is an SCF solvent in the
extraction of coke forming compounds from a porous catalyst? (b) Is it possible
to maintain catalyst activity in situ by periodically extracting the coke-
forming compounds with an SCF solvent, thus preventing any accumulation of coke
in the catalyst? These questions are addressed through systematic experimental
investigations of the platinum/gamma-alumina-catalyzed isomerization of 1-hexene
-- a reaction system that undergoes simultaneous deactivation by coking. The
reaction is carried out in an autoclave reactor, while catalyst reactivation is
performed in a high-pressure equilibrium cell. The SCF solvent employed is
supercritical carbon dioxide. Besides the possibility of performing catalyst
reactivation in situ, the proposed reactivation scheme also operates at
relatively mild temperatures as compared to conventional processing. Hence any
thermal deactivation of the catalyst and support is minimized. Successful
completion of this project should bring out the potential for devising novel,
energy- efficient catalyst reactivation schemes. Besides, information from this
research also has application in the understanding of SCF extraction of lower
molecular-weight constituents from solid coal or any porous matrix in general.