* 8709968
* U.S. Participation in the XXIInd General Assembly of the    International Union of Radio Science
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Robert Riemer, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Tomas E. Gergely
* 07/31/1988
* USD 20,000.00

Radio Science is a cross disciplinary endeavour, encompassing basic and applied
research in many diverse areas, such as radioastronomy, atmospheric research and
telecommunications. Much of this research is international in character, due
largely to the fact that radio waves do not stop at national boundaries and
propagate over extremely long distances. The international character of radio
science led to the foundation of the International Union of Radio Science
(commonly designated as URSI) in 1919. The aims of URSI are: 1) to promote the
scientific study of radio communications; 2) to aid and organize radio research
on an international scale and to encourage discussion and publication of the
results; 3) to facilitate the standardization of measurements and measuring
instruments; and 4) to stimulate and coordinate the study of the scientific
aspects of telecommunications. URSI accomplishes many of its objectives through
a triennial General Assembly. Proceedings of this meeting are widely and openly
distributed and reach a broad audience. Adequate U.S. participation in the
General Assembly is clearly desirable. Consequently, I recommend that the
National Science Foundation award a Travel Grant to the National Academy of
Sciences to ensure the participation of qualified U.S. researchers at the XXIInd
General Assembly to be held in Tel Aviv, Israel, August 24-September 2, 1987.