* 8709888
* Genetics of Segregation Distortion in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1987,10/31/1991
* Barry Ganetzky, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 10/31/1991
* USD 327,800.00

Segregation Distorter (SD) is naturally occurring meiotic drive system on the
second chromosome of Drosophila melanogaster. Contrary to Mendelian
expectations, heterozygous SD/SD+ males transmit the SD chromosome in vast
excess over the normal homolog. The basis of this distorted transmission
involves the induced dysfunction of the spermatids that receive the SD+
chromosome but the details of the mechanism are unknown. The SD system comprises
at least three distinct genetic components: the Sd, the E(SD), and the Rsp loci.
We have focused on characterizing the properties of these components with the
aim of elucidating the structure, function, and orgin of SD chromosomes and
their dynamics in natural populations. We identified a 12 kb tandem duplication
uniquely associated with all SD chromosomes, which we believe corresponds to Sd
itself, and have identified putative Sd and Sd+ transcripts as well. We will
further characterize these transcripts and their relationship to each other by
Northern analysis, S1 nuclease mapping, and isolation and sequencing of cDNA
clones. Functional tests of the putative Sd clone will be carried out by
P-mediated transformation. Portions of the tandem duplication will be sequenced
to determine its precise structure and to estimate its evolutionary age. The
spatial distribution of the Sd product will be assessed by in situ hybridization
and immunolocalization. Additional experiments are aimed at examining allelic
variation at the Sd locus, the effect of genetic modifiers on its expression,
and its possible homology with other drive systems. We will also carry out
further genetic analysis of E(SD) to test the generality of our observation that
two doses of E(SD) can produce distortion in the absence of Sd and to examine
the basis of this distortion. Genetic tests to assess the possible existence of
weak and strong E(SD) alleles and to discriminate between different hypotheses
for the role of E(SD) in distortion are also planned. Finally, the presence and
frequency of E(SD) on non-SD chromosomes in natural populations will be
determined. The work proposed, as well as the work already done, has significant
implications for our understanding of basic genetic mechanisms. The presence of
SD has a profound effect which can be quantified. Yet, the results of the work
from Dr. Ganetzkys laboratory have demonstrated that the mutation resulting in
an SD phenotype is a 12 kilobase tandem duplication. Such duplications are not
rare so the question is why this particular one has such major effects on the
phenotype of organism. The answers also impinge upon our understanding of both
evolutionary biology and population genetics.