* 8709221
* Neogene Rocks and Faunas, Yushe Basin, Shanxi, P.R.C.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Richard Tedford, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 12/31/1989
* USD 138,660.00

Funds are requested to support two years of research on late Neogene
terrestrial Paleoclimatology, zoogeography, and biochronology of Asia. Pertinent
data are available for the Siwalik group of southern Asia (Pakistan), and
indicate important paleoenvironmental changes through time, reflecting in part,
the development of monsoons. We propose to develop a second data source in the
Yushe Basin, Shanxi, PRC, the longest (late Miocene through early Pleistocene)
sequence of fossiliferous Neogene strata known in eastern Asia. Detailed
knowledge of the faunal history of Yushe Basin, coupled with a precise
chronology based on paleomagnetic reversal stratigraphy, will contribute to
reconstructing Asian terrestrial paleoclimatology. By reference to sequences
from Pakistan and the Miocene oceans, our results will show which terrestrial
climatologic trends were local, and which may have been worldwide in scope.
Development of the vertebrate fossil record of the Yushe Basin will provide
information on mammalian paleobiogeography, with particular relevance to
interchange events with North America. Documentation of East Asian faunal
succession will also provide the biostratigraphic basis necessary to define
Asian provincial mammal ages. The proposed research is a joint project with
Chinese colleagues at the IVPP, Beijing, and our institutions jointly contain
major unstudied fossil collections from Yushe Basin. This proposal is
specifically concerned with augmenting the collections of micromammals, and
constructing a precise magnetochronology, as a contribution of data necessary
for paleoclimatologic, paleobiogeographic, and biochronologic syntheses.