* 8709679
* Mathematical Sciences: Differential Equations, Continuum    Mechanics and Thermodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1990
* James Serrin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1990
* USD 105,642.00

Work will be done in four related areas of analysis. First, radial solutions of
nonlinear partial differential equations will be sought. Existence and
uniqueness of solutions for the ground state problem are of particular concern.
Bifurcation problems for positive solutions of the Dirichlet problem will be
investigated along with a study of critical dimensions for the polyharmonic
operator. Asymptotic behavior and global structure for the generalized Emden's
equation will be analyzed and multi-valued ground states for the mean curvature
operator studied. Work on the foundations of thermodynamics and continuum
mechanics focuses on the existence of entropy and internal energy, especially as
a consequence of non-cyclic thermodynamical laws. A derivation of a generalized
energy equation for weak first law thermodynamics is planned. Emphasis on shock
conditions and shock structure in weak first law thermodynamics will
characterize work on shock wave theory. The Joule-Thompson experiment will be
viewed as a limiting case of shock wave theory. A continuation of a fundamental
derivation of thermodynamics as deduced from mathematical principles will be
pursued. This work relates to several important areas of mathematical analysis
including nonlinear partial differential equations and global analysis. In
addition applications to the study of surfaces of prescribed mean curvature,
thermodynamics and chemical reactions lie close to this undertaking.