* 8709019
* Fundamental Studies of Metal Dispersion for Uniformly and   Nonuniformly Distributed Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* John Regalbuto, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 02/28/1990
* USD 69,960.00

The objective of this project is to establish a scientific basis for the
prediction of catalyst dispersion from fundamental studies of the impregnation
step of catalyst preparation. Techniques must first be developed for this new
approach. Experiments will be designed in which the number of coupled elementary
processes of impregnation is minimized. Thus, the first type of system to be
studied will be adsorption over a planar substrate. A high-resolution electron
microscopy technique will be employed with a special "cold stage" to enable
direct, detailed observation of catalyst precursor morphology just after
impregnation. A second scheme will be designed for strongly adsorbing systems to
permit measurement of an adsorption isotherm from the liquid phase (by atomic
adsorption) and measurement of dispersion directly from the solid phase (by
chemisorption and possibly TEM) for the same catalyst batch. A third apparatus
will be designed to investigate the variation of dispersion with position in
nonuniformly distributed catalysts. Different one-dimensional distribution
profiles will be produced in an elongated catalyst sample, containing sufficient
material so that the bulk metal concentration and metal dispersion can be
measured for discrete sections along the sample length. In all cases, direct
measurements of catalyst dispersion will be compared to existing impregnation
theory. Finally, revised theory will be developed where needed, using as a basis
these relatively simple impregnation systems. These studies are intended to
provide a background to design of catalyst system preparation procedures that
would give predictable results, in contrast to the trial-and-error methods now
in use.