* 8709278
* Engineering Initiation Award:  Analysis of Convective Mass  Transfer During Electrochemical Plating and Etching
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Peter Pintauro, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 06/30/1990
* USD 70,489.00

Research Summary: The objective of this project is to evaluate the accuracy and
study the range of applications of a new, non- contact electrochemical method
for determining mass transfer boundary-layer thickness in natural and forced
convection systems. The method, which will be applied to the electroplating and
electro-dissolution of copper, converts concentration overpotentials after
current interruption to a dimensionless concentration fraction. The experimental
data is then matched to a theoretical electrode surface concentration decay
model. Boundary-layer thicknesses are determined by equating the real time scale
of the experimental data and the dimensionless time scale of the theoretical
analysis. The advantages of the technique over other methods of determining
boundary-layer thicknesses are: a) the technique can be applied to both electro-
deposition and dissolution reactions over a wide range of applied currents, b)
the method can be used to analyze convective mass transfer at irregularly shaped
electrodes and c) the necessary experimental apparatus is simple and
inexpensive. The proposed research regarding this new technique is as follows:
a) theoretical and experimental boundary-layer analyses at a vertical flat plate
copper anode and cathode with natural, forced and mixed natural/forced
convection stirring, b) segmented copper anode and cathode boundary-layer
experiments and c) boundary-layer thickness determinations in a semi-cylindrical
cavity during plating and etching.