* 8709671
* The Role of Education in the Development of a National      Science Tradition
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1988
* David Wilson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 11/30/1988
* USD 18,000.00

Education has played an important role in shaping distinctive traditions in
science. Though we think of science as transcending national boundaries, the way
in which fields of science have in fact evolved conceptually is in important
part due to local concerns and circumstances. Although Scotland is a small
country, its scientists were of major influence and importance in the nineteenth
century. However, little is known of the way physics was taught at the
universities nor of how traditions were established in the culture. Dr. Wilson's
study shows the important role that Scottish institutions played in shaping a
distinctive tradition in physics. His work sheds light both on current
historiographical issues in the cultural influences on science and on the
history of the rise of physics. Specifically, he is writing a history of the
natural philosophy class as taught by the professors of natural philosophy in
the Scottish universities. Though concentrating on the natural philosophy class,
the study seeks to integrate a number of related themes: interactions between
Scotland and other countries, the industrialization of Scotland, the history of
Scottish higher education, developments within other Scottish subjects like
engineering and moral philosophy, and the careers of Scottish students, as well
as the changing definition and content of physics itself. Not only will the
study contribute to our understanding of the development of physical thought
within an important geographical-cultural region, but in doing so, it will also
add to our comprehension of the conceptual development of the several
internationally prominent physicists produced by Scottish universities during
the nineteenth century. Dr. Wilson has established himself as a leading scholar
of the nineteenth-century Scottish influence on British physics and higher
education. His publications on the Stokes-Kelvin relationship, the results of
his prior National Science Foundation support, are an important contribution to
the internal and institutional history of British physics. Moreover, he has
shown a distinct capability for distilling conclusions of broad significance
from his work.