* 8709788
* Behavioral Ecology of Odonates
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Jonathan Waage, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1991
* USD 103,984.00

Dr. Waage's research has three related goals. Although the work focuses on one
species of insect, it has wider relevance to the question of how habitat and
female behavior interact and how they in turn influence male behavior, and it
contributes to the general methodology for experimental testing of hypotheses
under field conditions. Dr. Waage's first goal is to continue to develop methods
for testing hypotheses about the causes of behavior under field conditions. This
is important because many species cannot be raised in captivity and because
experiments done under simplified laboratory conditions may often not reveal
much about about what goes on in nature. Dr. Waage's choice of damselflies as
research animals stems from his familiarity with their biology and his ability
to manipulate individuals and their habitat. For example, his research will
involve creating, removing, and altering egg-laying (oviposition) sites to test
what features of them or their locations are important for choice of these
sites. Determining what influences the choice of oviposition sites by females
and by males of the damselfly Calopteryx maculata- is Dr. Waage's second goal.
Oviposition sites (vegetation in streams) are key resources for individuals of
both sexes. Females use them as places to put their eggs, and males defend them
and use them as places to encounter females. Dr. Waage will investigate what
features of oviposition sites and surrounding vegetation make them attractive to
males and females. He will also investigate why there is so much temporal and
spatial variation among sites in their use by males and females. Answering the
simple question of what determines oviposition-site choices by C. maculata
actually may help explain much of male and female behavior and the interactions
between the sexes. Although this work is on one species, the findings will
contribute to the general body of information on how insects deal with finding
and exploiting resources. The third goal of this project is to test a number of
general ideas currently in the behavioral-ecology literature. Like most rapidly
growing disciplines, theory in behavioral ecology is far ahead of its testing.
Dr. Waage will focus on the idea that female behavior (for example, where they
lay eggs) may underlie or determine much of male behavior (for example, male
choice of places to look for females, or competition among males for access to
such places). Behavioral ecology has long been biased towards explaining things
from the male perspective. These damselflies seem to be ideal animals with which
to explore how male and female behaviors are related. Together with Dr. Waage's
previous work, this project should enable him to show how female egg-laying
behavior influences male behavior and how, in turn, male- female interactions
influence the process of location and use of important resources.