* 8709812
* Psychological Processes in Language Use
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Herbert Clark, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 02/28/1991
* USD 349,713.00

This research, a renewal of Clark's current NSF-supported research project,
addresses two central issues in people's use of language. The first is how
people make sure what they say adds to the conversation they are taking part in.
It isn't enough for them to utter the right sentence at the right time. In
addition, all the parties to the conversation must try to ground the content of
that utterance--establish the shared belief that everyone has understood it well
enough for current purposes. Study 1 will investigate how two people ground what
is said in a conversation when they have to deal with occasional interruptions.
Study 2 will investigate how listeners infer what speakers are thinking when
they hesitate just before or in the middle of an utterance. Study 3 will analyze
the many ways in which speakers and their listeners comment on what the speakers
are actually doing as they speak, with words like uh huh, uh, and well, and with
corrections by the speakers or listeners. Study 4 will investigate the many
techniques by which people accomplish grounding. And study 5 will examine how
speakers use these techniques for "saying" things indirectly or "off the
record". The second issue is how speakers and listeners keep track of changing
perspectives of narratives or other types of discourse, as when listeners try to
follow the viewpoint of the narrator of a story or the attitude and emotions of
a person being quoted. Study 6 will devleop a model of quotation, or direct
speech, in which the quoted words are viewed as a reenactment or demonstration
of what the quoted person actually did. Study 7 will study people's memory for
direct vs. indirect speech in narratives or stories, and Study 8 will
investigate the difficulties speakers have in retelling stories in which they
have to quote themselves and others, and otherwise keep track of changing
perspectives. Study 9 will examine the perspectives people take in making
invitations, offers, and compliments that are pro forma and not intended to be
taken seriously. What makes this work important is that it investigates
interpersonal features of communication that are overlooked in most studies of
language. These features are crucial to the design of complex modern
communication systems, especially those in which computers take the role of
speaker or listener. These systems cannot work efficiently, perhaps even at all,
unless they are able to deal with grounding and perspective, both of which
require the delicate coordination of timing, thought, and actions by two
individuals.