* 8709711
* Molecular Basis of Regulatory Idiotopes
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Constantin Bona, CUNY Mount Sinai School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1989
* USD 82,000.00

Previous studies have led to the definition of a category of idiotope designated
regulatory idiotopes which have been proposed to play an important role in
idiotype-determined regulation of the immune response. High connectivity between
B cell clones with various antigen specificities has been demonstrated, and such
clones can be activated by antibodies specific for regulatory idiotopes. This
phenomenon has been termed "cross-regulation". Furthermore, the majority of
monoclonal antibodies expressing A48 regulatory idiotopes utilized V genes
derived from the VH441-4 and VK10 families. Further studies will be aimed at
exploiting these observations to gain further insight into the cellular and
molecular mechanisms governing the expression of regulatory idiotopes. A rabbit
antibody specific for a synthetic peptide corresponding to CDR1 of the heavy
chain of A48 antibody and hybridomas from non- immunized mice selected with a
VH441 germline gene probe have been prepared. The antibody to the synthetic
peptide will be used to determine whether or not the antibodies sharing
regulatory idiotopes express the same CDR1 sequence as the germline gene from
which the A48 protein is derived. The antibodies produced by the hybridomas
selected from non-immunized mice ("steady state") will be characterized with
respect to their VH and VK families, their idiotypy, and their fine
specificities. This should make it possible to determine the frequency of
regulatory idiotopes in the steady state. The sequence of VH and VK genes
encoding antibodies expressing regulatory idiotopes will be carried out and
should enhance our understanding of the molecular factors contributing to the
expression of regulatory idiotopes. The overall goal of these studies is to
elucidate the immunochemical and molecular basis of regulatory iditopes. This
knowledge should add to our understanding of the mechanisms by which immune
responses are regulated.