* 8709974
* Unsteady Motion in Pipe Flow of Dense Gas-Solid Suspensions REU Supplement
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Shao Soo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 07/31/1991
* USD 233,780.00

Narrative: Unsteady stratified motions have been observed in dense gas-solid
suspensions at moderate and low velocities, but means for prediction are
lacking. This flow range is significant because it is energy efficient for
processing and transport of solids and because it tends to minimize attrition of
solids and erosion of equipment. With test loop systems of 2-inch and 5-inch
pipe diameters capable of continuous recycling of solids, a minimum investment
of solid material is needed for prolonged test runs. The large pipe especially
makes possible detailed observation and measurements. A preliminary study showed
that wave motion and phase interactions at a low velocity can be directly
observed, and comparison to simple wave analysis can be made. At moderate
velocities and large particle densities, measurement of wave motion in terms of
a spectrum based on autocorrelation of probe current or local mass flow was
feasible. The proposed research includes further work on basic formulation and
transport properties, and definitive measurements over a range of unsteady
horizontal pipe flow at first. Both auto and cross- correlations will be
determined at various positions in the pipe over a range of flow conditions and
particles. The aim is toward prediciton of flow conditions and scale-up of
designs.