* 8709785
* Learning in an Invertebrate
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* M. E. Bitterman, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1991
* USD 187,554.00

Although invertebrates comprise more than 95% of all animal species, little is
known of the ways in which they acquire and use information about their
environments. The deficiency is being remedied, in part, by Dr. Bitterman's
intensive study of learning in the honey bee, a highly evolved species which is
readily available in large numbers, which has sensory, motor, and motivational
properties well suited to the research, and which is at the same time of great
agricultural importance. Individual foragers are pretrained to come of their own
accord to the laboratory, where they feed under controlled conditions. The
environmental features about which they learn are tastes, colors, odors, shapes,
air movements, substrate vibrations, local anomalies in the earth's magnetic
field, mild electric shocks, and chemical irritants. (As in work with
vertebrates, learning not only about neutral and pleasant stimuli is studied,
but also about unpleasant stimuli, in this case with some practical implications
for evaluating insect-repellents.) The responses recorded are activity in the
vicinity of a feeding place, extension of the proboscis in anticipation of food,
and leaving a feeding place in anticipation of an impending unpleasant event.
Dr. Bitterman's experiments to date reveal a wide range of detailed similarities
between the learning of honey bees and vertebrates, with nothing at all that is
novel--a surprising outcome in view of the vast differences in neural
organization and complexity as well as the remoteness of the evolutionary
relationship. (The common ancestor of honey bees and vertebrates, which lived
about half-a-billion years ago, had hardly any brain at all.) One focus of Dr.
Bitterman's continuing research is to extend the range of vertebrate learning
phenomena sought in honey bees, with the aim of discovering the functional
differences that must almost certainly exist. A second is to deepen the analysis
of the phenomena already demonstrated to an extent that will permit precise
quantitative statements of the functional principles. The general endeavor of
which this project is a part is to understand the evolution of intelligence in
relation to the evolution of the brain.