* 8709934
* Mathematical Sciences: Lifting Properties of Invariant Kernels and Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,10/30/1989
* Cora Sadosky, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/30/1989
* USD 32,067.00

This research will focus on applications of the theory of generalized Toeplitz
kernels to problems in analysis and probability theory, especially to weighted
norm inequalities and moment problems. One direction this work takes concerns
stationarity of stochastic processes. A generalized notion of stationarity for
such processes arises from the theory of singular integrals through the
consideration of generalized Toeplitz kernels. The characterization of the
processes having covariance kernels that are such was given using lifting
properties of the kernels. The classical stationary processes being those that
have covariance kernels that are Toeplitz or invariant occur as special cases.
Present work is planned in dealing with kernels that are invariant under one-
parameter groups of transformations and the treatment of bidimensional
interpolation problems with a goal of providing a bidimensional version of the
classical Helson-Szego theorem of prediction theory. A second application of
this work will be sought in the study of lacunary coefficients of classes of
analytic functions. The prototype of the theory is in the work of Paley which
asserts that functions in Hardy space with lacunary coefficients are square
integrable . A dual result derives from Hankel forms which are effectively the
mirror images of Toeplitz forms. New results are expected which can be
translated into weighted norm inequalities for Fourier transforms. In addition
to prediction theory this work relates to ideas in quantum theory, scattering
structures and systems theory, as well as moment problems in engineering.