* 8709973
* Fluid Dynamical Models for Determining Wind Characteristics and Their Application in Pakistan
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1987,08/31/1990
* Mariano Estoque, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1990
* USD 77,000.00

This project provides support for research, by Drs. Mariano A. Estoque and T.
Nejat Veziroglu of the University of Miami, and by Dr. A. A. Junejo of
Pakistan's Appropriate Technology Development Organization, and Dr. M.Y. Akhtar
of the National Institute of Power, to develop models for determining detailed
wind distribution over complex terrain, and to apply the models to selected
regions of Pakistan. Input for these models are the prevailing flow field and
geographical distribution of the terrain elevation. The modeling results are
expected to provide data for preparing detailed wind atlases for selected
regions of Pakistan. These will provide important information for the
development of wind energy in that country, both for agriculture and industrial
use. The U.S.-Pakistan Program supports joint research where the technical
capabilities of scientists and the facilities complement each other, and where
the research is likely to benefit both countries. These conditions are met in
this project. The U.S. researchers have worked on energy research for many years
with considerable results and publications. Dr. Estoque has extensive research
experience in meteorology and boundary layer studies. The Pakistani
collaborators are well-qualified scientists with long research experience in
their fields. The research is of particular importance to Pakistan because of
its interest in developing renewable energy sources. It is also important to the
U.S. since modeling weather conditions in various regions of the world could
lead to better understanding of the weather in the U.S. The project has the
support of the Government of Pakistan which is providing the costs of the
activities to be carried by that country's scientists. The project is to be
funded over three years as follows: 1. University of Miami, INT-8709973 FY87:
U.S.$11,000 (INT) + U.S.$10,000 (ECES) + SFC$14,000 (Pakistani currency) FY88:
U.S.$11,000 (INT) + U.S.$10,000 (ECES) 89: U.S.$11,000 (INT) + U.S.$10,000
(ECES) 2. Pakistan's Appropriate Technology Development Organization To be
funded by Pakistan's Ministry of Science and Technology