* 8709108
* REU:  Collaborative Research:  Direct and Indirect Effects  of Fish Predation on the Freshwater Littoral Benthos
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Larry Crowder, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 12/31/1990
* USD 102,109.00

Many ecological communities are structured in ways considerably more subtle and
complex than can be expressed in the standard trophic hierarchy, with its
superimposed layers of predators, potentially cross-linked by competition.
Drawing upon nine years of research on the littoral biota of Bays Mountain Lake
(Kingsport, TN), this project will identify and measure the critical biotic
interactions among the dominant vertebrate predator (redear sunfish, Lepomis
microlophus), the dominant invertebrate predator (larvae of the dragonfly
Tetragoneuria cynosura), and their prey community. The three component
experiments examining these interactions will be conducted: (1) large-enclosure
experiment manipulating two size-classes of fish; (2) a small-enclosure
experiment manipulating small fish and two-year classes of dragonflies; and (3)
laboratory experiments designed to identify the behavioral mechanisms underlying
the field results and strengthen their interpretation. Concepts emerging from
each component will be integrated by the research team to provide a realistic
model of forces structuring littoral communities. These studies are designed to
measure the direct effects of predation, which may result in either increased
mortality or reduced growth or both. Indirect effects of predation will also be
assessed and may be either stimulatory or inhibitory to particular prey.
Interference and exploitation competition is the final aspect which may be
either within or between species. The results will help change our fundamental
assumptions about community organization, and will provide a comprehensive
understanding of one community's structure, including how that structure arises
from underlying behavioral and ecological mechanism. Understanding gained
through this collaborative effort will provide a valuable information base for
fisheries biologists and lake managers.