* 8709905
* The Concepts of Infinity and Continuity
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1989
* John Murdoch, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 07/31/1989
* USD 24,951.00

Bertrand Russell, the famous philosopher, Nobel prize winning author, and, with
Alfred North Whitehead, writer of the "Principia mathematica" which attempted to
establish the foundations of mathematics, referred to the difficulties
surrounding the notions of infinity and continuity as "one of the greatest of
philosophical problems." Indeed, at some time or other in mathematics, physics
or philosophy classes, students are confronted by the paradoxes of motion, first
presented in the Ancient World by Zeno, which deal with the issues of infinity
and continuity. A typical example of Zeno's riddles is the paradox of how one
can ever start a journey if, in order to get somewhere, one must first go half
way; but then to get half way, one must traverse half of that distance, etc.
Since these divisions can go on forever, one can never even begin the journey.
Hence, motion is impossible. Zeno's paradoxes not only provide an easy lesson
plan for introductory science or philosophy classes, but are still debated in
learned texts in the foundations of mathematics. Ancient and modern solutions
are well known. Not so well known, however, are the ingenious and perceptive
answers involving discussions of sophisticated concepts of infinity and
continuity which medieval scholars gave to these problems. It is these little
known developments which Professor Murdoch is examining. He will investigate the
late medieval treatment of the notions of infinity and continuity and the
various problems that were then seen as intimately involved with these notions
and with their interaction with other aspects of medieval science and
philosophy. The results will be two fold. First, Professor Murdoch will provide
an essentially topical history of the medieval discussions of the problems
surrounding the infinite and the continuous with an in-depth treatment of the
context of these medieval discussions and an intensive analysis of the various
medieval topics and aspects of infinity and continuity themselves. Secondly, he
will prepare a number of separate articles on each of the major individuals who
contributed to these discussions. These articles will locate the relevant
examinations within the structure of a single work and within the overall
thought of the author of these individual works. This analysis will greatly
expand our understanding of the development of these vexing issues of infinity
and continuity and will greatly inform contemporary discussions.