* 8709410
* Laboratory and Numerical Experiments on the Effects of      Topography and the B-effect on Baroclinic Flows
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Richard Pfeffer, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 12/31/1990
* USD 500,036.00

The goal of this research is to produce a series of laboratory and numerical
experiments to determine the effects of large-scale topography on baroclinic
flows in thermally-driven, rotating fluids. The B-effect will be simulated with
radially sloping bottom and top boundaries without bottom topography. Starting
with simple 2-wave bottom topography, the PIs will progress to increasingly more
complex topography using the amplitudes and phases of the dominant modes of the
earth's topography in the middle latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. Numerical
models will be modified to include waves over bottom topography and will be
integrated in parallel with the laboratory experiments. These models will
incorporate two versions of the B-effect. In one version, the B-effect will be
incorporated in the governing equations as it appears in the equations for
atmospheric flow. In the other, it will be incorporated in the boundary
conditions by assuming radially sloping bottom and top boundaries as simulated
in the laboratory experiments. The numerical solutions obtained with both forms
of B will be compared in order to assess the degree to which the sloping
boundaries in the experiment capture the essential influence of B on baroclinic
flows. Much interest in the area of geophysical fluid dynamics research is
currently focused on study of topography and rotation induced planetary wave
regimes, and their role in the fluctuations of the mean zonal wind. One problem
with the current batch of theoretical studies of topographic instability is that
there is very little by the way of suitable observations for verifying
predictions of theoretical models. The importance of this project is that
laboratory annulus experiments provide a powerful means for simulating fluid
behavior under various boundary conditions and validating theory. The work
proposed by Dr. Pfeffer and colleagues will investigate through a series of
laboratory annulus and numerical experiments the effects of large scale
topography on thermally-driven rotating fluids.