* 8709820
* The Formation of the Mathematical Community
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1989
* Lenore Feigenbaum, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 06/30/1989
* USD 16,841.00

Scientists do not operate in a vacuum. Even those most "pure" of scientists,
mathematicians, who ostensibly need only pencil, pad, and eraser to carry our
their research, have actually been found to need to communicate with each other
about their research. These social networks of communication help to explain why
certain questions or lines of research are "popular"--even in mathematics--while
others are ignored. Sociologists along with historians and philosophers of
science have long been interested in these so-called "invisible colleges." In
the rise of modern science, we can turn to the correspondence of certain
scientists who served as the conduit for these exchanges of views. The French
priest, Pierre Mersenne, served in this role in the first half of the 17th
century. The secretary of the Royal Society, Henry Oldenburg, played a similar
role in the latter half of the century. As the scientific community grew and
became more specialized, no one person could hold such a central role. For
mathematics in the 18th century, Brook Taylor became for those interested in
what was going on, the major conduit for the mathematical "invisible college."
Known by students of the calculus as the inventor of the series that bears his
name, Taylor played a crucial role in the development of mathematics in the
early 18th century. By virtue of his participation in both the Newton-Leibniz
calculus priority controversy and in the collaborative effort to extend, apply,
and promote the new infinitesimal analysis, Taylor attracted illustrious friends
and enemies in the European mathematical community. Dr. Feigenbaum, under this
grant, is continuing to prepare an annotated edition of Taylor's collected
correspondence, accompanied by an historical commentary. This edition should be
of interest for several reasons. Taylor's letters shed light on the concerns and
activities of British as well as Continental mathematicians, on their
professional and personal connections, and on their forms of communication and
collaboration. Moreover, they help to illuminate the Newton-Leibniz controversy
by supplying us with details missing in the available accounts and by allowing
us to view the dispute from the perspective of those who, if not centrally
involved, were nevertheless deeply affected. They also dovetail with, and
therefore nicely complement, the already existing editions of mathematical and
scientific correspondence of the early 18th century. Ultimately, this study will
contribute to our understanding of the nature and role of scientific communities
and communications in the development of science. The project thus is of great
importance for the history, philosophy and sociology of science.