* 8709319
* Petrologic, Geochemical, and Isotopic Investigation of Gulf Coast Salt Dome Cap Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1987,05/31/1990
* J. Richard Kyle, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 05/31/1990
* USD 105,700.00

Salt dome hosted Zn-Pb-Ba-Ag deposits in the Gulf Coast Region of the United
States offer unique information about the origin and evolution of metal-bearing
brines and ore deposits in sedimentary terranes. The salt dome mineral deposits
have genetic affinities with Mississippi Valley Type Zn-Pb-Ba deposits and
sedimentary exhalative Zn-Pb-Ag-Ba deposits. Our previous studies, most of which
have focused on the petrology and geochemistry of ore minerals, indicate that
these deposits were apparently emplaced during and after the formation of cap
rocks from relatively hot fluids leaking upward along the salt stock margins. We
propose to continue our study, concentrating more on the processes of cap rock
formation than ore mineral formation (1) to better establish the links between
basin brines, cap rocks, and sulfide/sulfate mineral deposits, and (2) to
determine what constituents in the sedimentary section or beneath the salt stock
provided metals and sulfur. Detailed petrographic studies will be integrated
with C, O, Sr, Pb, and S isotope, REE, and fluid inclusion studies cap rocks and
associated minerals. We propose to determine the relative sequence of events
that must take place in a sedimentary basin to produce salt dome mineral
deposits, to characterize the nature of sulfur- and metal-bearing fluids, to
investigate the isotopic relationships between anhydrite cap rocks and salt-
hosted anhydrite to see what reactions involving anhydrite take place during cap
rock formation, and to investigate how fluids in different salt basins may give
rise to distinct isotopic signatures of salt dome cap rocks within that basin.