* 8709329
* Alleghenian Episode of Basin-Wide Illitization in the       Appalachians - A Test of Fluid Expulsion Hypothesis
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* James Aronson, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1990
* USD 128,541.00

The illitization of smectite during diagenesis and burial metamorphism is a
major aspect of shale petrology; K/Ar dating has elucidated the process.
Bentonites simplify the study because they are free of detrital illite/smectite.
Recent research shows that Ordovician bentonites throughout the southern half of
the Applachian basin underwent illitization to potassium (K)- bentonites during
a relatively short episode 300-265 m.y. ago in the upper Pennslyvania- lower
Permian, corresponding to the Alleghenian Orogeny. Some of the K-bentonites are
in close association with Mississippi Valley Type (MVT) zinc deposits. Basin-
wide illitization may be attributed to explusion of edge of the foreland basin
during Blue Ridge overthrusting, a novel hypothesis that is receiving support
from diverse observations by many researchers. If true, the explusion of hot
waters to the distal edges of the basin as of mega-importance to the secondary
history of such sedimentary basins, as outlined in the speculative hypothesis by
Oliver (1986). This project will contrast the geographic distribution of
illitization dates (1) within the Appalachian Basin from south to north, where
the timing and character of the Alleghenian Orogeny may have been different; (2)
between the Appalachian Basin and Illinois Basin along their divide at the
Cincinnati Arch-Nashville Dome; and (3) between the Appalachian and
Ouachita/Arkoma Basins along the strike of the orogen. Finally the petrology of
the smectite to illite reaction in Appalachian shales should provide a marked
contrast with the generally accepted model proposed from deeply buried cases
like the Gulf Coast, where the chemical breakdown of detrital K-feldspar plays a
major role.