* 8709887
* Workshop &amp; Conference on Linguistic, Computational, and     Philosophical Aspects of Generic, Habitual and Mass Terms   to be held Summer 1987 at Stanford University
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Ivan Sag, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 12/31/1988
* USD 14,199.00

Abstract Narrative A key component of linguistic theory is semantics, the study
of what and how linguistic expressions mean. This is in some ways the most
difficult part of linguistics, because meaning is the relationship between what
is said and what is talked about, and what is talked about can in principle be
anything in the universe, true or false, real or unreal. Most of whatever
success there has been in work in linguistic semantics has come about primarily
by virtue of setting strict limitations on the classes of meanings to be
studied. Further progress depends, then, on progressive relaxation of these
limitations, to incorporate broader ranges of linguistic expressions into a
general semantic theory. The aim of the workshop proposed here is to accomplish
such a broadening of the reach of semantics, to a class of phenomena which have
been presenting increasing challenges to semantic analysis under currently
available theoretical models. These phenomena are the generic, habitual, and
mass terms. Generic expressions say something about classes of things, for
example, "Dogs are furry." Habitual expressions describe some kind of activity
which happens regularly, even though it may not be happening at the moment, for
example, "Max reads Time magazine." Mass terms are those which refer to
undifferenti- ated stuff which may be present in greater or lesser quantity, but
can't be counted, like "water" or "salt". There is reason to believe that all of
these types of expressions are related semantically, and that a proper
modification to semantic theory dealing with one type could in principle deal
with the other types as well. These expressions are of particular importance
because they are the typical form of scientific statements, and our failure so
far to be able to perform a satisfactory semantic analysis of them has made it
impossible to deal with such statements in a computational environment. The
participants in the workshop are linguists and logicians who have been trying to
cope with the semantic problems related to this set of phenomena from their own
respective perspectives for some time now. While they have made some notable
progress, each has encountered significant problems, which they believe may be
amenable to attack from the perspective of one of the others. The workshop will
provide an extended period of intensive interaction to allow them to follow up
these leads fully, and report their findings to the rest of the community
interested in these problems.