* 8709760
* Mass Transfer and Flow in Rotary Gas-Liquid Contactors      (Industry-University Cooperative Project)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Milorad Dudukovic, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1989
* USD 133,193.00

Research Summary: Higher mass transfer rates can be achieved in packed bed
rotary devices where the liquid attains an acceleration many times that due to
gravity. There are potential commercial applications in many fields. The
objective of the proposed research is to provide a rational basis for the
scaleup, operation and design of rotary devices for gas-liquid contacting. To
accomplish this goal, the shape, structure, velocity profile and stability of
liquid films in rotors of readily characterizable solid surfaces is first
examined. The penetration model or the convection-diffusion model is then
adapted to develop suitable expressions for the mass transfer coefficients,
including a statistical model for random distribution of solid surfaces. This
provides a rational basis for scaleup. Liquid holdup and texture in the rotating
packed beds is measured by a modified electrical conductivity method thereby
providing additional information on the characteristics of liquid film flow in
these devices. Scientific Novelty. The research has two novel features, (1)
systematic use of sound fundamental knowledge generated in equipment of known
geometry to generate design procedures for equipment which are otherwise
difficult to characterize, (2) development of a modified electric conductivity
method for measurement of liquid-up and texture in rotating equipment. Such
measurements are normally difficult. Practical and Technical Impact. The work
will provide a firm basis for design and thereby increase potential commercial
applications of this device. It is expected that the device would find
application in high purity specialty chemicals which cannot be often readily
produced in traditional equipment. Another potential application is in monomer
stripping in polymerizations. Moreover, as one looks into the future, there is a
need to develop equipment for gas-liquid contacting in outer space under reduced
or zero gravity environment. The proposed research will facilitate the
realization of many of the above possibilities.