* 8709141
* RUI:EIA: Study of Halogen Lamp Rapid Thermal Annealing on   Implanted InP and InGaAs
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Mulpuri Rao, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Queen
* 11/30/1990
* USD 65,000.00

A detailed halogen-lamp rapid thermal annealing study will be performed on Si-
and Be- implanted InP and InGaAs to obtain high quality n- and p-type layers in
these materials. In addition to single implants, some multiple implant schedules
will be used to suit particular device requirements. One-and two-step annealing
cycles will be used on the implanted material. The surface morphology, dopant
activation, carrier mobility, doping profiles, defect density, and energy levels
of the implanted layers will be evaluated by performing scanning electron
microscopy, Hall, transmission electron microscopy, Rutherford back scattering,
photoluminescence, and deep level transient spectroscopy measurements. The
results of the halogen-lamp rapid thermal annealing will be compared with those
obtained from conventional furnace annealing. Light-ion bombardment using H, N,
B, and Be ions into p-type InGaAs will be studied to obtain near-intrinsic,
high-resistance layers and high-speed photoconductive detectors. The variation
of the sheet resistance of the high-resistance layers with different 20 s
halogen-lamp annealing temperatures will be studied to find the critical
halogen-lamp processing temperature above which high resistance disappears. Also
current -voltage, spectral response, optical impulse response, and noise power
measurements will be performed on the photoconductive detectors. The results of
this study will be useful to make high-performance devices using ion-
implantation technology.