* 8709366
* Axonal Outgrowth and Dendritic Development of Cortical      Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1991
* Brenda Claiborne, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Steven C. McLoon
* 08/31/1991
* USD 174,827.00

Since Ramon Y Cajal first described the elaborate shapes of neurons in the
mammalian brain, it has been of interest to understand how the dendritic and
axonal branching patterns of cortical neurons develop. One intriguing aspect of
development is the relationship between axonal outgrowth and the formation of
dendritic structure. In the past, very few studies of cortex were designed
specifically to address this issue, primarily because available morphological
techniques did not favor simultaneous examination of dendritic and axonal
arbors. The technique of intracellular dye injection has overcome this
limitation, but as yet it has not been applied to questions of correlated
dendritic and axonal development in cortex. The objective of Dr. Claiborne's
research is to correlate axon and dendritic development of cortical neurons
using intracellular dye injection and both light and electron microscopic
analyses. The work focuses on two questions: (1) Does synapse formation by the
axon precede dendritic outgrowth? (2) Once dendritic growth is initiated and the
adult pattern of dendritic branching emerging, does further axonal development
occur? These questions will be addressed using an in vitro brain slice
preparation from developing rat pups. The results of her studies will yield
important and useful information on the development relationships between
dendritic branching, axonal branching and synaptogenesis in identified neurons.
Many of the issues to be evaluated are central to defining mechanisms of growth
and differentiation of neurons in the central nervous system.