* 8709401
* The Calculus of Variations for Double Integrals and It's    Application to Theories of Membranes and Elastic Plates
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1989
* Clifford Truesdell, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 06/30/1989
* USD 18,000.00

It is well recognized and increasingly studied that scientific instruments have
transformed the nature of science. The telescope and microscope, for example,
literally opened up whole new worlds for scientific examination. Another kind of
instrument has also transformed science; but, because of the difficulties of
examination of these developments, these instruments are rarely examined with
any kind of historical sophistication. These instruments are new techniques of
mathematics. While Newton's Principia was not written using the new calculus (so
his contemporaries could understand his arguments) Newton's theory could not
have been fully developed with out calculus. Similarly, Einstein's theory of
general relativity could not have been developed without new mathematical tools
which he had to learn in the early years of the second decade of this century.
These are the obvious examples, but there are many, many more which simply have
not been examined. Professor Truesdell, an award winning mathematician and
scientist, has the technical skills and a unique historical sensitivity to carry
out the kind of analysis of the role of mathematics in the development of
science. Under this grant, he will examine a previously completely ignored area:
the history of the calculus of variations for double integrals. Variations of
multiple integrals are essential tools of analysis for contemporary theories of
fluids, elastic solids and electromagnetism. The use of multiple integrals in
the mechanics of continua enables us to comprehend and in part control the world
around us today. Studies thus are possible of the oceans, rivers, lakes, tides
and winds, acoustic vibrations, flight in the atmosphere, and earthquakes just
to give a few examples. The beginnings and the earliest application of
variational principles to double and triple integrals are due to Lagrange in his
work between 1762 and 1811. Lagrange's studies affected the development of the
general theory of elastic deformation in the 1830's by Navier, Poisson, and
Cauchy. They had an obvious effect on the research of George Green and, through
him, have influenced every branch of mathematical physics. Professor Truesdell
will examine this history up through about 1830, tracing the mathematical
development in detail and describing its early application to mechanics and
differential geometry by Lagrange, Poisson, and Rodrigues. This study will
greatly enhance our understanding of the critical interaction of mathematics and
science--an interaction which has literally reshaped every one of the sciences.