* 8709349
* Perception of Binaural and Complex Sounds
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Richard Stern, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1991
* USD 191,200.00

This continuing grant for three years is on auditory perception. The two ears
must be used together, binaurally, for localizing a sound source in space. The
difference for the two ears in arrival time of a signal is the interaural time
delay (ITD), and the difference for the sound intensity is the interaural
intensity difference (IID). The auditory system is very sensitive to small
changes in these cues, and there has been a lot of theoretical interest in how
such cues are used to construct the perception of sound localization. Models to
account for binaural phenomena usually involve a display of interaural cross-
correlation of auditory nerve activity, after some peripheral analy- sis. But it
remains important to know whether the auditory system can extract such
interaural differences when the stimulus is not a simple constant relatively
low-frequency tone pulse, but more complex sounds such as amplitude-modulated
tones or narrowband noise, which have a characteristic "envelope" of frequency
or intensity with time. This project will extend theories of binaural
interaction to desribe and predict results of experiments using complex binaural
stimuli, and using pure tones over a very wide range of frequencies. Two models
will be handled. One will be developed that considers the peaks of
crosscorrelation functions, and how those vary with frequency. A second will
reformulate a model initially designed only for low-frequency stimuli, using an
approach relating auditory nerve fiber responses to high-frequency tones and
broadband noise. The model predictions will be tested by psychoacoustical
experiments, which will be used to distinguish alternative interpretations of
sound lateralization phenomena, and better understand intersubject variability.
This work is an unusually quantitative approach that will have substantial
impact on an important issue in auditory perception. The models dealing with
responses to complex stimuli are likely to influence current research in several
sensory systems where complex stimuli are now being addressed in a quantitiative
way. This work also may lead to potential application for auditory prosthesis or
auditory displays for the blind.