* 8709023
* Experimental Study of Opportunities and Risks in            Taxpayer Compliance
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Russell Weigel, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 11/30/1989
* USD 22,156.00

Why taxpayers do or do not comply with tax laws is emerging as a focal point of
scholarly research. Individual taxpayers' perceptions of opportunities and risks
associated with cheating influence their patterns of noncompliance with income
tax laws. The interpretive limitations of the survey methods that typify past
research in this area have underscored the need for experimental approaches
capable of more direct testing of causal hypotheses. Dr. Weigel's research
addresses this need by embedding the tax compliance task within a larger
experimental task that requires tax calculation. In the context of a small
business management task, Dr. Weigel rigorously compares a random sample of
college students with one of middle-aged, experienced taxpayers, testing the
effects that a variety of situational conditions--high or low opportunity to
cheat and high or low withholding taxes that create loss or refund situations--
have on compliance behavior. In addition, an opportunity for further comparison
with a third sample of taxpayers is afforded by his collaboration with scholars
in the Netherlands. An important scientific contribution that Dr. Weigel's
research makes is not only to examine tax compliance in an experimental context,
but, specifically, a context that simulates a real-life tax declaration
situation and thus provides a particularly good opportunity to understand the
decisionmaking process.