* 8709970
* RUI: Language Variation and Syntactic Change in St.         Barthelemy, French West Indies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Julianne Maher, Marist College
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 01/31/1989
* USD 8,996.00

Abstract Narrative Most creole languages evolved in a plantation setting, in the
context of contact between a metropolitan language spoken by the plantation
masters and one or several indigenous languages spoken by the workers, and the
theoretical study of creole languages has depended heavily on this context. The
French creole of St. Barthelemy (St. Barth) in the French West Indies is an
exception. There was never a plantation economy (the climate and terrain of the
island would not support it), and never a significant black population.
Nonetheless, the inhabitants of St. Barth speak, according to the small amount
of linguistic investigation that has been done there, several distinct creole
varieties, a surprising phenomenon in view of the history and very small size of
the island. The Principal Investigator proposes to undertake a systematic
examination of the linguistic situation on St. Barth, initiated with a summer
field trip to gather data. She is well prepared to carry out this project, by
virtue of the dissertation research she has recently completed on language
variation in the language enclave situation. In addition to the project's
potential for increasing our understanding of the dynamics of creole languages,
the Principal Investigator's participation in the project will enhance the
teaching of undergraduate students interested in linguistics at the
undergraduate institution which is the project's home.