* 8709552
* INTER- AND INTRA-ANNUAL VARIABILITY IN AN INTERACTIVE       OCEAN-ATMOSPHERE CLIMATE SYSTEM
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Robert Gallimore, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 06/30/1990
* USD 185,800.00

This project will investigate the earth's climate variability in an interactive
ocean-atmosphere system as modeled by a low-horizontal-resolution general
circulation model that includes a mixed-layer ocean component. The focus will be
on the inter- and intra-annual variability aspects of the annual cycle. Very
long model simulations (in the range of 50 to 100 years) will provide
substantive statistical representations of the relevant variability events.
Analyses will focus on assessing (1) SST variability characteristics, (2) the
relationship between atmospheric circulation anomalies and SST anomalies and (3)
the role of ocean-atmosphere energy exchange in forcing variability. Additional
simulations which include cases with prescribed sea surface temperature or
atmospheric conditions will help in determining cause/effect relationships
between SST and atmospheric variability. On time scales beyond a few weeks, the
oceans strongly influence the earth's climate. A productive approach to studying
the processes leading to that influence and the feedback to the oceans by the
atmosphere is interactive models. It is expected that the study will (1) provide
understanding of the role of thermodynamical ocean-atmosphere interactions in
producing tropical and extratropical variability of climate, (2) help in the
assessment and interpretation of more complex systems which incorporate internal
ocean processes and dynamic ocean-atmosphere interactions, and (3) provide
insight into fundamental aspects of climate variability such as predictability
and cause/effect relationships between the ocean and the atmosphere. This
research is relevant to the World Climate Research Program's Tropical Oceans-
Global Atmosphere Program (TOGA).