* 8709456
* Slab Diffracted S Waves
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Vernon Cormier, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Brooking
* 02/28/1990
* USD 129,286.00

Inversion of P wave arrival times has found that lithospheric slabs frequently
penetrate beyond the cutoff in the seismicity evident in Wadati-Benioff zones.
Synthetic seismograms are calculated for teleseismic S waves radiated by a deep
focus earthquake occurring within a slab that penetrates to 1200 km depth. The
synthetics demonstrate a phenomenon of slab diffraction that acts to lengthen
the apparent pulse width of the S wave. The slab diffraction is observed in all
azimuths on the dipping side of the slab evolving into a prominent secondary
phase along strike, and rapidly decaying on the side opposite to the dip.
Broadband S waves are shown, which suggest the existence of slab diffraction in
data. Amplitude ratios used in studies of mantle attenuation, D" structure, and
core structure may also be affected by the focusing and defocusing effects of
the high velocity perturbation of the slab. It is proposed to use a
WKBJ/Gaussian beam method to synthesize the effects of slab diffraction in
three-dimensional models in an effort to further constrain and invert for slab
structure. An investigation will also be made of the contaminating effects of
slab structure in other studies of mantle and core elastic and anelastic
structure that use waveforms and amplitudes of body waves from deep focus
earthquakes.