* 8709418
* The Rationality of Collective Political Action
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Henry Dietz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1990
* USD 150,992.00

This investigation tests, cross-nationally, alternative specifications of a
rational choice theory of participation in both legal and illegal forms of
collective political action, using a maximum-difference research design that
entails two-wave panel surveys in the Federal Republic of Germany, Israel, and
Peru. The portion of the study supported by the Foundation is the research in
Peru. In the research the concept of collective political action is defined
broadly to include a variety of behaviors by which groups exert influence on
public policy, including actions that are more or less conventional in
democracies, such as communal activity and legal protest, as well as illegal
acts of civil disobedience and political violence. The generalizability of the
hypotheses about determinants of collective political action will be assessed by
subjecting them to multiple tests within and across countries, and dynamic
relationships will be investigated by means of a panel design. The project will
advance the study of political participation in three ways. First, from a
theoretical perspective previous research has tended to be somewhat ad hoc. The
rational choice models to be tested in this project differ in the extent to
which they modify important assumptions of the "economic" approach to
rationality. Moreover, the project will determine the extent to which other
hypotheses - - especially those of relative deprivation theory and the
socioeconomic and resource mobilization approaches - - can be integrated into a
rational choice explanation of collective political action. Second, prior
research has tended to focus exclusively on the industrial/post-industrial
societies of North America and Western Europe, all of which have very high
levels of economic development, non-repressive democratic regimes, and
relatively homogeneous, "modern" cultures. A major step forward in the field of
political participation research will be to determine the extent to which
relationships found to hold in advanced industrialized societies can be
generalized to less developed countries. Thus, in addition to an instance of an
advanced European country, West Germany, the research design includes Israel, a
semi-developed country in the Middle East, and Peru, a relatively poor
developing country in Latin America. These countries differ in regard to many
important political, social, and economic characteristics. They are appropriate
sites, therefore, not only for a strong test of the generality of the rational
choice model but also for investigation of a variety of contextual interaction
effects between macro and micro determinants of collective politcal action.
Third, previous studies usually have been cross-sectional and correlational,
permitting only weak inferences about causality. The research design in this
investigation includes a two-wave panel survey, which allows a test of
hypotheses concerning the flow of causality directly and an opportunity to model
reciprocal relationships between attitudes and behavior. In summary, the
rational choice models tested in this project are more comprehensive, more
carefully specified, and more rigorously operationalized than in prior studies.
They integrate and subsume a variety of social-psychological variables that have
been included in previous investigations of the determinants of political
participation.