* 8709533
* Gender Differences in Mathematics Performance: Meta-Analysisand Cognitive Analysis
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1990
* Janet Hyde, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 08/31/1990
* USD 218,926.00

There are now available more than 100 studies providing data on gender
differences in mathematics performance, many of them having tested literally
thousands of subjects. What is needed is a systematic, meta- analytic synthesis
of the existing studies. The objective of the research is to clarify the nature
of gender differences in mathematics performance. A detailed meta-analysis of
gender differences in mathematics performance, combined with a cognitive-
processing analysis, will address important and complex developmental and
cognitive issues. In particular, the proposed project will provide answers to
the following questions: (1) What is the magnitude of gender differences in
mathematics performance, using the d metric? (2) "Mathematics achievement" is a
general term encompassing a wide variety of tests, including simple tests of
mathematics facts (addition, multiplication problems), word problems, geometry
problems, calculus problems, and so on; does the magnitude of the gender
difference vary on these different tasks, perhaps being close to zero on some
and large on others? (3) Developmentally, at what ages do gender differences
appear or disappear, and on which kinds of tests? (4) Combining Hedges'
homogeneity statistics (Hedges, 1982, Journal of Education Statistics) with
cognitive processing analysis, do males and females differ in some cognitive
processes related to mathematics performance, but not on others? (5) To what
extent do affective variables (such as confidence, anxiety, attributions, and so
on) mediate the gender differences in mathematics performance? The results of
the research can make contributions to basic science by providing answers to the
questions summarized above. In addition, the research has potential implications
for mathematics education (and in turn for science and engineering education,
insofar as they are dependent on mathematics education), particularly for sex
equity in mathematics education.