* 8709972
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research in Microzonation Analysis of Reconstruction Opportunities in Coastal Areas of Mexico
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1987,10/31/1989
* Jane Preuss, Urban Regional Research
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1989
* USD 16,265.00

This award will enable Jane Preuss and a colleague of Urban Regional Research,
Seattle, Washington, to collaborate with Salvador Farreras and Francisco Suarez
of the Center for Scientific Research and Higher Education of Ensenada and
Antonio Sanchez of the Naval Oceanographic Research Station, Ensenada, Mexico,
in an analysis of the impact of the 1985 Mexican earthquake on coastal
communities. They will also analyze the vulnerability to earthquake hazard of
selected western coastal Mexican communities and develop recommendations for
reducing vulnerability to future earthquakes and other coastal hazards, such as
storm surges and hurricanes. The Mexican earthquake produced unexpected damage
in some areas and left other likely areas unscathed. The study will attempt to
get a clearer understanding of the pattern of seismic hazard to coastal
communities by evaluating both ground motion and other geophysical data and the
structural engineering and urban design components of the seismic and tsunami
wave damage along the coast. The geoscientific analyses of conditions related to
the hazard will be done by the Mexican team, which has expertise in geology and
physical oceanography. The U.S. team, which has expertise in urban planning and
structural design for natural hazard mitigation, will be responsible for
recommendations for microzonation/urban planning and for the design aspects of
reconstruction and long-term mitigation. Both groups are well-qualified for
their components of the cooperative project. The results of this study will be
useful to planners in the U.S. and elsewhere where coastal communities may be
susceptible to such disasters. The results will be of particular value to the
Mexican government in evaluating the feasibility of targeting selected coastal
communities for growth as a part of its reconstruction and decentralization
strategies.