* 8709889
* Petrogenetic Processes near OSCs and Transforms Inferred    from the Chemistry of Seamount Lavas:  Constraints on the   Deep Thermal Structure and Processes beneath EPR Offsets
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1987,03/13/1989
* Rodey Batiza, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 03/13/1989
* USD 199,943.00

Hot mantle material upwelling in a broad zone beneath active ridge crests like
the East Pacific Rise (EPR) melts to provide magmas feeding the narrow axial
neovolcanic zone plus active near-axis seamounts. Knowledge of the thermal
structure, mantle flow patterns, melt-generation sites, and conduit and storage
geometry within the broad subaxial zone is important for understanding magma
supply and tectonic processes at active ridge crests. This study will complement
on-going studies of EPR axial processes by integrating the results of new
seamount petrologic study in order to construct a fuller, more comprehensive
picture of the thermal structure and petrogenesis beneath the broad subaxial
zone. Active seamounts near the EPR axis occur at along-axis depth minima and
offsets (OSCs and transforms). The former type are well-studied and these
studies provide several testable hypotheses for the interaction of axial and
seamount petrogenetic processes. In contrast, seamounts at offsets have received
no systematic study. Proposed in this study is a 30-day seabeam/dredging program
to survey and sample 25 seamounts (87 dredges) in various tectonic settings at
OSCs and transforms and to complete a petrologic/geochemical study of the
samples. The goals of this study are to chemically characterize the lavas of
seamounts at offsets and to use that data to test half a dozen discrete
hypotheses for the origin of seamounts at offsets, mantle flow and melting
processes, and magma supply geometry at depths beneath the EPR and its
surroundings. The petrogenetic interpretation of the seamount lavas will be
combined with interpretations for the origin and evolution of coeval, EPR axial
magmas to gain a broader understanding of petrogenetic-tectonic processes
occurring beneath the EPR. The study has been designed to minimize potential
problems of spatial/temporal correlation.