* 8709489
* Universities' Research Conference, Cambridge, Massachusetts,Fall of 1988
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Geoffrey Carliner, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 01/31/1990
* USD 112,640.00

This grant supports the continued semi-annual meetings of the Universities'
Research Conference (URC). The purpose of these conferences is to bring together
economists from across the U.S. for two days of discussions on a specific topic.
Conference topics are chosen for their relevance to current economic policy
discussions as well as their interest to academic economists. Recent conferences
have focussed on international aspects of fiscal policies, monetary policy,
government spending programs, and unemployment. Papers for presentation at the
conferences are solicited from over 80 economics departments and 50 business
schools. Conference organizers are careful to select a mix of established and
less well known researchers. Discussants and other conference participants are
also chosen to encourage interaction among economists with similar interests at
different universities. A typical conference includes 8 to 10 papers and about
80 participants from 25 different universities. This is a unique and valuable
forum for researchers who otherwise might have little opportunity to interact
with other specialists in their field. Past conferences have been well run. The
quality of the papers presented was high. Participants benefitted from the
formal presentations and the informal interactions. The conference organizers
have the ability to continue this successful conference series.