* 8709198
* Logical Computation Associative Storage and Self            Organization in Neural Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Santosh Venkatesh, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sarah A. Clark
* 06/30/1990
* USD 70,000.00

Neuro-anatomical models of brain function have proved fertile ground in the
development of efficient computational structures in recent times. Keynotes of
these structures include a high degree of parallelism, distributed storage of
information, robustness and fault- tolerance, and the usage of very simple
processing elements individually performing tasks of low computational
complexity. These characteristics of neural networks lend themselves to a
plethora of engineering problems. Applications include (i) image and signal
processing, and particularly inthe areas of robot and computer vision, and
automatic speech generation and recognition, (ii) associative and content-
addressable memories with applications to a variety of areas including expert
systems utilizing large data bases, automated directory assistance, and coding
and decoding systems, and (iii) adaptive systems capable of self-organization
and "learning." These applications utilize fully the high degree of parallelism
and the distributed format of inormation storage in these networks. Rapid
convergence results typically, as a consequence of the highly parallel
operation. In addition, the distributed storage of informationresults in a
robust, fault-tolerant system. This is a particularly appealing feature for
systems in hostile environments, and for applications where constant monitoring
is unfeasible as in space-borne systems. Another feature useful in practice is
the utilization of very simple computational elements as the basic component of
these networks. This augurs well for the possibility of low cost, mass
production of these networks for specific applications. The area has a
particularly rich inter-disciplinary flavour. Engineering analysis, architecture
design, and development of materials for these networks exist symbiotecally with
investigations in artificial intelligence and parallel computing in computer
science, spin glasses in statistical physics, and modelling of neural phenomena
in neurobiology.