* 8709257
* PRIMITIVE LAVAS, CHEMOSTRATIGRAPHIC VARIATION AND MAGMATIC  EVOLUTION IN THE KEWEENAWAN MID-CONTINENT RIFT
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Jonathan Berg, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 12/31/1989
* USD 79,000.00

The Keweenawan rocks of the Lake Superior region afford an excellent opportunity
to study contemporaneous volcanic and plutonic activity associated with
continental rifting in the Proterozoic. By comparing genetically related
volcanic sequences and plutons on a regional basis, a range of basic problems
can be addressed. In a pilot study the PI has discovered very primitive basaltic
and picritic lavas near the base o the Mamainse Point Formation (MPF) in
Ontario. These lavas display spectacular quench-olivine textures and systematic
chemical variations with stratigraphy. This project will sample the remaining
four-fifths of the MPF and analyze for major and trace elements by XRF and DC
plasma spectrometry. Mineral chemistry will be determined by electron
microprobe, and geochemical modeling will be attempted in order to delineate the
processes responsible for the origin and compositional evolution of this
important volcanic sequence. Results will be used to evaluate the hypotheses
derived from previous work, and to determine the relationship between the
plutonic and volcanic rocks. An attempt will be made to characterize the nature
of the subcontinental mantle source and to evaluate possible relationships
between these lavas and plutonic anorthosite complexes.