* 8709250
* Information and Debt Markets: Reputation, Financial         Intermediation and Optimal Maturity Structure
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,07/01/1988
* Douglas Diamond, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 07/01/1988
* USD 0.00

This project makes a significant contribution to an increasingly important line
of research in financial economics. It examines the relationship between
borrower and lender in the credit markets, specifically looking at the effects
of information, particularly when the borrower and lender have different
information about each other. The important roles of financial institutions and
the details of financial contracts have only recently been addressed by economic
theory. Past research has shown that the provisions of contracts have virtually
no effect on the real variables in an economy if both parties to the contract
have all the information available. This, however, is not a realistic situation.
Typically, a lending institution such as a bank does not know as much about the
borrower's ability or inclination to repay a loan as the borrower does. Thus
banks and other lending institutions face risk in making a loan. That risk is
ameliorated as the bank accumulates more information about the client. For
example, the bank can realistically be more certain that a client who has a long
history of repaying loans will repay the next loan, than that a new client will
repay the loan. Reputation clearly plays an important role in both the
borrower's wish to acquire a loan and in the lender's desire to let one. This
project specifically analyzes the value of reputation to a borrower. In a game
theoretic framework Professor Diamond examines how firms choose to accumulate
investment capital, either through loans or by selling stock directly to the
public. These decisions are very important in that in the aggregate they have a
great impact on the financial sector, the availability of credit to other firms
and consumers, and the incentives for banks themselves to take risks.