* 8709971
* Application of Plant Biotechnology in Forestry: A U.S.-Indo Workshop, January 12-14, 1988, New Delhi, Award in U.S.and  Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1987,11/30/1988
* Ralph Mott, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1988
* USD 41,000.00

Description: This project supports a U.S.-Indo workshop on application of plant
biotechnology in forestry. The meeting which is organized by the Tata Energy
Research Institute (TERI) in New Delhi and a U.S. team headed by Dr. Ralph Mott
of North Carolina State University will cover the relatively specific aspects of
biotechnology and genetic engineering that are more usable in forestry
application. These include tissue culture techniques and genetic manipulation of
woody plants, as well as study of the drawbacks to nitrogen fixation application
in forestry. The workshop is designed to articulate the issues of transfer of
scientific developments in biotechnology to field implementation programs, to
identify specific gaps in the literature in this field and to compile recent
contributions to fill this gap, and to identify specific research needs for
possible collaboration. Scope: This project fits well the objectives of the
U.S.-India program in its dealing with an area of science that is of great
interest to U.S. and to Indian scientists and where the cooperating scientists
are leaders in the field. The Indian institution TERI is a relatively new
private research organization with extensive ongoing research programs in areas
of energy including heavy emphasis on forestry and biomass. It has a large well
trained staff most of whom have extensive research background in biotechnology.
The U.S. scientists are active researchers in the field of biological sciences
and its application to forestry. The meeting is likely to stimulate strong
collaborative research.