* 8709345
* Explaining Agrarian Change
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1988
* Daniel Little, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 06/30/1988
* USD 29,259.00

Dr. Little is undertaking an examination in the philosophy of the social
sciences organized around four recent controversies in empirical agrarian
studies. His study is designed to permit the formulation and analysis of topics
in the philosophy of social science that are concretely related to the current
practice of social science. This investigation analyzes the main theoretical and
methodological controversies in these four debates and attempts to determine how
these theories illuminate issues in the philosophy of science. The primary aim
of this investigation is to arrive at a more detailed and accurate
representation of the logic and diversity of social science than is available in
the philosophy of science literature today. This study will shed new light on
traditional problems in the philosophy of social science, and it will suggest
new problems for further research within this area. A second goal of this
research is to contribute substantively to ongoing debates in the concrete areas
under scrutiny. Experience in other areas of the philosophy of science shows
that philosophical examination of current empirical research can be of
significant benefit to the practicing scientist in clarifying conceptual
puzzles, analyzing issues in the logic of explanation and confirmation, and the
like. Many of the issues in the area of agrarian studies which Dr. Little is
examining are ones that cut across disciplinary boundaries and involve abstract
philosophical concepts like rationality, community, or moral values. A
philosopher's treatment of these issues in their context in the empirical
literature should be of interest to the practitioners themselves. Thus the
research produced from this project promise to be of great interest to both
philosophers and social scientists.