* 8710087
* Estrogen Stimulated Calcium Dependent Uterine Proteinase
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1987,04/30/1991
* Katherine Henrikson, New York State Department of Health and Health Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 04/30/1991
* USD 208,600.00

Uterine arginine esteropeptidase is an estrogen-responsive enzyme complex. It
consists of 2 components: a membrane-bound activator (A)and the 78 kDa proenzyme
of a trypsin like serine proteinase (B). Activation of the proenzyme is calcium
dependent and involves no change in molecular weight. B hydrolyzes arginine
esters and actin and myosin. Both A and B increase in activity in the uterus
when estradiol (E2) is given to the rat. The increase in A and B activity are
hormone and tissue specific. To test the hypothesis that this enzyme is
important in the development of the uterus studies are proposed in three areas:
1)the mechanism of activation of B by A and the role of calcium, 2) the
mechanism ofthe E2 response, and 3) studies directed toward identification of
the functions of A and B. Estrogen stimulation of the immature rat uterus has
pleiotropic effects which are not well understood at the molecular level.
Responses in the first few hours after stimulation include the induction of new
protein synthesis, major changes in membrane permeability, and alterations in
the specific activity of some enzymes. Later responses, 24-48 hours after
stimulation, include DNA synthesis and cell division. One of the early responses
is the increase in specific activities of the two components of the complex
calcium dependent enzyme that is the subject of this study. The results of this
research will contribute to our understanding of the mechanisms by which
estrogen affects uterine growth and development.