* 8710374
* Single-Input and Multiple Out-put Ports Energy Dissipating  Mechanisms for Improved Vehicle Crashworthiness
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Ashok Midha, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1991
* USD 90,000.00

The objective of the study is to evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of
integrating a multidirectional energy absorbing device into the front frame of
an automotive structure to allow for maximum energy absorption with reduced
longitudinal deformation. The premise is that the application of a single-
input, multiple-output mechanical device to the frame of a vehicle could
dissipate energy in mutually orthogonal directions, thereby absorbing
significantly more energy with a smaller longitudinal displacement. Therefore,
the likelihood of passenger compartment intrusion and occupant injury would be
greatly reduced. The plan for completion of this study involves four phases:
Phase I involves research in the area of single-input, multi- output devices.
Phase II, the Design Phase, involves preparation of a preliminary design for
integration of such a device into a vehicle structure. Phase III, the Modelling
Phase, involves a mathematical model of the designed system with simulated mass
distributions. The response of the system, possibly under various impact
conditions, is determined. Phase IV, the Verification Phase, determines the
degree of correlation between the analytical prediciton of Phase III and the
experimental data acquired in Phase IV. The experimental data may be gathered by
testing of a scale model. The project is one supported under the Creativity
Awards for Engineering Students.