* 8710243
* An Investigation of the Cellular Events that Initiate and   Control the Deposition of Patterned Walls in Plant Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1987,09/30/1991
* Candace Haigler, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/1991
* USD 248,000.00

This research will exploit a unique developmental system (in which mesophyll
cells of >Zinnia> >elegans> differentiate in suspension culture to form
tracheary elements with distinctly patterned secondary walls) in order to obtain
a more integrated view of how higher plant cells initiate and control the
deposition of a patterned wall. Five major areas of reserach will be conducted
to meet this goal: (1) Light and electron microscopy to clarify the timing and
cytology of differentiation; (2) Investigation of the role of microtubules; (3)
Investigation of the role of microfilaments; (4) Investigation of the role of
the Golgi apparatus and the functional life of rosettes (particles associated
with cellulose synthesis) in the plasma membrane; and (5) Investigation of
calcium.mediated events critical to the initiation and continuation of
differentiation. Light and electron microscopy (coupled with immunochemical and
cytochemical probes) will be used to monitor changes in differentiation.related
cellular processes before and after application of antagonistic drugs. The
results of this study will increase our knowledge of how diverse cellular
features function together in the control of a well.defined developmental event.
They will also enhance our understanding of the control of plant morphogenesis,
which is partly determined by the pattern of microfibrils in cell walls.