* 8710142
* An Investigation of the Photochemical Properties of         Transition Metal Arene Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Kent Mann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 02/28/1991
* USD 163,294.00

This project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
is in the area of organometallic photochemistry. The results are expected to
answer important questions concerning the mechanisms of light-induced reactions
of organometallic compounds and may also provide useful methodology for the
synthesis of thin films of organometallic compounds. The focus of the project is
photochemical and thermal arene replacement reactions of transition metal
complexes. New laser dye complexes of CpRu(+) and Cp(*)Ru(+) will be
synthesized,and the emission and photochemical properties of these new
chromophores will be investigated. Mechanistic studies of arene release from
CpRe(arene), from CpMn(biphenyl) and from bis(arene)Re(+) will focus on the
importance of hapticity changes in the photochemical and thermal reactions of
metal-arene and related compounds. The differences between photochemical and
thermal arene displacement will be investigated by kinetic studies and through
spectroscopic identification of reaction intermediates. Reaction intermediates
will be characterized using rapid scan diode array and FT-IR spectrometers.
Flash photolysis studies will be initiated to measure the kinetics of metal-
arene dynamics by transient absorption and emission lifetime measurements. The
mechanism of epoxide polymerization by CpFe(arene)+ complexes to produce thin
films will be studied, and this reaction will be extended to produce chiral
polymers by using chiral iron complexes as the photochemically active species.