* 8710795
* Economic Effects of Alternative Compensation Systems
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Derek Jones, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1989
* USD 36,842.00

Much recent economic research has focused on compensation systems for labor and
management which might be an effective alternative to the wage system. Most of
the attention has centered on a system of profit sharing or employee ownership,
wherein workers are compensated not only by wages but also by a share of the
firm's profits. Of particular interest to both academicians and policy makers is
the enormous potential importance of structures internal to the firm, especially
those that provide for flexible pay, in determining macroeconomic outcomes.
There are, however, many other possible sharing arrangements, and in principle
they will also have many ramifications other than affecting inflation,
unemployment and other macoreconomic variables. They could as well affect
investment decisions and productivity. Past work has shown that sharing schemes
take one of four different basic forms: 1) arrangements in which employees are
remunerated by a share of the firm's profits but do not own stock nor exercise
managerial control in the firm, 2) systems where employees own shares in the
company, but have no role in the decisions of management, 3) firms which are
managed entirely by labor, and 4) firms in which labor and management share in
the decisions. Many specific arrangements are variations on these four basic
configurations. Given the importance of profit sharing systems, there is a
dearth of solid empirical work done on these issues. This project fills that gap
by generating rigorous econometric evidence on the association between degrees
of profit sharing and various economic indicators including productivity,
investment rates, enterprise formation, and firm survival. Using a very rich and
detailed set of panel data previously constructed by Professor Jones on profit
sharing firms in Great Britain, France, and the United States, this project
provides estimates of labor and wage equations, production functions, and
productivity equations. These enable Professor Jones and other researchers to
ascertain the structure and the mechanism by which labor compensation
arrangements affect the macroeconomy.