* 8710578
* Asymmetric Information Models of Law Enforcement and        Regulatory Compliance
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1989
* Jennifer Reinganum, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1989
* USD 78,705.00

Economic considerations have an important influence on the outcomes of two-party
bargaining situations which are subject to enforcement by law. Drs. Reiganum and
Wilde seek to extend their earlier work under NSF support, which focused on the
conditions that engender income tax compliance, to a variety of problems
involving bargaining situations in the areas of tax compliance, plea bargaining,
and regulatory compliance. They make a series of different assumptions
concerning human behavior and then examine and compare the outcomes of the
situations which follow from these different assumptions as well as the degree
to which these outcomes can be predicted. The models they formulate to study
these problems use analytic techniques from economic theory and the theory of
incomplete information. The research of Drs. Reiganum and Wilde addresses
several fundamental questions regarding compliance in the face of asymmetric
information: To what extent does prosecutorial discretion affect bargaining
between prosecutors (as agents of society) and defendants over reduced sentences
in exchange for guilty pleas? How does uncertainty on the part of taxpayers
affect their compliance behavior, and how does the incorporation of third-party
"expert advisors" affect compliance and Internal Revenue Service auditing? How
does a firm undertaking toxicity testing decide whether or not to apply to the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for permission to manufacture the new
chemical and how, in turn, does the EPA choose to accept the firm's application
or, alternatively, to conduct a costly audit of the firm's test results? The
rigorous theoretical analysis of Drs. Reiganum and Wilde promises to further
illuminate the causes and underlying dynamics of compliance and thus is of
substantial scientific significance.