* 8710882
* Collaborative Research in The Growth and Decline of State   Public Assets: A Study in Instrutional Political Economuy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1990
* John Jackson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/1990
* USD 33,734.00

The New York City and Cleveland fiscal crises of the 1970's, the decay of public
infra-structures, growing public employee pension debt, and the increased
incidence of shortfalls in the cash budgets of state and local governments
suggest that not all state and local governments stand on a firm fiscal base.
Recent and continued cutbacks in federal domestic spending and in aid to state
and local governments means added financial and political pressure on the state
and local sectors. Needs and demands remain constant and interest groups who
once went to Washington for public dollars and favorable regulation now focus on
the state and local sectors. These factors have significant long-run effects on
the fiscal viability of state and local governments. With declining current
resources and rising spending pressures, officials in these governments may turn
to the one place where dollars are available - - the asset accounts. By failing
to maintain the state's infra-structure, by underfunding pensions, or by simply
borrowing to pay for current services, politicians and bureaucrats can gather
additional resources to meet service demands. The problem obtains, however, that
while current services are provided, public assets are depleted. The persons who
tend to lose in this process are future taxpayers who inherit a lower public
asset base than they should. In this investigation, the researchers are
assessing the asset and liability base of state governments and how it has
changed in the past fifteen years. The data period for this project is 1971 to
1984 for the forty-eight mainland states. The data for this research include new
estimates of governmentally held public wealth, defined as the difference
between the value of a government's assets and of its liabilities. The stock of
a government's assets are its infra-structure, (roads, buildings, and
computers), and its financial assets, (cash, stocks and bonds). Liabilities are
short and long-term debt and unfunded public pension funds. Change in the level
of this public wealth over a fiscal year constitutes government savings or
dissavings, depending upon whether wealth increases or decreases. The
researchers assess the budgetary decisions of state officials to expand current
services and transfers, to reduce current tax levels, and finally to expand or
deplete state public assets. Implicit in this assessment is an analysis of why
the time preferences exhibited in the public and private sectors may differ.