* 8710051
* Longitudinal Study of the Political and Policymaking Role ofthe Philippine Supreme Court
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1989
* C.Neal Tate, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 08/31/1989
* USD 80,000.00

Dr. Tate plans to investigate the political and policymaking role of the
Philippine Supreme Court from 1965 to the present. The data base for the study
is comprised of some 12,000 cases, interviews with justices of the Supreme Court
and Court of Appeals, and mailed questionnaire surveys to a sample of trial
court judges and members of the legal profession. Based on these data sources,
Dr. Tate is able to quantify numerous aspects of the institutional role of the
Philippine Court over time and undertake complex multivariate analyses focusing
on the impact of such events as President Marcos' declaration of martial law or
the assignment of increased administrative and supervisory duties to the Court.
Also, time series analyses can assess the impact on the Court of annual
variables like macroeconomic indicators of the health of the economy. The data
sets combined permit placing the Court in its political and legal system
contexts, analyzing its institutional performance and decisionmaking, and
identifying the patterns of change and continuity as it adapts to radically
changed political surroundings. This study has considerable scientific promise.
It offers the opportunity to examine the political role of courts not only
outside of the American context but also in a setting that serves as a natural
experiment because of major regime changes through the period in question. Thus,
it should substantially advance knowledge of the interrelationship between
politics, political regimes, and the judicial process.