* 8710829
* Architectures for Application-Specific Concurrent Computers
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Anthony Terrano, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 12/31/1989
* USD 70,000.00

The present generation of concurrent or parallel computers are intended to be
(quasi) general-purpose computers. Achieving this design goal has resulted in a
significant architectural tradeoff. The channels are too slow to allow the use
of state-of-the-art VLSI processing elements in order to provide a large number
of inexpensive communication channels between the processing elements. As a
result, these computers have not offered a sufficient advance in performance or
cost-effectiveness over conventional supercomputers to inspire widespread
interest among scientists and engineers with computation-intensive problems.
However, by appropriately restricting the class of target applications, it is
possible to design concurrent computers which are at least two orders of
magnitude more powerful and cost-effective than those built thus far, justifying
the programming effort needed to use a concurrent computer. This research is a
study of the relationship between the structure of computation-intensive
problems on the one hand and concurrent computer architectures on the other. It
includes the development of techniques for characterizing the grain-size
dependence of the communication to computation ratio of several computation-
intensive problems, and will use the results obtained to design architectures
for concurrent computers which are suitable for these problems. The potential
discoveries and advances expected from this research are methods for
characterizing the dependence on the decomposition grain size of the
communication to computation ratio of computationally intensive problems, and
the design of architectures for concurrent computers which are suitable for
these problems. The emphasis of this research is on the identification of
properties of computationally intensive problems which can be exploited in the
design of application-specific concurrent computers. The contribution of this
work is to develop our understanding of how to characterize these problems so as
to be able to design a concurrent computer which will advance the state-of-the-
art for cost-to-performance-ratio in supercomputers.