* 8710006
* Mathematical Sciences: Structure of Toeplitz and CompositionOperators
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Carl Cowen, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1989
* USD 69,083.00

Operator theory is a central discipline in Modern Analysis. Its origins lie in
the study of mathematical physics and partial differential equations in the
early twentieth century. Thus, it was seen that numerous physical problems in
the theory of equilibria, vibration, quantum theory, etc. could be studied
productively via the integral equations that model the phenomena. So it has
been, that from the fertile minds of Hilbert, von Neumann, and other giants that
the subject of operator theory has grown to a central position in such
investigations, and in core mathematics as well. At the heart of this
methodology is the deep investigation of the spectrum of an operator and the
concommitant study of its invariant subspaces. For the so-called self-adjoint
operators, this theory is now a standard technique throughout analysis, and the
spectral theorem provides the necessary building blocks for all such operators.
Although not quite as complete, spectral theory is significantly well understood
for an extensive generalization of the self-adjoint case; viz., the "normal"
operators. The current frontier, therefore, in the study of this structure
theory rests in the non-normal theory. A particularly important class of such
operators are referred to as "subnormal". They are significant for two reasons.
First, there is enough residual normal information to attempt a deeper
understanding of their inherent structure. Recent results, such as the fact that
subnormal operators are reflexive and have invariant subspaces, have given an
added impetus to the study of their spectral properties. Secondly, since many
explicit operators that arise in complex function theory, differential geometry,
and approximation theory are subnormal, there is a broad range of applicability.
Professor Cowen is a leader in the spectral theory of subnormal operators and
its relationship to classical analysis. His program involves the investigation
of explicit operators on the Hardy space of the unit disk in order to gain
insight into more general problems. In particular, he proposes to continue his
investigation of composition operators, Toeplitz operators, and related
operators. In recent collaborative work he found a class of composition
operators which are subnormal. Professor Cowen proposes to extend this class,
and to further investigate subnormality. Operators more general than subnormal
arise as multiplication operators on Krein space. Professor Cowen proposes to
initiate the study of such operators. In earlier work, he solved an old problem
by constructing subnormal Toeplitz operators which are neither normal nor
analytic. Professor Cowen proposes to investigate the more prevalent hyponormal
Toeplitz operators with the goal of finding conditions on the symbol that
determine hyponormality.