* 8710264
* Young Children's Strategies for Gathering Information
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1987,08/31/1990
* Patricia Miller, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1990
* USD 79,983.00

This research will use a method that has been developed to permit the direct
observation of a child's strategies of attention. Children select which
information to look at by deciding which small doors covering drawings to open.
For example, when there are 12 doors covering 12 drawings, and the locations of
only 6 of the drawings are to be memorized, the most efficient strategy is to
open only the 6 relevant doors. Preschoolers have trouble ignoring irrelevant
information. They tend to open all the doors and thus recall poorly. Three
developmental steps are predicted. First, children either do not use a strategy
or use an inappropriate strategy. Second, they use an appropriate strategy, but
it does not help them learn. Third, they use an appropriate strategy, and it
helps them. Much of the research will examine whether the second step is caused
by the considerable effort required for a young child to use the strategy. That
is, if children must put a great deal of effort into deciding which strategy to
use, actually carrying out the strategy, and monitoring whether they are using
it correctly, they may not have enough mental capacity left to rehearse verbally
or concentrate on the information to which they have attended. One way the
research will test the effort hypothesis is by essentially eliminating the
effort of producing the appropriate strategy by having the experimenter produce
it (i.e., open the relevant doors for the child). Children who usually can
produce the strategy but are not helped by it (stage 2 above) should now be able
to recall the relevant items well, because the needed mental capacity is freed
by the experimenter's help. A second way to test the effort hypothesis will take
the opposite approach: Increasing effort, by adding a second task to be
performed simultaneously, should cause a deterioration in the use of a strategy.
Children who normally produce, and are helped by, the strategy should no longer
be helped by the strategy. These two approaches will clarify the causes of, and
ways to eliminate, the poor use of attentional strategies in young children
which often results in learning or behavior problems.