* 8710238
* Postsynaptic Mechanisms and Neuronal Regulation of Ion Flux
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Barbara R. Talamo, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 01/31/1991
* USD 180,000.00

Extracellular ATP is a potential neurotransmitter. It activates many types of
cells, but its mechanism is unknown. Dr. Talamo has found that extracellular
MgATP elevates cytoplasmic calcium levels in rat parotid cells through a novel
mechanism. In the proposed studies, she will compare ATP and muscarinic effects
to study how calcium levels and ion secretion are regulated. Her preliminary
evidence indicates that ATP may not act through inositol-phosphate
intermediates, and that ATP and muscarinic agonists regulate calcium and Na flux
through different routes. To evaluate the role of phospholipase C activation in
elevating cytoplasmic calcium levels, she will quantitate the time course of
formation of (3H)-inositol phosphate metabolites and diglyceride for ATP and
carbachol. Using the intracellular fluorescent indicator quin2 to monitor
intracellular Ca++, and radiotracer ions to measure ion flux, she will explore
the requirement for extracellular calcium and elevated intracellular calcium to
activate Na, K and Cl transport. These studies will advance our knowledge of how
ATP may activate many different types of cells, and will be integrated with
electrophysiological studies utilizing patch clamp technology to develop a model
for the mechanism of ion and fluid secretion in epithelial cells.