* 8710140
* The Seasonal Cycle and the Business Cycle
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Jeffrey Miron, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 01/31/1990
* USD 99,401.00

This project analyzes the correlation between seasonal variations in
macroeconomic variables and the business cycle. There is a set of stylized facts
about macroeconomic variables that collectively constitute what is called the
business cycle. These facts include the tendency of output movements across
broadly defined sectors in the economy to move together. For example, there is
an observed correlation between growth in the money supply and output. Labor
productivity moves in a decidedly procyclical manner, as does volatility in
production, and purchase of consumer durables. Professor Miron has shown that
much of the variation in the above variables can be explained by seasonal
fluctuation, and an important contribution of this project is the ammassing of
empirical evidence that these fluctuations display the same kind of variation as
the business cycle. There is no strong reason to believe that the seasonal cycle
and the business cycle might behave in a similar fashion. Intuitively there
seems to be no theoretical connection between sources of seasonal variation
(such as weather) in output and the business cycle. However, previous empirical
studies by Professor Miron have shown that a large percentage of variation in
output can be explained by seasonality. This is a quite important finding in
that variation due to seasonality is easily predicted. For example, there are
likely to be fewer housing starts during the winter than in spring or summer. A
connection between the business cycle and seasonal variation is very important
because variation due to seasonal changes is virtually devoid of uncertainty,
whereas models of the business cycle incorporate a high degree of uncertainty. A
correlation between the two could be a valuable tool for making correct economic
policy. Technically, Professor Miron examines several analytical paradigms which
characterize business cycles. In one framework aggregate fluctuations are seen
as collectively rational responses of producers and consumers to technological
opportunities which vary across seasons. Another model analyzes seasonal
fluctuations as coordination problems arising from synergies in the timing of
economic activity across agents. Such phenomena as increasing returns to scale
in the short run, externalities associated with imperfect competition, and other
problems of timing in production and consumption might cause economic activity
to be more volatile in some seasons than in others.