* 8710914
* Three-Dimensional Modeling of Lowrise Wood-Framed Buildings - A Pilot Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1988
* Ajaya Gupta, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 11/30/1988
* USD 50,002.00

The objective of this project is to develop a simple but realistic three-
dimensional model for nonlinear analysis of lowrise wood-framed buildings
subjected to earthquake loading. The new model will help understand the seismic
performance of such buildings by predicting such characteristics as strength
deformation, ductility and damage potential. The study will lead to a static
analysis model for monotonic or cyclic loading, providing a starting point for
subsequent dynamic analyses. A macro-element developed for representing the
inplane behavior of wood diaphragms will be used to model a majority of lowrise
wood-framed buildings. Available test results, possibly from James Cook
University, Australia, and elsewhere will be used to verify this model. Various
building configurations will be analyzed. The computer program will help
evaluate the previous simple methods of seismic analysis, and also the designing
of various building configurations. A great majority of the lowrise buildings
are light wood-framed buildings for which a reliable tool for the prediction of
three- dimensional behavior is nonexistent. The study will lead to improved
design standards and design methods which in turn will reduce the dollar loss of
this major class of existing buildings in the event of earthquakes. The
Principal Investigator is a leader in the field and is expected to make
significant contribution to this important subject. An award is recommended.