* 8710705
* Regulation of Gene Expression by Cell Communication
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1991
* Lawrence Shimkets, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 05/31/1991
* USD 232,380.00

In many developing organisms differentiation is regulated by interactions
between neighboring cells although the mechanism is not known for any organism.
The goal of this study is to isolate the components of a cell interaction system
which regulates gene expression and differentiation during the developmental
cycle of the myxobacterium Myxococcus xanthus. The spoC locus is involved in the
production of an intercellular signal, the SpoC signal, which is necessary for
the transcription of specific developmental (SpoC-dependent) genes. This
proposal contains three lines of investigation which deal with different aspects
of the signaling process. First, the protein product of the spoC locus will be
purified by immunoaffinity chromatography. The cellular location of this protein
will be determined by western blotting, and a bioassay will be developed for the
protein. Second, several SpoC-dependent promoters will be cloned. The nucleotide
sequences responsible for their regulation will be identified by DNA sequencing,
deletion analysis and mutagenesis. Finally, another genetic locus, which has
been shown to modulate expression of SpoC-dependent genes, will be isolated by
molecular cloning, and SpoC-dependent promoters in a positive or negative
manner. The simple micro-organism, Myxococcus xanthus, provides an excellent
model system in which to study the control of a developmental program by cell
interactions. It provides a system in which genetic studies can be coupled with
studies of cell surface interactions in a developing system.