* 8710757
* Propagation Delays in the Bilevel and Trilevel Multilayer   High Density Interconnections on the GaAs Based VHSIC
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Ashok Goel, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 02/28/1991
* USD 76,716.00

There is an increasing demand for circuits with higher speeds and higher
component densities. This requires millions of closely spaced interconnection
lines that integrate the components on a chip. Parasitic capacitances associated
with the interconnections in such high density environments have become the
primary factors in the evolution of the VHSIC technology. Particularly for the
development of the ASIC's (application specific integrated circuits), it is
important to know the propagation delays expected in an IC (integrated circuit)
before its fabrication is undertaken. Objectives of the proposed research are:
(a) development of reliable models for the parasitic capacitances associated
with the multilevel and multilayer interconnection in the high-density
environments, suitable for the GaAs-based VLSI circuits; (b) development of
accurate models for the determination of the propagation delays in the
multilevel and multilayer interconnections on the GaAs-based very high speed
integrated circuits; (c) study of the crosstalk in the interconnections on the
GaAs-based very high speed integrated circuits; and (d) fabrication of the
interconnection lines on the GaAs substrate and experimental verification of the
dependence of the propagation delays on the interconnect dimensions,
interconnect material resistivity and other geometrical factors. This research
is expected to provide a better understanding of the interactions between
interconnection lines on VLSI chips as the dimensions decrease and the density
of the interconnections on a chip increase. This is very important to the
continued development of VLSI technology.