* 8710260
* RUI: Numerical Studies with Staggered Fermions in Lattice   Gauge Theory (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Karen Barad, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur Komar
* 12/31/1989
* USD 47,656.00

The objective of this theoretical physics project is to elucidate the influence
of fermionic degrees of freedom in a nonperturbative study of the theory of
quantum chromodynamics. The method of investigation is the lattice gauge theory
approach. Four interrelated numerical studies will be carried out. 1) A study of
two-dimensional QCD in which the flavor degeneracy inherent in the staggered
fermion formulation is removed by the introduction of nonlocal mass terms. This
project is important for contemplating physically realistic studies in four
dimensions. 2) A high statistics study of quenched QCD on a 83x16 lattice. The
aim of this work will be a determination of the hadron mass spectrum as well as
quark-antiquark charge distributions. 3) An initial investigation of the hadron
mass spectrum of the fully interacting theory, including fermion loop effects,
on an 83x 16 lattice. This project is a subset of a larger goal to understand
the influence of fermion polarization effects on strong interaction dynamics. 4)
Quenched and unquenched calculations of hadron mass spectrum on larger and
larger lattices, as increased computer power becomes available. Projects 2 and 3
are to be carried out on a dedicated, and currently operating, special purpose
parallel processor at Columbia University with computing power comparable to a
CRAY-1. Project 4 will make use of the second and third generation special
purpose machines currently under construction at Columbia. The research, to be
conducted by a highly-regarded physicist, is important to our exploration of the
consequences of quantum chromodynamics, the theory of the strong nuclear force.