* 8710108
* Studies of the Thermodynamics, Physiological Role(s) and    Intracellular Compartmentation of Phosphagen/Phosphokinase  Reactions
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1992
* W. Ross Ellington, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 05/31/1992
* USD 185,760.00

Muscles are biological tranducers which convert chemical energy into mechanical
energy-tension development during contraction. The higher the force and speed of
contraction of a given muscle, the greater the amount of chemical energy that is
needed to sustain these contractions. The major focus of this project is to look
at the process of chemical energy production in muscles from a range of
invertebrate species. The results will provide fundamental information about
energy transduction in muscle, in general and will give some insight into the
evolution of these processes in the animal kingdom. Chemical energy is derived
from two sources in muscles. First of all, fuels such as carbohydrates and fats
can be broken down yielding chemical energy. Secondly, muscles contain chemicals
known as phosphagens which function as reservoirs of chemical energy. It is this
latter source of chemical energy that is the focus of this research effort.
There are a number of different kinds of phosphagens which are distributed in
specific patterns in the animal kingdom. Little is known about the chemical
properties of most of these phosphagens. However, we do know that these
phosphagen are used to power rapid and forceful muscle contractions. These
studies will investigate the biochemical properties of these phosphagens with an
emphasis on how they are utilized during muscle work. In recent years, it has
become apparent that the interior of muscle cells, and for that matter all
cells, consists of an elaborate network of tubules, organelles and membranes.
Traditional methods of study of chemical energy production utilize invasive
techniques which involve destruction of this complex intracellular architecture.
To avoid this problem, he plans to use nuclear magnetic resonance or
spectroscopy, a method which allows us to observe chemical reactions in intact,
living cells. NMR techniques have been shown to be extremely useful in basic
research as well as in the context of the clinical environment. These studies
will extend our knowledge concerning the applicability of NMR methods for the
study of chemical energy production in muscles.