* 8710890
* RUI: Immunologic Analysis of Plant Membrane Differentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/1987,04/30/1989
* Michael Lynes, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 04/30/1989
* USD 75,900.00

Dr. Lynes proposes to develop sensitive and specific polyvalent antiserum and
monoclonal antibody probes to several plant plasma membrane componments, and to
use these probes to analyze those components. He proposes to investigate the
tissue and species distribution of each component, and to purify these
components for biochemical analysis. Two specific components of the plant cell,
the fusicoccin receptor molecule and the auxin binding molecule, will be
analyzed and isolated using anti-idiotypic antibodies. Other components of the
plasma membrane will be analyzed using antibodies generated from immunizations
with relatively crude membrane isolates. Once antibodies against the receptor
molecules or other membrane constituents have been induced in the immunized
animals, their reactivity will be assessed with a number of immunological
assays, and then the specific immunoglobulins will be purified. These antibodies
can then be employed in affinity purifications of components of the plasma
membrane that should prove to be exceptionally fast and efficient, surmounting
problems encountered with previously devised techniques for the purification of
membrane constituents. An analysis of the developmental patterns of expression
of plasma membrane associated structures made possible with the tools developed
in this project, will yield insights into the genetic regulation of those
traits, and the differentiation patterns of the cells that express those traits.