* 8710153
* Benefit Cost Analysis and Public Decisions Concerning       Natural Resources and Environment: A Study in Ethics and    Values
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Alan Randall, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 01/31/1991
* USD 80,000.00

A natural resource and environmental economist and a philosopher specializing in
socio-political ethics and the philosophy of economics will study the ethical
and value implications of using benefit cost analysis (BCA) when public
decisions about natural and environmental resources are being made. Using
standard economic-theoretic and philosophical methods, the investigators will
(1) identify and analyze the ethical and value commitments inherent in using BCA
to evaluate proposed public policies, and (2) examine particular ethics and
values issues that arise when BCA is applied to decisions about natural and
environmental resources, with special attention to public goods and nonmarket
valuations. Combining these methods with a case study of land-use management
decision-making in the USDA Forest Service, the investigators will also examine
value conflicts confronting economists and the discipline of economics when BCA
has an important and perhaps decisive role in policy-making. The case study will
be based on review of specialized literature and agency documents, and key-
informant interviews. The investigators will disseminate results through
scholarly channels as well multidisciplinary and semi-popular outlets; they will
also evaluate the possibility of preparing a book and holding a special workshop
for for selected scholars, land use and environmental managers, and
representatives of relevant interest groups, based on their results. This
project will make a unique contribution to scholarly and professional
understanding of ethical and value issues surrounding development and
application of BCA in public decisions about natural and environmental
resources. The investigators are both exceptionally well-qualified; graduate
students are involved; institutional support is good. This is a good example of
the kind of cross-disciplinary collaborative research EVS should encourage.
Results are likely to be useful and widely disseminated. Costs are very
reasonable. Total support in the amount of $80,000 is recommended, of which
$70,000 comes from Ethics and Values Studies and $10,000 from the Economics
Program.