* 8710314
* BALLOON-VIKING DATA ANALYSIS
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1991
* George Parks, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy E. Eastman
* 05/31/1991
* USD 202,600.00

The Viking-Balloon campaign in July 1986 was an international collaborative
effort and its goal was to utilize correlative measurements from ground,
balloon, and space-craft to further understand aurora and the associated
magnetospheric processes. The campaign resulted in a wealth of data from many
complementary instruments providing an opportunity to study auroral processes
from several different perspectives, from global scale to very localized
phenomena, involving many relevant parameters - high and low energy particles
and electric and magnetic fields - from widely varying regions of space.
Preliminary results from the data have already been obtained which indicate
interesting structure to pulsating aurora. This grant will support analysis of
this extensive data set which has tremendous potential with regard to many
magnetospheric-auroral problems. The dynamics of the aurora can be studied from
several different regimes, each one distinguished by its characteristic length
and time scales. Polar orbiting satellites and rocket experiments have the
advantage of making in situ measurements of the local plasma parameters, however
the constraints of orbital motion prevent many of these experiments (in
particular, rockets and low altitude spacecraft) from making measurements over
long time scales. Furthermore there is always an inherent ambiguity in
separating spatial effect from temporal effects, due to the single point from
which the data is gathered. Satellite imaging of the auroral oval and the polar
cap is a powerful tool, but does not always fully elucidate the small scale
dynamics occurring within an auroral arc. Balloon borne instruments, however,
are able to examine the longer time scale behavior of auroral phenomena, since
the balloon's motion is usually much slower than many typical auroral time
scales. Furthermore, the space-time ambiguity can be deconvolved by the use of
imaging techniques, and multiple point measurements. These imaging techniques
allow an examination of structures of scale lengths of order tens of kilometers
in as short as a few seconds. This was the general philosophy in the Viking-
balloons project; to employ X-ray imaging from a balloon as a tool to understand
Polar Ionospheric-Magnetospheric dynamics on time and length scales which are
not easily obtainable by other means, and to correlate these measurements to
data from a polar orbiting space craft. The Viking satellite from the Swedish
Space Corporation provided an opportunity to carry out this experiment. The
University of Washington will continue processing and scientific analysis of
data obtained during the Viking balloon campaign and take part in coordinated
studies with the international group in auroral and magnetospheric dynamics
using the Viking-balloon data.