* 8710712
* Synthetic Applications of ortho-Quinodimethanes and Other   Reactive Molecules Prepared by Pyrolysis (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Walter Trahanovsky, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 06/30/1991
* USD 162,153.00

This research, being supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program, will develop the technique of flash vacuum pyrolysis (FVP) as a source
of reactive intermediates that will permit the synthesis of a number of unusual
structures. FVP permits the rapid assembly of complex molecules from relatively
inexpensive starting materials in a reduced number of steps. This program will
develop reactions of o-quinodimethanes and other reactive molecules that will be
of use in the synthesis of complex organic molecules. Specific objectives
include the development of: (a) reaction sequences involving o-quinodimethanes
derived from the ferrocene and other metal pi-complexed ring systems which lead
to stable organometallic compounds and nonorganometallic derivatives of them;
(b) reaction sequences which start from the furan adduct of
methylenecyclobutenone and lead to functionalized fused ring systems; (c)
reaction sequences involving intramolecular reactions of
bis-2,5-dimethylene-2,5-dihydrofurans that lead to cyclophanes and derivatives
of them; (d) reaction sequences involving quinodimethanes with extended pi
systems that lead to cyclophanes and other ring systems; and (e) a general
reaction for the conversion of omega-halo N,N-dialkyl-amides to omega-
formylnitriles. The project includes the following types of studies: (a) the
preparation of novel reactive molecules such as o-quinodimethanes derived from
less common aromatic systems; (b) study of the chemistry of selected reactive
molecules; (c) development of "protected" forms of reactive molecules that will
allow them to be handled more conveniently; and (d) development of pyrolytic
reactions that involve unusual fragmentations or rearrangements. This project
should result in reactions which have unique specificities and can be used to
prepare ferrocenes and other metal pi-complexed ring systems, functionalized
fused ring systems, cyclophanes, medium and large carbocycles and heterocycles,
and omega-formylnitriles.