* 8710503
* Creation of Public Use Tapes and Documentation for the RAND Jury Verdicts Data Base
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1987,04/30/1991
* Terence Dungworth, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 04/30/1991
* USD 156,117.00

Although a relatively small percentage of civil damage lawsuits are disposed of
by jury trial, the verdicts that juries return have a significance to the civil
justice process that is far out of proportion to their numbers. They represent
the visible portion of the decisions that are reached by participants in civil
actions and are frequently cited as indicators of trends and developments in the
entire civil claims system, not simply the activities that take place in
courtrooms. However, research focusing on civil jury verdicts has been seriously
hampered by the lack of sound empirical data, organized in ways that are
amenable to statistical processing and analysis. Recognition that there has been
a dearth of useable data led to the decision by the Institute for Civil Justice
to undertake a large-scale data collection project focusing on jury verdicts
from selected jurisdictions in Illinois and California and including
comprehensive data on more than 25,000 civil damage cases between 1960 and 1985.
The result of that data collection is the Jury Verdicts Data Base. Specifically,
Dr. Dungworth seeks to create and document Public Use Tapes containing a cleaned
and edited version of the Jury Verdicts Data Base. These data will be located in
a public archive and made available for distribution to the research community.
Through making accessible a rich body of data in an area ripe for new empirical
work, this project holds substantial promise of advancing our understanding of
the civil litigation process, its costs, and its outcomes.