* 8710783
* Cruise to Detroit Seamount, NW Pacific, for Sediment        Coring and ODP Site Survey
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1990
* Lloyd Keigwin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 09/30/1990
* USD 127,943.00

Most paleoceanographic studies of the geochemistry of benthic foraminifera have
concentrated on the North Atlantic because of the abundance of fossil remains in
sediments of this region and because of the importance of the region as a source
for deep water in the oceans. Micropaleontologic and geochemical studies in this
area indicate major deep circulation changes during glacial/interglacial cycles.
In contrast, little is known about circulation in the northern Pacific since the
microfossil record of these changes is poorly preserved in the deep water
sediments of the region. Recent results from shallow sediments, however, suggest
that the North Pacific may have been a source of intermediate or deep water
during glacial conditions. The present award will support a field and laboratory
program to collect and analyze sediments from the northernmost Emperor seamount
chain. The objective of the field program is to collect a depth transect of
cores from the region of Detroit Seamount and use geochemical and paleontologic
techniques to establish the paleohydrography of the north Pacific. Laboratory
analyses will include carbon-14 and Cd/Ca ratios. Cores will be collected on a
separately funded cruise of the R.V. Washington. The results of this project
will be important in formulating plans for deep ocean drilling in the North
Pacific.