* 8710078
* Parallelism, Communication and Randomness in Models of      Computation, and Efficient Computation in Permutation Groups
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Laszlo Babai, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Dana S. Richards
* 06/30/1991
* USD 274,953.00

Research is being conducted into the power of fundamental features of
computation carried out according to various models. The PIs and others have
recently defined new classes in communication complexity theory and also in
Turing Complexity. Among such new classes are those defined by Arthur-Merlin
protocols which are close relatives of interactive proof systems. Both
interaction and randomness play important roles in most of these new classes.
Separation properties for these new classes are being studied. Of particular
interest are the separation problem of the polynomial time hierarchy in
communication complexity theory and the relation of the class of languages
determined by Arthur-Merlin protocols to the class of almost-NP languages. The
PIs are also continuing their investigation of reliability problems in
asynchronous distributed networks. The PIs have recently completed the proof
that permutation group membership is in the class NC. Their methods appear to
have implications for the sequential case and they are exploring the possibility
of obtaining a substantial speedup for the sequential situation. The roles of
interaction and randomness in computation are of crucial interest to the theory
community at this time. The PIs are leading figures in the development of the
understanding of these roles.