* 8710180
* Tribosensing:  A New Methodology for Nondestructive         In-Process Quality Evaluation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Ming-Kai Tse, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 11/30/1989
* USD 179,924.00

This research is aimed at: l. establishing the efficacy of TRIBOSENSING as a
technique for nondestructive, and in-process evaluation of materials; and 2.
developing a theoretical and practical technical base for the field of
tribosensing. Conceptually, the use of a tribosensing system in an industrial
process involves measuring and analyzing a combination of tribomechanical,
tribothermal, triboelectrical, triboacoustic, and other tribological effects
simultaneously during the rubbing of two surfaces in order to determine any
material quality parameter of interest. The potential use of tribosensing in
manufacturing is very diversified - some examples of applications are: self-
diagnostic machines, intelligent sensors for process control, in- process
materials characterization, and robot tactile sensing. To develop a practical,
automated system based on the tribosensing concept, several specific research
issues are identified: 1. selection of sensors and sensing materials; 2.
optimization of the design of the sensing probe; and 3. development of
tribosensing models and a unified signal processing methodology. To establish
the knowledge base for the optimal design of tribosensors, selected
experimentation, coupled with theoretical analysis of the physics of the
underlying tribological phenomena, will be pursued. To develop a unified
methodology for analyzing tribosensing data, the applicability of the recent
advances in the field of digital signal processing will be critically examined.
The significance of this proposed research lies in the development of a novel,
nondestructive, on- line sensing technique for a myriad of industrial
applications. Furthermore, the research explores the idea of quantifying and
utilizing the "information content" in tribological phenomena, which in itself
is a unique approach to furthering our understanding of the physics of
tribology.