* 8710748
* Performance-Oriented Logic Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Giovanni De Micheli, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 12/31/1989
* USD 60,000.00

Automatic synthesis of digital circuits is pivotal for the design of integrated
circuits with fast turn-around time. The quality of the synthesized circuits is
measured by some figures of merit, such as, for example, silicon area, power
consumption and switching-time performance. This project addresses the trade-
offs in area (power) minimality and switching-time optimality. In particular,
the search for a set of circuit transformations which can transform a circuit
that is optimal in terms of area into another that is optimal in terms of
timing. The objectives of the research are: (1) study a graph/algebraic model of
combinational logic circuits; (2) use the model to define circuit
transformations and determine their properties; (3) implement these
transformations as a CAD tool program which can be used interactively (or not)
in the search of good trade-off points between area (power) and timing. The
theoretical part of this research is centered on algorithms based on graph
theory and algebraic properties of Boolean functions. The experimental part
addresses a computer implementation of the algorithms and their test on real
circuit design examples. The impact of this research may be very profound on the
CAD and designer community. Algorithms for synthesis and optimization of
multiple-level logic are in high demand. The problem is well defined but not as
well understood. Designers still rely on their ingenious expertise but cannot be
supported yet by a well-defined theory based on sound mathematical foundations.