* 8710868
* Modeling and Analysis of Associative Memory Networks (EIA)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Anthony Kuh, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1989
* USD 77,638.00

Associative memories are composed of a collection of interconnected elements
having data storage capabilites. The elements are accessed in parallel by the
content of a data probe vector rather than by a specific address. Recently,
models referred to as the Hopfield AMN have received much attention. These
models are simple to analyze and exhibit some of the behavioral features of
neural networks. To incorporate these features, some new models will be explored
which retain enough of the simple structure of the Hopfield AMN that makes them
amenable to analysis. The objective is to obtain a better understanding of the
properties and behavior of various types of AMN. The principal investigator is
analyzing the dynamic and information storage capabilities of several new
models. Many of the new models are subject to some physical constraints and
interconnection costs, and it is appropriate to formulate various network design
and analysis problems as optimization problems. The research will have important
implications for the use of AMN in computer architectures of the future, matched
to challenging problems in signal processing, communications, control, and
artificial intelligence. Understanding the relationship between parameters of
various AMN and their information storage capacities is a step towards
determining the most useful aspects of this form of parallel distributed
computing.