* 8710209
* Strategic Behavior and Counterfactuals
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Cristina Bicchieri, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 07/31/1988
* USD 30,000.00

In game theory, the difficulty of defining rational behavior in game situations
like the prisoner's dilemma is the fact that the players' strategies will depend
on their expectations about other players' strategies. These expectations are
beliefs the players come to the game with. Game theorists assume these beliefs
to be rational in the very special sense of being objectively correct, but no
explanation is offered of the mechanism generating this property of the belief
system. In most cases, however, such a rationality requirement is not enough to
guarantee that an equilibrium will be attained. Under this research grant, Dr.
Bicchieri is concentrating on the relationship between an assumption of
epistemic rationality and equilibrium. By equilibrium, she means a combination
of actions such that no agent would want to change his action if he were to take
as fixed the other agents actions. In simple cases, an assumption of common
knowledge of rationality on the part of the players must be added. In more
complicated cases, such as when multiple equilibria are present, common
knowledge of rationality and the assumption of belief-rationality are not
enough, since there exists a whole set of rational beliefs, and no player can
ever be certain that the others believe he has certain beliefs. In these cases
it becomes necessary to explicitly model the process of belief formation. The
model which Dr. Bicchieri is developing attributes to the players a theory of
counterfactuals which they use in restricting the set of possible equilibria. If
it were possible to attribute to all players the same theory of counterfactuals,
then it could be shown that the players' beliefs would eventually converge.
Since there is no way of sorting out one theory of counterfactuals as the best,
or more rational to adopt, the process of belief formation might never converge,
and thus no equilibrium would be attained.