* 8710332
* Experimental Studies of Metal-Insulator Transitions         and Superconductivity (Materials Research)
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1987,05/31/1989
* Paul Chaikin, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/1989
* USD 50,000.00

Professor Chaikin proposes investigations in several areas. (a) Extensions of
earlier work on measurements of the transition temperature for various periodic,
quasi-periodic, and random artificially produced superconducting two dimensional
arrays are planned. The arrays are produced using microlithography techniques
and the superconducting order parameter is used to probe solutions to the wave
equation in these systems. (b) Very fine scale periodic structures will be used
to impose a periodic potential in a gallium-arsenide heterostructure. Hall and
magnetoresistance measurements at low temperature will be used to investigate a
predicted "chaotic" behavior associated with the Landau band being split into
sub-bands by the periodic potential. (c) Further experiments on the transport
properties of icosahedrally packed alloys are planned. (d) Ultra-thin metallic
films epitaxially grown on a semiconductor substrate will be produced. Transport
and thermoelectric power measurements will be made on these systems. (e)
Thermoelectric power and other properties will be studied in the new high Tc
superconducting materials. The thrust of the proposed work is an investigation
of electrical conduction in a variety of exotic systems. This will lead to a
better fundamental understanding of electrical conduction and may be of
particular relevance for microelectronics development.