* 8710844
* Multi-User Communications in Non-Gaussian Channels
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Behnaam Aazhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Aubrey M. Bush
* 02/28/1990
* USD 68,462.00

This project will investigate the problem of multiple-access communications
through non-Gaussian channels via spread-spectrum modulation. It is motivated in
large part by the fact that modern urban radio networks must operate in complex
and variable noise environments that are often dominated by impulsive, non-
Gaussian man-made and natural noise sources. Non-Gaussian disturbances are now
known to be present in many situations, and they can greatly reduce the
performance of conventional digital communication systems. The overall purpose
of this research is to develop new design methods suitable for multiuser systems
operating in such non-Gaussian channels. The study can be divided into two
principal tasks to be considered. There are the development of time and phase
synchronizers; and the design of "optimum" nonlinear, coherent, spread-spectrum
receivers in non-Gaussian noise. In many applications, in the presence of non-
Gaussian noise sources, the impulsive and transient characterisitics of noise
suggest that a nonlinearity in the receiver structure can significantly reduce
the effective noise power by reducing the large voltage deviation caused by
noise impulses. Thus it is proposed to design and analyze the performance of
optimum memoryless nonlinearities for synchronization and correlation reception.
Possibilities of introducing memory in the structure of receivers will also be
explored. It is anticipated that the results of this study will find widespread
application in urban and military mobile radio networking and low frequency
communications.