* 8710527
* Effects of Structure and Connectivity on Transport and      Reaction in Random Dispersions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1990
* Yee Chiew, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1990
* USD 60,000.00

Random dispersions are frequently encountered in the petro- chemical as well as
the high technology industries. Transport and reaction rates in these systems
may be characterized by effective properties; some examples are the effectve
electrical conductivity of colloidal suspensions and microemulsions, the
effective thermal conductivity of composite materials and packed beds, the
effective diffusivity of porous media, the effective nutrient consumption or
reaction rate in cell aggregates, and the effective ligand binding rate to
receptors in biological systems. Estimation and correlation of these effective
properties accurately will enhance the understanding and facilitate the design
of many engineering operations involving these heterogeneous systems. The
effective conductivity (or mass permeability) and the effective reaction rate of
a species in a random dispersion of particles depend not only on the properties
(physical and chemical) of the constituent phases but also on their geometries,
structures and connectivity. Present theories are successful only in describing
these effective properties at low to moderate particle densities, and therefore
are not applicable to dense dispersions. The calculation of these quantities at
high particle concentrations will require taking into account the interplay
between the structure of the dispersion and the transport process involved
simultaneously. The essential focus of this proposed research is to
systematically explore the connection between certain representative "families
of structures and their effective conductivity and effective reaction rate. The
PI plans to determine these effective properties for dense dispersions. This is
achieved by using: (1) methods borrowed from statisitical mechanics of dense
fluids to describe the spatial arrangements and clustering behavior of
particles, and (2) stochastic random walk theory to model diffusion on a
microscopic level (and thus avoiding the solution of the differential equation
for the many-particle random system).