* 8710569
* EIA: The Effect of Hydrogen on Optical Damage in Ti DiffusedLiNbO3 Waveguides
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Dunbar Birnie, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/1989
* USD 70,000.00

This work is funded as an Engineering Initiation Award (EIA). The presence of
hydrogen in lithium niobate crystals has been found to make Ti-diffused
waveguides less susceptible to photorefractive optical damage. This project is
aimed at understanding how the hydrogen additions lower damage. The work will
proceed in five stages: (1) Annealing at high temperature in a controlled gas
environment will be used for equilibration (oxygen, lithium, and water
activities will be controlled simultaneously); (2) FTIR, Raman, and optical
spectroscopies will be used to analyze the equilibrated crystals; (3) the bulk
photorefractive effect will be measured by writing holographic diffraction
gratings; (4) planar waveguides will be made by in-diffusion of titanium; and
(5) optical damage in the waveguides will be measured. The results of each of
these steps will be correlated to understand what hydrogen defects are present
and what their effects are. A better understanding of hydrogen in lithium
niobate will allow fabrication of waveguides with longer life and higher power
transmission capabilities. This proposal describes work which will further
characterize the photorefractive effect in lithium niobate. The understanding
obtained in the proposed study should allow the fabrication of improved optical
devices. The major thrusts of this study will be to identify hydrogen related
defects which are likely to be present in lithium niobate, and to assess their
positive or negative effects on the photorefractive effect. The identifications
will be made by studying crystals which have been equilibrated in carefully
controlled environments.