* 8710765
* The Effectiveness of Poisons and Preservatives on           Preventing the Decomposition of Organic Matter Collected in Sediment Traps
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1991
* Cindy Lee, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/1991
* USD 185,812.00

The proposal research will investigate the ability of commonly-used poisons and
preservatives to prevent alteration and decomposition of organic matter
collected in sediment traps. In-situ experiments will be conducted under
conditions which represents both coastal and open ocean areas, periods of
maximum high and low productivity, and oxic and anoxic environments. The
experiments will test the ability of different poisons/preservations to prevent
fundamental information on the relative decomposition rates of individual
compounds and compound classes, specifically contrasting terrigenous and marine
material in oxic and anoxic basins. Two major questions will be addressed: 1)
what is the effectiveness of various poisons and preservations on the
composition of organic matter collected in sediment traps; and 2) what is the
extent of decomposition of preservation of the major classes of biogenic
compounds? The approach of answering these questions will be to determine
concentrations of organic compounds (lipids, sugars, amino acids, pigments, and
lignin oxidation products) in sediment traps chloroform, salt gradient,
formalin, or antibiotics. Field experiments will be Saanich Inlet, British
Columbia, in oxic and anoxic waters, and at the time-series Station S off
Bermuda.