* 8710103
* Theory of Adaptive Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Jerome Busemeyer, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 02/28/1990
* USD 67,810.00

The purpose of this research is to investigate how individuals learn to improve
their decision-making skills on the basis of experience resulting from
consequences of past decisions. The research was designed to evaluate
empirically a mathematical learning theory that can be summarized by three
principles: The first principle describes how each situation is categorized for
the purpose of identifying a set of appropriate decision-making rules; the
second principle describes how one particular rule is selected from a set of
competing rules on the basis of average past performance; and the third
principle describes how the performance of each decision rule is slowly improved
by a fine tuning process guided by feedback from previous consequences. The
first two experiments will test the hypothesis that a simple "hill-climbing"
mechanism is used to fine tune and improve the performance of a given rule.
Experiment 1 will investigate how diagnostic criteria are learned in a medical
diagnosis task, and Experiment 2 will investigate how individuals learn to
improve resource allocations to maximize profits. The next two experiments will
test the hypothesis that rules are selected on the basis of performance
estimates produced by a recency-weighted averaging mechanism. Experiment 3 will
investigate how individuals learn to choose among fictitious medical treatments
that differ according to efficacy, and Experiment 4 will investigate how
individuals learn to choose among diagnostic rules for categorizing fictitious
medical patients. The last two experiments will test the hypothesis that
decision situations are categorized prior to rule selection, and rule
performance is assessed separately for each category. Experiment 5 will test the
hypothesis that untrained decision makers rely on concrete surface features,
whereas trained desision makers rely on abstract structural principles for
categorizing decision situations. Experiment 6 will investigate how individuals
learn to discriminate rule performance on the basis of envirionmental cues.
Overall, this research program will improve our understanding about the
evolution of decision strategies, the development of both optimal and non-
optimal strategies, and the process that novice decision makers use to become
experts through practice.