* 8710230
* The Influence of State Law and Local Governance on Local    Finance
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1990
* Eric Monkkonen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 10/31/1990
* USD 70,626.00

Until recently, legal and political theory has been dominated by the untested
hypothesis that local government functions in a legal system crippled and
frustrated by state and federal limitations. It has been asserted that the
constitutional limitations historically imposed by state governments on the
truncated and dependent local governments has frustrated the proper and natural
development of municipal government in the U.S. and accounts for a whole host of
contemporary problems. The fundamental power of American local government has
been shaped by this "strict" construction of its power, a construction enforced
through both state and federal court decisions down through the twentieth
century. Dr. Monkkonen is conducting a socio-legal historical analysis of the
efforts of state government to control or limit the indebtedness of local
governments in the nineteenth century. His preliminary work at the state level
indicates that there is no association between states that did and did not
impose debt limits on the subsequent indebtedness of local governments. He will
now examine legal control of local politics beginning with the Illinois
constitution of 1870 as the basis for investigation. He will reanalyze data from
a survey of 1200 local governments in Illinois in 1870 together with the
censuses of 1870 and 1880 to study the impact of the imposition of debt limits
between these dates. Local variations will be studied and extensive archival
analyses in a subset of communities will be conducted to understand the
political dynamics of variations. Issues that will be explored in the analysis
include the nature of corporate, fiscal behavior, how government
entrepreneurship was determined, the relationship between levels of government
and popular political action, and the success of regulatory laws. Most
importantly, the research takes an era of experimentation with local government
entrepreneurship and examines whether externally mandated regulations constrict
emergent, local public/private capital development or whether municipal
corporations (local governments) limit their own fiscal behavior, with the main
restriction to local fiscal behavior coming from risk aversive voters more than
from any external controls. The Illinois survey and subsequent fiscal limitation
activities represent a unique opportunity to examine the interactions between
law, politics, and finance. The building and behavior of the American "state"
has become a priority agenda for both theory and empirical research. The
empirical results of this research will add new evidence that possibly the local
state, not the national state, was the locus of American state building and
provided a form of corporate entrepreneurship.