* 8710013
* Universities' Research Conference; Cambridge, Massachusetts;Fall 1988 and Spring 1989
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Geoffrey Carliner, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1990
* USD 76,300.00

The NBER Summer Institute brings together economists from universities,
government and international organizations for a few days or a few weeks of
seminars, workshops, conferences, and collaborative research. Last year's Summer
Institute included 316 economists from 94 universities and academic
institutions. Similar numbers are expected for the 1987 Summer Institute funded
by this grant. The Summer Institute provides a unique opportunity for economists
to work closely with others in their areas of specialty for extended and
generally intense periods of research. Although numerous conferences permit
researchers a few hours in which to exchange ideas, only NBER's Summer Institute
lasts long enough to allow serious collaboration among economists from several
institutions. While there are, of course, presentations of work nearing
completion, emphasis is placed on the "workshop" aspects of the program, where
new ideas are raised, preliminary research ideas are developed, and plans for
joint or coordinated research efforts are established. The Summer Institute is
organized into six programs: economic fluctuations, financial markets and
monetary economics, international studies, labor studies, productivity, and
taxation. Each program has its own group of participants and its own structure.
Although there is considerable variation among the programs, a typical Summer
Institute program will last for one to three weeks, with seminars each morning
and afternoon devoted to individual research. Some programs conclude with a more
formal conference. Programs may include a variety of subjects or they may be
organized around specific topics. Workshops are also planned on supercomputers
and data archives.