* 8710933
* Cognitive Control of Movement Sequences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1991
* David Rosenbaum, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1991
* USD 145,104.00

The aim of this project is to develop a detailed model of the planning and
control of voluntary movements in humans. Fundamental knowledge in this area can
inform robotics, physical education and rehabilitation, and the design of human-
machine systems. Three lines of experiments will be pursued. One will focus on a
phenomenon recently discovered in Rosenbaum's laboratory under his current NSF
support. This parameter remapping effect is a tendency for people's performance
of repeated movement sequences to suffer when characteristics of individual
movements change from one performance cycle to the next. Experiments will
explore the underlying causes, generality, and susceptibility to training of
this phenomenon. In addition, the effect will be used to shed light on the
building blocks for movements and the rules governing their combination. Another
line of experiments will be concerned with another phenomenon that was also
recently discovered in Rosenbaum's laboratory. Tentatively called the response
switching effect, it is a dramatic reduction in the rate at which people can
alternate between vocal and manual responses, compared to the rate at which they
can produce manual or vocal responses alone. The phenomenon is surprising, since
current theories suggest that it should be possible to produce vocal and manual
responses in parallel and therefore very quickly. Several experiments will
attempt to identify the source of this effect. A final part of the project will
focus on the planning of skilled actions. Experiments will address the question
of how people formulate plans for the manipulation of objects. The method will
be to record the amount of time that people take, and the sorts of movements
they choose to perform, jsut after seeing an array of objects for which an
abstractly defined task was given beforehand (e.g., place the object in the
container). The model of planning to be derived from the research should be of
interest to roboticists and to clinicians who deal with motor disorders.