* 8710081
* ROW: Multi-echelon Inventory Models and Queueing Network    Models for Repairable Spares
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Margaret Schaefer, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/1989
* USD 40,668.00

The PI has developed several maintenance-center inventory models; in each she
has considered the problem of determining how many repairable spare parts to
stock at a maintenance center. Complex machines receive scheduled overhauls at
the maintenance center, at which time all failed parts are removed and replaced
by spares. The failed parts are repaired and returned for use as spares. If a
part is needed for an overhaul while all spares are in the repair shop, the
resulting shortage is remedied by emergency repair at premium cost. Objectives
have included: (1) maximizing job-completion rate subject to a constraining on
total inventory investment; (2) minimizing expected shortage costs, under a
similar constraint; (3) determining the optimal number of spares and repair
strategy when there is a choice of repair rates, using a Markov decision model;
and (4) determining the optimal replenishment policy when failed spares are
sometimes condemned as irreparable. In the proposed research, PI will study (1)
multi-echelon inventory models and (2) cyclic queuing networks, in order to
incorporate these ideas into more realistic models. This research has been
reviewed and recommended for funding under the program for Research
Opportunities for Women, which incorporates considerations of professional
development, in this case through participation in the operations research
program at Stanford University.