* 8710928
* A Longitudinal Study of Individual Decreolization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Charlene Sato, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 12/31/1990
* USD 60,000.00

Abstract Narrative A process which has come to be of great interest to
linguistic researchers over the past several years is the process of
decreolization. Creole languages typically emerge in a contact situation between
two (or more) languages of unequal social status. It has been reliably and
repeatedly observed that the members of a creole-speaking community vary among
themselves in the specific variety of the creole which they speak, some speaking
versions much closer to the superstrate or high-status language than others. It
has also been observed that there appears to be some change over time in the
linguistic situation in the community, with more and more speakers speaking
varieties closer and closer to the superstrate language. This pattern of change
is called decreolization. The exact nature of decreolization is a matter of
controversy. Two primary views prevail: that individual speakers actually change
their own dialect over time, replacing creole features with superstrate
features; or that individual speakers may extend their linguistic repertoires,
for example by adding new vocabulary items from the superstrate language, but
real change takes place only from generation to generation. The project proposed
here is designed to investigate this controversy directly. Past studies have had
to infer the course of historical development from the current status of
speakers of different ages. In this project, the investigator will be able to
trace the actual changes in the dialects of six individual speakers over the
course of 14 years. This is possible because the speakers were subjects of an
intensive study of Hawaiian Creole English carried out 14 years ago, the data
from which are still readily available. During the forthcoming project, the
investigator will examine the full set of linguistic variables which were
recorded in the earlier study, and determine whether the speakers have changed
their dialects in the interim. The Principal Investigator is highly qualified to
undertake this research. She is herself a native speaker of Hawaiian Creole
English, well trained in the research techniques of sociolinguistics. She was a
member of the team that carried out the original research project 14 years ago,
which was the source of the baseline data against which the current situation is
to be compared. The proposed project offers the opportunity to come up with a
definitive answer to a key current question of linguistic theory.