* 8710305
* Inference, Instruction, and Pragmatic Reasoning Schemas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1991
* Patricia Cheng, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1991
* USD 145,058.00

The classical view of reasoning holds that people solve problems by applying
formal inferential rules such as the syntactic rules of deductive logic.
Evidence based on previous work by Nisbett, Cheng, and Holyoak shows that people
typically do not reason using such rules; instead, they use what they term
pragmatic reasoning schemas, which are clusters of abstract rules organized
according to goals and conditions of applicability. The pragmatic schemas
studied so far include regulation schemas, such as permissions and obligations,
and a qualitative version of the law of large numbers. Teaching such abstract
pragmatic schemas improved reasoning, both immediately following training and
after a delay of a week or two, whereas teaching formal rules did not improve
reasoning, even immediately following training (or, in other studies, improved
reasoning immediately, but the improvement decayed rapidly). One plausible
explanation is that pragmatic rules are organized according to the conditions
under which they apply, and therefore can be applied and practiced once they are
learned. In contrast, formal rules do not specify conditions of applicability
and therefore are difficult to apply. The first set of experiments will extend
the pragmatic schema approach to the evaluation of evidence on cause-and-effect
relations. The first experiment will test whether people use pragmatic rather
than formal rules in evaluating causal relations. It will also investigate the
reasons for common fallacies about causal relations. The second experiment will
measure the effectiveness of current graduate training on causal reasoning in
psychology and chemistry. Psychology students are exposed to a wider range of
causal relations than chemistry students, and therefore should be more accurate
in classifying events according to the type of causal relation involved. The
third experiment will test whether causal reasoning can be taught effectively by
abstract means, as predicted by the pragmatic hypothesis. The second set of
experiments will extend the study of the duration of training effects of formal
and pragmatic rules. Pragmatic training will include rules on obligations and
causal relations. The third set of experiments will examine whether it is the
naturalness or the pragmatic nature of the rules that lead to effective
training. The last study will evaluate a new course on reasoning based on
pragmatic rules. This research will lead to the development of instructions on
reasoning more effective than training in formal logic. The new instructions,
being theoretically based, will be more systematic as well as more general than
the case-based methodnow prevalent in law, medical, and graduate schools. The
instructions will cover reasoning on social regulations, explanation of
variability based on the law of large numbers, and the evaluation of evidence in
accepting or rejecting scientific hypotheses.