* 8710874
* Behavior and Protocol Specification of VLSI Systems for     Verification and Automation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1990
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 08/31/1990
* USD 60,000.00

The object of this research is to design and implement a hardware specification
language that has a hierarchical structure and a formal semantics for
specifications which not only assists in automating several costly and error-
prone tasks of VLSI design, but also guides test case generation. The language
must have sufficient expressive power so that it can express behavioral,
structural and temporal attributes of the chip or system design. The basis for
the language is a purely functional specification language, developed in his
doctoral research, called the Structural and Behavioral Language (SBL). The
proposed research will address questions of: (1) specification of timing
protocols; (2) characterization of the formal semantics; (3) implementation of
the language using object-oriented programming techniques; and (4) design
automation capabilities including test generation techniques. He will exercise
the language by specifying a large and functionally complex VLSI chip. As we
enter an era in which fabrication of several million transistors on a single
silicon chip is possible, integrated circuit designers are faced with the
difficult problem of specifying the external behavior of modules, their timing,
and then verifying that the design meets the specifications. Unfortunately the
advances in technologies have rendered existing hardware specification languages
inadequate for design of large, complex VLSI circuits. They have major short-
comings such as lack of high-level abstraction mechanisms, lack of formal
semantic definitions, poor support for design automation, and inability to
specify complex timing protocols. What is needed is research on means to express
circuit design specifications that can uniformly characterize the behavior as
well as timing of modules ranging in size from simple VLSI library modules to
entire micro-computer systems. The proposer will attack this problem by
designing a VLSI specification language which has a formal notation which will
capture design decisions precisely at all stages in the design of a chip or
system. This will facilitate a free exchange of design information, as well as
provide the structure for automatic verification of designs. This research will
lead to improvements in the quality, performance, and cost of VLSI circuit
designs. This two-year award is being made under the Engineering Initiation
Awards Program.