* 8710753
* Design of a Multiprocessor System for LISP
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Matthew Thazhuthaveetil, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 02/28/1990
* USD 60,000.00

Recent speculation into the nature of future computing systems has focused
attention on VLSI, artificial intelligence, and parallel processing. This
research focuses on the design of VLSI building blocks for multiprocessor
systems specifically for LISP, the premier language of AI (artificial
intelligence) research today. The initial system organization is based on the
SMALL LISP architecture, where processing functionality is partitioned across
two processing components--an evaluation processor and a list processor--whose
operation can be partly overlapped. A detailed design of system components based
on this partition is being developed. VLSI layouts are being done to get insight
into timing and the feasibility of the approach. Using this information for
guidelines, a software simulator is being developed to simulate component
performance as well as the effectiveness of the system organization. This
research is expected to impact computer architecture in several ways. It should
provide insight into the feasibility of extending the Decoupled Access/Execute
type of architecture to multi-processing systems. It could provide an early
preview of possible future generation LISP systems. Finally, this functional
composition approach could provide another approach to the design of computer
architectures for other similar languages.