* 8710330
* Conflict and Continuing Relationship Between Schools and    Parents or Children with Disabilities
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1987,09/30/1989
* David Engel, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 09/30/1989
* USD 85,451.00

Law and culture shape interactions between people and groups in society. The
relationships among various parties are pervaded by cultural images and social
values that give form to perceptions of events, expectations of behavior, and
definitions of acceptable and unacceptable conduct. Under certain circumstances
social interactions are perceived as "normal"; under others they are perceived
as problematic and conflictual. Dr. Engel examines the factors that lead people
to interpret a set of experiences as conflictual or nonconflictual in order to
better understand the emergence and transformation of conflict and the
invocation of the law. The particular social arena for the research is the
relationship between parents of children with physical disabilities and the
schools and school districts that plan and implement educational programs for
"handicapped" students. There are some important features of this setting for a
study of the relationship between law, culture, and conflict; namely, the
parties cannot "exit" from their dealings with one another since the
relationship is mandated by law. Thus, the relationship is a continuing one
rather than a one-time or intermittent social encounter. Also, it is distinct
from the continuing relationships studied previously because it involves an
individual and an institutional entity rather than two individuals, and it is
characterized by vast disparities in resources and authority rather than
involving parties of roughly equal power. Specifically, Dr. Engel examines the
continuing interactions between parents and schools in terms of their cultural
and legal context. Through a series of systematic interviews with parents over
the course of a year, the project traces the ways in which interactions are
perceived and interpreted and explores the reasons that conflicts emerge or fail
to emerge. Finally, through interviews and observations involving a separate
group of parents who have sought legal assistance, the study investigates how
and why the formal legal framework is actually invoked and what affect it has on
the relationship between parents, whom the law has attempted to empower, and
schools. Dr. Engel's study tests prevailing assumptions that continuing
relations are generally characterized by strong informal normative systems
worked out cooperatively by the parties in a situation where reciprocity and the
threat of withdrawal from the relationship may have little relevance.
Conventional theories of continuing relations also assume that the invocation of
formal law is less frequent than in one-time or intermittent interactions and
that it is dysfunctional for the relationship. While this study may indeed
discover that formal law is seldom invoked, it may also raise some questions as
to whether the potential role of law in dealings between parents and school
authorities is dysfunctional or functional for the relationship itself and for
the various parties involved.