* 8710226
* Determination of Physical Properties of Oceanic Sediments   From ODP Well Logs and Their Relationship to Diagenesis
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1990
* C Cheng, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 03/31/1990
* USD 70,500.00

Under this proposal, we intend to study the physical properties of ocean bottom
sediments and their relationship to the processes by which they were formed and
evolved. The properties of these sediments will be mostly obtained from
measurements made down the wells drilled during cruises of the Ocean Drilling
Program. If possible, we will also make direct laboratory measurements on any
actual samples of these sediments recovered during drilling. This proposal
involves three specific work tasks: 1) Analyze existing data sets collected
during the Ocean Drilling Program and the previous Deep Sea Drilling Project and
collect further data in future ODP cruises. These data sets will be analyzed to
obtained the shear wave velocity of the sediments. 2) Refine our method of
obtaining shear wave velocity of the sediments from the full waveform acoustic
logging data collected. This involves increasing the speed and accuracy of our
calculations, better signal processing techniques to reduce noise in the data,
and improvements in the model of sound wave propagations in these sediments. 3)
Study these sediments in the laboratory, whenever it is possible to do so. These
studies will involve inspecting the samples under a high power Scanning Electron
Microscope to find out their structure and composition, making direct
measurements of shear wave velocity and other physical properties, comparing
them to measurements made in the well, examining how these data fit into
existing theories about the formation and evolution of these sediments, and, if
necessary, developing new theory about these processes.