* 8710451
* Analysis of Blastoderm-Specific Genes in Drosophila
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Judith Lengyel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1991
* USD 263,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to understand the function of the >Drosophila>
segmentation gene >tailless> (>tll>). The mutant phenotype consists of
characteristic defects or absence of structures of segmental origin located near
the anterior and the posterior of the ectodermal region of the blastoderm. The
remaining segments appear larger. Like the identified "gap" segmentation genes,
>tll> mutants alter the >ftz> blastoderm striping pattern. Hence, >tll> acts
early in development. However, it appears to serve a unique function, as there
are no other zygotically active genes altering both poles of the embryo. While
the development of a segment pattern in insects has been explained on the basis
of a double gradient resulting from the action of two separate systems, it has
not been predicted that the products of a single gene might be involved in
establishing the two opposite poles. The objectives are to use molecular
techniques to isolate the >tll> gene and to characterize its gene product. In
situ hybridizations will be carried out to early embryos to determine whether
the transcript is localized to the anterior and posterior regions altered in the
mutants. The transcription unit will be defined and the transcription pattern
determined. The gene will be sequenced, antibodies will be raised against fusion
proteins, and the effect of mutations in other segmentation genes on expression
of >tll> will be assessed. The experiments will provide insight into a unique
gene which controls segmentation at the two ends of an organism, and so into the
process of cell determination at the onset of development.