* 8710786
* Nature and Transformations of Particulate Carbohydrates in  the Oceanic Water Column
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Kenneth Mopper, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/1989
* USD 149,327.00

Carbohydrates represent a major organic component of all marine organisms,
especially phytoplankton, and thus these substances constitute a large fraction
of oceanic particulate organic matter (POM). However, in comparison to other
important groups of biomolecules, eg, lipids and proteins, surprisingly little
attention has been paid to carbohydrates in oceanic POM. Therefore, a study to
test the following hypotheses: 1. During descent of particles in the water
column, storage carbohydrates are preferentially lost while structural
polysaccharides are relatively enhanced in the residue. The latter compounds can
be used as biomarkers, while loss of the former may be used to estimate the
energy potential (caloric value) and rate of degradation of POM with depth; 2.
Algae are the major sources of carbohydrates in the sea, but close to land,
terrigenous sources may become locally important. These inputs can be
differentiated on the basis of their carbohydrate compositions; 3. As a result
of microbial degradation during descent of particles, new polysaccharides are
formed. These new saccharides are to a large degree compositionally distinct
from the original materials and thus may be used to estimate the degree of
microbial degradation POM. The study will be based largely on analyses of
samples from sediment traps deployed as part of the VERTEX Program. Analytical
techniques will include the use of selective depolymerizations coupled with high
resolution GC and HPLC. When put in the context of the VERTEX Program,
especially work being done on proteins, lipids, and microbial activity, the
proposed study of carbohydrates should contribute significantly towards our
understanding of the processes affecting fluxes of organic material and
diagenesis in the watr column.