* 8710624
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowships in Plant Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Anne Sylvester, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 12/31/1989
* USD 52,982.00

The proposed study uses the available ligule-specific mutants to ask how
polarized cell divisions are regulated. The goal of the study is to test the
hypothesis that the cytoskeleton plays a structural role in the transmission of
the genetic information that directs cell division. The hypothesis will be
tested characterizing the cytoskeletal changes of normal and ligule-specific
mutants using immunocytochemistry of intact and sectioned leaf tissue.
Micromanipulation of leaf primordia will test for the time of determination of
the ligule, and inhibitor experiments will test for the role of specific
cytoskeletal components. The time of DNA synthesis, as determined by
autoradiography, will place the cytoskeletal changes within the context of the
cell cycle. Since ligule division is precise and predictable, a comparative
study with mutant plants will provide a means to isolate specific control points
during division. These results will clarify the process by which the
cytoskeleton participates in the establishment of cell polarity during division.
In order to completely understand the mechanistic events which result in an
ordered program in the developing organism, it is necessary to use the
techniques of genetics, cell biology, biochemistry, etc. Too often, however, the
several binds of expertise are not available to a single laboratory and the
combined approach is not used. This project brings together genetics and cell
biology to ask a significant developmental question. If the cytoskeleton is
implicated as a conduit of genetic information in the cell by this study, the
impact will be felt in all aspects of biology, not just the area of plant
biology.