* 8711516
* The Mu Transposons
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1993
* Michael Freeling, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1993
* USD 249,417.00

Perhaps the most fundamental question that must be answered for any transposable
element system is: "What encodes the autonomous (transposase) function and how
is it transmitted?" That is the primary question we address for the Mu
transposon system in maize. Five different approaches are proposed. 1) A newly
discovered Mu transposon is structurally consistent with autonomy. The element
will be added using T-DNA to a special tester line of tobacco plantlets: If the
transposon is autonomous it will specify "excisase" that will revert a tobacco
gene, leading to a kanomycin-resistent tobacco. A similar experiment will be
done using maize cells. 2) We recently discovered that some Mu transposons have
circular forms. These will be microinjected into the tester tobacco line and
into maize. 3) New Mu transposons will be characterized. 4) We will use a series
of genetic crosses to evaluate hypotheses for Mu copy number control, and will
also obtain mutants affecting Mu excision by selecting rare "phase change"
phenotypes. 5) We also propose to identify the transposase directly by looking
for specific protein-Mu binding. A secondary aim involves characterization of Mu
excision products. The information sought in these proposed experiments is not
only essential for our understanding of this truly unique transposon system, but
is essential if Mu is to be useful for biotechnology.