* 8711618
* Studies of Secondary Processes within High Pressure         Electron Capture Ion Sources
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/1987,04/30/1991
* Eric Grimsrud, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vickie Lewis
* 04/30/1991
* USD 317,221.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfields of mass spectrometery and gas chromatography. Of the methods
available for the trace analysis of environmentally or biomedically important
organic compounds, those based on high pressure, gas phase, electron capture
reactions in combination with capillary column gas chromatography have been
shown to possess superior potential. Two such methods incorporate the High
Pressure Electron Capture Mass Spectrometer (HPECMS) and the Electron Capture
Detector (ECD). During the course of this project, Professor Grimsrud and his
students will further develop techniques which utilize the HPECMS and the ECD
and will elaborate the underlying principles on which they depend. In spite of
its great potential for trace chemical analysis, the fundamental basis of
"Electron Capture Spectra" observed by HPECMS is often not explicable in terms
of electron capture processes, alone, because of poorly understood secondary
processes. One goal of this project is to improve the analytical utility of
HPECMS by revealing the existence and nature of such secondary processes and by
determining the means by which their detrimental effects on analysis can be
eliminated and their beneficial effects enhanced. To this end, a specialized
pulsed electron beam mass spectrometer will be constructed which will allow
greater control and variation of experimental parameters than is possible with
conventional, commercial instruments. Also, this research will extend the
capability of the ECD through the use of photon-induced electron detachments of
negative ions within this device.