* 8711273
* Claims for Effector Independence and Generalized Motor      Programs:  Evidence from Handwriting
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1990
* Charles Wright, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1990
* USD 114,989.00

Human movements, from the simplest pointing movement to more elaborate multi-
gesture movements, follow directions contained in pre-existing mental plans,
often called motor programs. Although we are seldom aware of the existence of
such programs, their purpose is to structure commands to the muscles so that
movements can be made with minimal reliance on slow, feedback-based, error-
correcting processes. While there is general agreement on this point, the
structure of motor programs is far from clear. Motor control theorists have
speculated that motor programs can be generalized. This idea, which stems from
an analogy to subprograms in computer programming, suggests that motor programs
in memory have formal parameters that are replaced with actual, situation-
specific values when a movement is about to be made. This research will explore
the empirical reality of motor-program generalization as well as the
implications of various proposals describing how such generalizations might be
implemented. These issues will be addressed in the domains of handwriting and
drawing movements. While this research will investigate motor program
generalization across several movement parameters, e.g., movement speed or size,
special emphasis will be given to a particular form of motor- program
generalization known as effector independence. This term describes the ability
of a single motor program to drive any of several effector systems to produce
movement associated with that program. Effector independence is claimed to draw
empirical support from several informal comparisons of the shapes of words
written using only the wrist and fingers versus those same words written with
the whole arm, as on a chalkboard. In this context, different effector systems
might include the right hand, the left hand, the whole right arm, or even a
foot. It is this diversity of the movement systems involved, with their
different joint configurations, muscle systems, and types of nerve innervation,
that makes the claim of effector independence so tantalizing. This research will
proceed along two lines. The first will examine, for previously learned
movements, the disruptive effects on the movement's shape, timing, force, and
velocity caused by manipulating a number of aspects of the experimental
situation. In the second line of research, people will learn novel movements
under one set of conditions, and their ability to transfer that learning to new
conditions will be studied. The insights about the structure and function of
motor programs gained from this research will have potential application to the
training of skills requiring coordinated movement, the diagnosis and treatment
of movement disorders, and the planning and representation of movements in
robotic systems.