* 8711831
* Petrological Study of the Early Stages of Alteration of the Los Pelambres Porphyry Copper Deposit, Chile
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1987,11/30/1989
* James Munoz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 11/30/1989
* USD 6,050.00

This award supports the dissertation of Milka A. Skewes, a Chilean graduate
student who is studying for her Ph.D. under James L. Munoz at the University of
Colorado. They will study the fluid transport and deposition of metals in the
early stages of development of the porphyry Cu deposits of Los Pelambres, Chile
which are similar to those in Butte, Montana. Samples from Los Pelambres with
hydrothermal deposition in veins will be collected and the mica minerals from
the veins chemically analyzed for the halogens, F and Cl. The vein density at
Los Pelambres is low and therefore there is little alteration by later events on
the early veins. Halites reside in the mica in these veins and the study of the
F/Cl ratio gives a record of the changes in halogen composition of the
hydrothermal fluids during formation. The veins are associated with biotitic
breccia which forms a link between the host rock and early magmatic fluids.
Samples of this breccia available at the University allow a study of the
transition from the magmatic to the hydrothermal stage in this deposit. The
results of this research on a unique ore deposit which makes an important
contribution to the economy of Chile will significantly add to the understanding
of mineral ore genesis. This research is particularly relevant to the SDC
Program objective of supporting projects related to a developing-country problem
and in this case a similar one in the U.S. Munoz has developed the techniques of
using biotitic mineral chemistry and has facilities for petrographic studies,
fluid inclusion measurements and electron microprobe analysis. Work is underway
on samples provided by W. Atkinson. The requested funds will be used for field
studies, thin section preparation and microprobe analysis. The breccia zone will
be mapped and sampled by Skewes over three-four weeks this winter and sample
analysis carried out at Colorado. The results will be valuable to the copper
industries in both Chile and the U.S. and there should be a significant
contribution to international science and the training of the Chilean student.