* 8711753
* The Language of Dispute Managment in the Kingdom of Tonga
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Susan Philips, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 12/31/1990
* USD 120,419.00

Abstract Narrative Language can be studied from a variety of perspectives: as a
formal object, as a cognitive capacity, as a cultural artifact, as a medium of
social interaction. The project proposed here falls into the latter category. As
a study in what has been called the ethnography of communication, the research
proposed here is based on the premise that the expla- nation of the forms, and
form-meaning relations, that language takes on in actual usage is to be found in
the social uses to which the language is being put. The study focuses on one
category of language use, dispute management, which has received considerable
attention already from ethnographers of communication, and therefore is the
topic of a growing theoretical framework to which this study will be related.
The new dimension which the proposed study will pro- vide is examination of
linguistic usage in a language and a culture fundamentally different in salient
respects from the western cultures in which much of the previous research on
this topic has taken place. The locale of the research will be Tonga, an island
nation in the southwest Pacific with a Poly- nesian language and culture. Tonga
has a mixture of western and indigenous institutions for formal resolution of
disputes, including the court, the fono or town meeting, and the church. The
Tongan language includes universal patterns such as inter- rogatives and
quotations, and also locally specific patterns such as distinct speech levels
depending on the social status of the interlocutors and the person being talked
about, and these are used to definite rhetorical effect in complex inter- active
ways in the dispute management process. The focus of the project will be to
understand, describe, and explain these linguistic patterns in terms of the
social settings in which they are used. The Principal Investigator is a leading
anthropological linguist who has made a number of important contributions
throughout her career to the ethnography of communication. For the past few
years she has been focusing her attention on the uses of language in legal
settings. The project proposed here thus builds in a natural way on her ongoing
research.