* 8711519
* Dominant Strategy Theory and (NON-) Homogeneous Economies
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Joseph Ostroy, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1990
* USD 99,108.00

The contribution of this project comes from developing a new approach to an
issue central to economic theory, i.e., the determinants of market failure.
Economists have compiled a taxonomy of exceptions to market efficiency. For
example, optimality theorems for markets do not hold if the returns to
production are increasing or if public goods are bought or sold. This project
uses developments in mechanism theory and models of economies with a continuum
of agents to develop a more general and more powerful anatomy of market failure.
This research builds on past work by the investigators. They are capable of
doing the work. The study of mechanisms is an attractive approach because of its
generality. Markets are one of many different types of mechanisms for allocating
resources, so markets may fail to achieve economic efficiency where some other
mechanisms might not fail. The investigators have shown in their previous work
that the source of mechanism failure is the presence of monopoly power due to
increasing returns, externalities and public goods. In this project they
characterize efficient dominant strategy mechanisms applicable to transferable
or non-transferable utility and finite agent or nonatomic models. For the
existence, or feasibility, of such mechanisms, homogenity of the environment is
shown to be the decisive condition without which there is mechanism failure.
Connections are drawn between mechanism failure and market failure. Comparisons
are made between Bayesian Nash equilibrium and dominant strategy equilibrium. A
special case, the double-auction model, is examined for dominant strategy
properties and the findings are applied to the question of attainment of
equilibrium in a market with a small number of agents. Theoretically, asymptotic
properties of double-auction markets are investigated. The issue of homogeneity
versus non-homogeneity in nonatomic models is addressed with special reference
to the existence of Walrasian equilibrium, the characterization of Walrasian
equilibria that are not perfectly competitive, and the phenomenon of
monopolistic competition.