* 8711342
* Concepts and Meanings of Formal Domain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Alan Schoenfeld, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 02/28/1991
* USD 151,139.00

This project will develop a scientific analysis of the knowledge and processes
involved in understanding algebra at the high- school level. The research will
use three main approaches: One approach is analysis of conceptual growth, a
method that has been used productively in the study of cognitive development.
The second approach uses tasks taken from the mathematics curriculum and related
tasks designed to show what students are able to do and what knowledge they have
that enables them to do it. The third approach uses methods of artificial
intelligence to construct models of students' knowledge and cognitive processes.
The research will focus on students' understanding of the concepts of variables
and functions and how this understanding relates to their knowledge of the
symbolic expressions of algebra. The research on conceptual growth will study
students' ability to reason about two physical systems involving functional
relations, a winch in which the final position of a block depends on several
factors, and a transfer of liquid from one cylinder to another, where the final
height of liquid depends on several other factors. Previous research has shown
that students have significant understanding of functions in these systems
before they study algebra, and this research will document the increases in
students' understanding as they study relevant formal mathematics. The research
on understanding symbolic representations will study students' understanding of
the meanings of formulas and graphs and their relations. Tasks used in these
studies will include problems that are included in the curriculum, as well as
more open-ended tasks designed to tap specific aspects of students'
understanding. The research on computer modelling will use the results of the
empirical studies to develop definite hypotheses about specific knowledge that
students acquire in order to perform tasks in the curriculum and other reasoning
tasks when they understand the concepts, and about the ways in which that
understanding changes and grows. Increased scientific knowledge about the
understanding of concepts in algebra will contribute to our understanding of the
domains of conceptual growth and the analysis of understanding the meanings of
symbols. Previous research on conceptual growth has studied informal domains of
knowledge, such as taxonomic categories and biological processes. This research
will extend those analyses by studying algebra, a domain with a formal
structure. Most previous studies of symbolic understanding have focused on
ordinary language, and the study of understanding the formal system of algebra
will provide new insights into ways that meanings of symbolic representations
are understood. Results will also be useful in the improvement of school
instruction in algebra and for other training in which mathematical
understanding is important.