* 8711142
* Analysis of Holostean Pituitary Pro-opiomelanocortin Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Robert Dores, University of Denver
* Continuing grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 04/30/1992
* USD 104,300.00

The pituitary hormone, adrenocorticotropin (ACTH), is derived from the precursor
protein, pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC). This precursor not only contains the
sequence of ACTH, but also the sequences of alpha-melanotropin, beta-
melanotropin and the endogenous opiod peptide, beta-endorphin. POMC is
synthesized in two regions of the pituitary as well as in distinct sets of
neurons in the central nervous system. Although this biosynthetic pathway is
present in all extant vertebrates, few studies have attempted to explain how
this biosynthetic pathway evoluted. Insights into this issue can be obtained
from studies on species that appear to exhibit traits that can be considered
ancestral. This study will focus on two "mainline species," the holostean fish,
Amia calva, and the Australian lungfish, Neoceratodus forsteri. These species
occupy pivotal positions in the phylogeny of the bony fish. The holostean fish
are on a line of evolution which gave rise to the teleosts, the modern bony
fish, and the lungfush are on the line of evolution which gave rise to the
tetrapods. The projects in this proposal will focus on the biochemistry of the
POMC end products in these species. These studies will provide new information
on the evolution of the pro-opiomelanocortin biosynthetic pathway and will
further our understanding of the mechanisms involved in production of chemical
signals by endocrine cells.