* 8711320
* Dissertation Research:  Innovation During the Early Upper   Paleolithic
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1989
* NONE NONE, New York University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 03/31/1989
* USD 9,998.00

Technological innovation first becomes apparent in the archaeological record in
the Upper Paleolithic. This can be seen in the remains of bone and antler
projectile points. This project will focus on processes of technological change
by studying functional continuities and developments in projectile points during
the early Upper Paleolithic in Belgium, Germany, France, and Spain. Specifically
the student will look at manufacturing strategies, morphology, and patterns of
wear on tools. While the cultural and biological changes surrounding the
Middle/Upper Paleolithic transition have recently been the focus of extensive
archaeological inquiry, to date anthropologists have devoted little attention to
patterns, structures, and processes of early technological innovation and
invention. This study will go beyond traditional uses of bone and antler
projectile points as chronological markers and will enable scholars to discuss
the role of technological styles during the Upper Paleolithic. This research
involves new methods of investigation and will result in new information on
early Upper Paleolithic technology. In addition, the use of the concept of
innovation to explain the technological changes connected with early Homo
sapiens sapiens will shed new light on the emergence of modern human beings.