* 8711324
* China and America Air/Sea Experiments
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1991
* Richard Arimoto, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 08/31/1991
* USD 300,000.00

There is growing awareness that atmospheric transport delivers geochemically
significant quantities of trace substances to the remote atmosphere and to
inland waters, coastal waters of various regions and the open ocean. Interest in
the atmospheric transport and deposition of trace substances has increased
significantly in the past 10 to 20 years in part because this pathway is now
recognized as an important means for dispersing chemical contaminants throughout
the environment. The natural biogeochemical cycles of a variety of trace
substances have, in fact, been altered by air pollutants in various regions, but
the composition of gases and particles in the atmosphere of the People's
Republic of China is unique. This uniqueness is a result of material derived
from anthropogenic sources as well as those from naturally occurring sources.
The major source of air pollutants in China is the combustion of coal and
intense agricultural development in China. Naturally occurring trace substances,
including mineral dust particles, are important components of the atmosphere,
and chemical reactions between naturally occurring and anthropogenic materials
are now known to be important. High concentrations of atmospheric dust occur in
China during the spring and early summer due to the eolian transport of mineral
particles from arid regions in central and western China. Understanding the
chemistry, atmospheric transport, and air/sea exchange of Asia dust is an
important biogeochemical research issue. The objectives for the cooperative
atmospheric and ocean science studies between the U.S. and China are: (1) to
characterize the chemical composition of aerosol particles and rainwater from
Asian and determine the areal and temporal variability in the concentrations of
mineral aerosol, trace elements, nitrate, phosphate, and sulfate; (2) to
determine the integrated atmospheric deposition rates of these substances to
coastal waters; (3) to evaluate the extent to which anthropogenic emissions from
China, particularly those that result from the combustion of coal, affect the
chemistry of the atmosphere and waters of the western North Pacific; and (4) to
identify probable source areas for mineral dust through meteorological analyses.
The concentrations of selected trace elements (Al, As, Br, Ca, Cd, Cl, Co, Cr,
Cu, Fe, I, Mn, Na, Pb, Sb, Sc, Se, Sn, Th, V, and Zn) will be determined in
aerosol particle samples and atmospheric deposition samples from the near
surface troposphere at three sites along the coast of the People's Republic of
China (PRC) and at one site in the Central Loess Plateau in China. The
concentrations of sulfate, nitrate, and phosphate also will be determined in
aliquots of the samples by scientists from China and verified by analyses in the
U.S.