* 8711315
* The Development of Modern Zoology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1989
* Cynthia Pyle, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 07/31/1989
* USD 25,000.00

The modern world view is distinguished from the medieval or ancient view by what
has been called a quest for reality: how does the world really work? "Reality"
refers here to a definite structure of the universe independent of ourselves as
observers. In even recent history of science, this quest for reality has been
assigned only to those studying what we today define as science, that is our
physical and natural sciences: astronomy, physics, botany, zoology,and even
medicine, which occupies a special position. It is also commonly agreed that the
transition occurred with the Scientific Revolution of the 16th and 17th
centuries in physics and astronomy. Dr. Pyle, in this pathbreaking study, argues
that the modern view emerged not only in science, but also in humanities and
that it was the humanist traditions of the Renaissance of the 14th and 15th
centuries are aspects of the same quest which influenced the development of
science. She argues that the zoologists' approach to the masses of new materials
and species which were flooding into Europe as a result of the explorations of
the new world which began in the 15th and 16th centuries drew their techniques
at least analogously from the humanists' approach to classical texts. The
methods the humanists used to identify texts, date them, and test their validity
are comparable according to Jacob Bronowski to the scientific method and, in the
case of zoology, are directly analogous. Like the humanists, the zoologists
relied increasingly on first-hand evidence,including specimens and drawings sent
from one investigator to another. Under this grant, she will examine manuscript
sources in Europe in order to determine the development of the new zoological
methods in the 15th and 16th centuries. She will examine the work of a number of
zoologists of this period in order to compare the philological and zoological
methods in order to test her hypothesis that the two methods are indeed
analogous and stem from the same scientific impulse which arose in the 15th and
16th centuries. This study thus promises to clarify the origins not only of
zoology, a little-studied area in the history of science, but, more importantly,
to lay the groundwork for a whole new interpretation of the origins of modern
scientific methodology. The work is controversial as any new interpretation of
the rise of science will be. Yet it also provides new insights into a force
which has completely reshaped the world we live in.