* 8711857
* The effect of Federal Judicial Appointments on Judicial Process and Behavior
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* Claude Rowland, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 12/31/1988
* USD 29,291.00

Judicial process and the exercise of judicial judgment may be affected by the
politics of federal judicial appointments; yet, understanding the impact of the
appointment process on the lower federal district courts remains rudimentary and
incommensurate with its importance. Dr. Rowland's research addresses fundamental
questions about the links between politics, judgment, and the evolution of
American jurisprudence. In an effort which integrates diverse theories from
economics, social psychology, and political science, Dr. Rowland's investigation
includes the measurement of appointment effects on both the published and
unpublished opinions of judges in the areas of civil rights, civil liberties,
labor, regulation and contract cases decided between 1981 and 1985. Not only is
the effect of the appointing President to be examined, but also the "home state
effect," as measured by the politics of those home state forces which generated
the appointment. In addition, attorneys involved in settlement and litigation in
two jurisdictions, Kansas City, Kansas, and Kansas City, Missouri, are
interviewed to determine the extent to which their decisions to settle or
litigate were based on the judge's perceived predilections and political
leanings. While there is much conjecture about the interrelationship between
political and legal processes, this study should yield systematic knowledge of
how the two mesh to influence judicial behavior.