* 8711382
* Evolution of Modern Intra-Arc Sedimentary Basins in the     Central Philippine Archipelago
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1991
* Daniel Sarewitz, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 05/31/1991
* USD 245,149.00

Intra-arc basins are important but are little-studied component of complex
island arc systems at consuming plate margins. These basins commonly mark the
sites of important tectonic features such as major strike-slip faults, incipient
rifts, or trapped fragments of ocean crust. The lack of investigation of these
basins has resulted in an inadequate appreciation of their significance, in both
modern and ancient arc terrances. In this award the investigators would study
several marine and non-marine intra-arc basins in the Central Philippine
archipelago. They will use a combination of marine geophysical and geological
tools such as SeaMarc II Sonar, Single Channel Seismic profiler, Piston corer,
etc., along with land geological survey techniques. This investigation will
focus on the present-day tectonic setting and detailed structural evolution of
basins, as well as on their stratigraphic and sedimentologic histories, and the
spatial and temporal relations between sedimentation, volcanism and tectonism.
The study is intended to solve regional problems, and to contribute to the
general understanding of processes of internal disruption and sedimentation in
island arcs, and to develop practicable criteria for identifying intra-arc
basins in ancient, accreted arc terranes. The investigators have an excellent
record of working in the Philippines water and the project has very high chances
of being successful.