* 8711957
* Knowledge-Guided Detection of Inner Ear Hair Cells in       Digitial Images (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Terry Weymouth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joyce
* 11/30/1990
* USD 125,303.00

The designer of an automated scene understanding system needs to have a
repertoire of methods for the effective representation of knowledge and access
to a variety of methods for image processing. In addition, such a design process
is helped by an understanding of methods for controlling search in the
construction of solutions which combine uncertain evidence from multiple
plausible interpretations. One strategy for adding to the available methods for
scene understaning is to build successive systems for interpretation in
increasingly difficult domains. This research, focuses on a domain that demands
capabilities which exceed those of the current techniques. The project is aimed
at developing a system for the automatic interpretation of tissue section images
of hair cells of the organ of Corti in the inner ear. This domain is complex
enough to engender the development of new techniques and tractable enough for
study. Domain knowledge is available in the form of expectations for location,
orientation, and geometric relations of objects, and in the form of expert
protocol for interpretation. Because of the nature of the images, interpretation
based only on local features is impractical, providing the opportunity to
investigate methods for combining uncertain evidence from several sources under
the guidance of domain knowledge. Further, interpretation requires the use of
images from several focal planes, giving us the opportunity to investigate
symbolic feedback in a combination of both data- driven and knowledge-controlled
interpretation methods. Finally, results from human interpretation of slides
provide clear standards for evalutiion of the system.