* 8711083
* Assigning Discount Rates to Future Life Saving:  An         Examination of Individuals' Preferences
* BIO,BIO
* 09/01/1987,05/31/1992
* Paul Portney, Resources For the Future Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 05/31/1992
* USD 55,439.00

The evaluation of government spending or regulatory programs is often difficult,
and especially so when comparisons must be made about programs that save or
extend lives at different points in time. How are we to evaluate a program
saving 10 lives this year against one saving 10 lives 20 years from now?
Economists often assign a "discount rate" to future costs or benefits, but
extending or saving future lives cannot be assigned a clear monetary discounted
value. One way to proceed in the face of this difficulty is to examine
individuals preferences for present as opposed to future life saving.
Specifically, this project will allow an economist, a sociologist and a
philosopher to explore several different methods of eliciting information about
the implicit rate(s) at which individuals' discount future life saving (if at
all) when asked to choose between hypothetical but nevertheless realistic
government regulatory or spending programs to prevent premature mortality. The
methods include in-person interviews, mail surveys, and telephone surveys. Each
one of these methods will identify aspects of life-saving programs that are
intrinsic to individuals' discounting judgments. Extrinsic factors that could
affect the validity of the findings will also be identified, and steps taken to
overcome them. This is the first study that attempts to probe, in a systematic
way, the difficult issues associated with comparative choices between life
saving programs and individual attitudes towards them. Its results will
contribute to our understanding of the normative implications of these choices,
and to the development of new and more sophisticated techniques for undertaking
these kinds of studies and analyses. The investigators are exceptionally well
qualified; institutional support is good; costs are reasonable; the research
plan is very appropriate for this exploratory phase; results are likely to be
influential. This is exactly the kind of cross-disciplinary collaborative
research EVS should encourage. Total support in the amount of $55,439 is
recommended, of which $40,000 is awarded now.