* 8711218
* Simulation of Human Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Douglas Hintzman, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1991
* USD 156,020.00

Previous NSF-supported research by Hintzman has shown that a simple theory of
human memory, based on a few core assumptions, can account for a surprising
number of empirical phenomena uncovered in experiments on human learning and
memory. The basic assumptions of the theory have been formalized in computer
programs, which have been tested on learning and memory tasks analogous to those
given to humans participanting in experiments. Such simulation work is a
valuable aid in the development of theories of cognition, particularly theories
involving factors such as parallel processing and variability, whose
consequences are difficult to anticipate intuitively. The basic assumptions of
the Hintzman simulation model, for example, concern processes underlying the
operation of just two fundamental variables, repetition and similarity. However,
the model accounts for several phenomena that previously had been thought to be
unique, and to require their own ad hoc explanations. The research will consist
of three types of activity: (a) The simulation model will be expanded in two
ways. First, the present model, which has so far been applied primarily to
memory for distinct events and the learning of abstract categories, will be
applied to the domains of associative learning and recall. Second, different
versions of the model will be developed to handle problems for which the present
model is inadequate. These include retrieval of the meaning of a word from
memory, and the facilitative effect of prior familiarity on learning. (b)
Several experiments will test new predictions made by the model concerning the
learning of abstract categories, the effects of repetition and similarity on
recognition of previously encountered items, and memory retrieval latencies. (c)
Comparisons will be made between the present memory model and other models in
the literature. Interest will focus primarily on determining whether a simple
model of the "connectionist" type exists whose behavior is essentially the same
as that of the current model. This is important because an advantage claimed for
connectionist models by some is that they are anatomically or physiologically
plausible. The theory has broad implications for learning, memory, and cognitive
processes. As such, it could yield practical insights in the fields of education
and training, memory improvement, treatment of memory defects, and the
reliability of judgments based on memory.