* 8711421
* Research, Politics and Value Choices:  Making Sense of      Environmental Applications of Biotechnology
* BIO,BIO
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1990
* Frances Lynn, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1990
* USD 82,448.00

The research objectives of this project are to anticipate impacts in
environmental applications of biotechnology and to illuminate ethical and value
issues embedded in them. These issues stem from scientific uncertainty, the
varying impact of the new technologies on different sectors of society, and
disagreements as to how and by whom regulatory decisions should be made.
Throughout the project, oversight will be provided by a balanced advisory board.
The project is divided into two phases. In the first phase, the principal
investigator and team members will write detailed technical scenarios for
analyzing potential impacts for three specific applications of biotechnology:
fast growing tree clones, herbicide resistant plants, and the decontamination of
hydrocarbon wastes. The scenarios will be shared with scientists and
policymakers in industry, government, academia and public interest
organizations. Representatives of these groups will be interviewed to ensure
that the scenarios identify the major alternative projections of future impacts
of biotechnology and illuminate the scientific, social and political judgments
and values implicit in the different perspectives. In the second phase of the
project, the team will develop a casebook and simulation exercise based on the
scenarios, for use with lay audiences. The simulation will involve participants
in choosing and negotiating among conflicting data, disciplines, theories,
values and public policy options. These and other background materials will be
the basis for a one and one-half day conference. Fifty participants,
representing the major interest groups in North Carolina that are likely to
become involved in issues concerning the commercial applications of
biotechnology, will be invited. The conference, including small group
simulations, will be taped and transcribed. Results will include a series of
scholarly articles. Ultimately the team hopes to publish a book and make the
casebook and simulations available nationally. This project will illuminate
ethical and value issues associated with environmental applications of
biotechnology. It will also provide a model for reasoned deliberation and
negotiation about choices and decisions which must be made about them. The
principal investigator is very well qualified to undertake this project and she
has credibility with from diverse interest groups that is necessary to make it
successful. Institutional support is good; costs are reasonable; the research
plan is both innovative and feasible; and results are likely to be useful and
influential. Total support in the amount of $82,448 ir recommended, of which
$62,448 comes from the National Science Foundation and $20,000 from the
Department of Agriculture. Of the total, $40,000 is awarded in this fiscal year.
$42,488 will be awarded in fiscal year 1988.