* 8711949
* Increasing the Representation of Women, Minorities and the  Physically Disabled in Science &amp; Engineering:  A Survey &amp;   Analysis of Efforts at Selected U.S. Colleges &amp;
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/1987,09/30/1991
* Marsha Matyas, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1991
* USD 209,725.00

The increasing national need for science, engineering and technological
personnel make the participation of all sectors of the U.S. population in these
areas imperative. Women, certain minority groups, and physically disabled
persons continue to be underrepresented among those pursuing science and
engineering degrees. Colleges and universities have made efforts to increase the
participation of these target groups in science and engineering through
precollege programs to develop student interest and skills, recruitment programs
to bring students into science and engineering majors, and retention programs to
improve graduation rates. However, the extent and effectiveness of these
programs and services has not been examined, especially at the undergraduate and
graduate levels. Through surveys and intensive case studies directed at top
research universities, minority institutions, and women's colleges, this project
will determine the number, types, and effectiveness of programs and services
currently housed at these U.S. institutions which are aimed at increasing the
participation of female, minority, and physically disabled students in science
and engineering. Findings of the project will be disseminated through a
conference on recruitment and retention efforts and through the publication and
distribution of a report on the recruitment and retention of female, minority,
and physically disabled students in science and engineering. The project will
make an important contribution to NSF and national understanding and
implementation programs to broaden participation in science and engineering.