* 8711656
* Investigating Alternative Estimation Methods for LDV        Econometric Models that Normally Involve Multidimensional   Integrals
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1987,09/30/1988
* Vassilis Hajivassiliou, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1988
* USD 0.00

The estimation of a large class of limited dependent variables (LDV) models,
though possessing desirable theoretical properties, is infeasible by
conventional methods because it requires the evaluation of multidimensional
integrals. Examples are discrete choice models with several contemporaneously
correlated alternatives and LDV models with temporally correlated errors. A
recently proposed method (McFadden (1986)), the Method of Simulated Moments
(MSM), was shown to make the estimation of certain discrete choice models
feasible, by avoiding the need for numerically calculating multiple integrals.
Hajivassiliou and McFadden (1987) extended the method and presented limited
computational experiments on it. With current mainframe computer technology,
however, it is not possible to investigate the performance of this novel method
(MSM) against the theoretical benchmark of classical maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) which requires the intractable integrals. Given the nature of
these estimation problems, the application of supercomputer vectorization
techniques will afford a comprehensive set of experiments to compare the MSM
against the other classical estimation methods. Moreover, the use of a
supercomputer will make feasible the classical method of MLE for several of
these models, which, in view of the integrals involved, is currently beyond the
capacity of mainframe computers. This award will provide access to the requisite
computing capacity at the Pittsburgh Center.