* 8711452
* Measurement of Axial Catalyst Temperature Profiles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1990
* Timothy Cale, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/1990
* USD 112,270.00

The proposed research project is aimed at developing a nonintrusive technique to
measure the cross sectional average catalyst temperature at each axial position
of an operating packed bed reactor. The PI's ultimate goal is to develop a
method to measure the catalyst temperature at each point in a reactor and thus
develop an experimentally validated heterogeneous reactor model. The overall
objective of catalytic reactor model development is reliable design. To reliably
predict performance over a range of operating conditions, the model must predict
the correct temperature and concentrations at each point in the reactor. More
precisely, the model needs to predict the catalyst phase temperature and
reactant concentrations in the catalyst phase throughout the bed. The PI began
work on his magnetic method to measure catalyst temperature in a packed bed
under an initiation grant. In the proposed work he will move the bed into an AC
permeameter sensing coil, determine the incremental voltage due to each axial
position, and thus calculate the average axial temperature. Measurement of
radial and/or intraparticle temperature gradients will not be attempted at this
time. When applicable to a given catalyst/reaction system, the method could be
used directly in kinetic and transport parameter estimation, reactor control and
reactor performance evaluation.