* 8711346
* Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Potassium Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Richard Gaber, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 01/31/1991
* USD 233,000.00

All cells accumulate and maintain high internal concentrations of potassium,
usually against low external concentrations. The plasma membrane proteins that
mediate this transport are, therefore, of fundamental interest particularly
since the molecular mechanisms they employ remain largely unknown. There are
yeast mutants that are defective for potassium transport, and he proposed
project is to clone and sequence the gene encoding he low-affinity transporter
proteins. In addition, heterologous gene fusions will be constructed and used to
generate domain-specific antisera that will be employed to determine the
secondary structure of the transporter. The antisera will also be used to
inhibit potassium uptake and thus identify specific transporter domains directly
involved in transport. Once functional domains are identified, monoclonal
antibodies that recognize epitopes within these domains will be isolated and
used to identify the specific amino acid sequences involved. Site directed
mutagenesis will then be performed to obtain mutants deficient in transport. DNA
sequence analysis of intragenic revertants of these mutants will permit
sophisticated model building regarding molecular mechanisms for ion transport.
Yeast has emerged as a model organism for the genetic and molecular dissection
of fundamental cell biological processes. The approach that has been so useful
for the analysis of cell cycle genes, protein trafficking sequences, and
transcriptional regulation, will now be extended to elucidate the genetic and
molecular bases of ion transport.