* 8711112
* Distributive Justice &amp; Consent to Risk in the Management    of Hazardous Wastes:  Do Transportable Treatment Unit       Technologies Offer a Technological Fix?
* BIO,BIO
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Norman Daniels, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1990
* USD 114,000.00

The goals of this project are to provide (1) the first primarily ethical
assessment of competing waste treatment technologies and (2) a model for
introducing consideration of issues of distributive justice and consent to risk
into contexts involving technology assessment. The project will compare fixed
(continuous) and transportable or mobile (batch) technologies for treatment of
hazardous wastes being generated as part of the ongoing waste stream, so as to
isolate the effects of mobility on the distribution of benefits and burdens. The
principal investigator, a philosopher specializing in issues of justice and
public policy, will collaborate with engineers, political scientists, and
experts on regulatory policy and community concerns. The ethical comparison of
standard and alternative treatment technologies will draw on the philosophical
literatures concerning distributive justice and consent to risk. It will also
require a review of the extensive empirical literature, based on case studies,
surveys, and interviews, of efforts to site standard treatment facilities. This
literature also includes discussion of the perception of risks and community
sensitivity to distribution issues. The team's members will guide the principal
investigator through relevant surveys of commercially available transportable
treatment units (TTUs), and of regulations that affect them, and assist him in
the review and analysis of relevant technical and regulatory documents. Results
will include articles aimed at the audience interested in philosophy and public
policy, and co-authored articles, aimed at specialized technical audiences of
engineers, and corporate and regulatory officials, as well as at community
organizations and environmental groups concerned with siting issues. The project
will make a significant contribution to incorporating ethical considerations
into the assessment and regulation of new technologies. The principal
investigator and other members of the research team are very well qualified;
this is exactly the kind of collaborative research effort EVS intends to foster.
Institutional support is excellent. The research design is good; tasks are
appropriately allocated and results are targeted to important audiences. Total
support in the amount of $114,566 is recommended.