* 8711102
* Biosynthesis of Microbial Metabolites from Hydroxylated     Anthranilic Acids (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Steven Gould, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* John S. Showell
* 07/31/1990
* USD 163,700.00

The understanding of how living systems "synthesize" the molecules that make
them up can provide important information on the relationships among the parts
of the plant and animal kingdoms. This can be used in the designing of new
plants where the intent is the diminishing/elimination (or conversely
increasing/adding) of a constituent. This grant is in the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program. 6-Hydroxyanthranilic acid has been recently
identified in this laboratory as a new product of the shikimic acid pathway and
as a key intermediate in the biosynthesis of sarubicin A by Streptomyces
helicus. 6-Hydroxyanthranilic acid seems most reasonably formed from the rare
isochorismic acid. Subsequent steps are proposed involving novel C-glycosides of
a 2,6-dideoxy sugar and further hydroxylation of the anthranilate moiety.
Subsequent work in this laboratory on the biosynthesis of antibiotic LL-C10037a,
with a very different skeleton from sarubicin A, clearly points towards
anthranilic acid and/or 3- hydroxyanthranilic acid as a key intermediate with
subsequent further hydroxylation at an undetermined stage as well. Up to six
putative C-glycoside intermediates will be synthesized with stable isotope
labels and tested in S. helicus. Labeled anthranilic acid, 3-hydroxyanthranilic
acid, and a series of further hydroxylated and/or decarboxylated and/or
acetylated compounds will be used to determine specific biosynthetic
incorporations. Cell-free preparations of S. helicus will be generated and
examined for the presence of isochorismate synthase and 6-hydroxyanthranilate
synthase, and preliminary studies on the mechanism of the former reaction will
be initiated with O-18 labels.