* 8711245
* Examination of the Stem Cell Differentiation During         Embryogenesis Using Monoclonal Antibodies
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Vicki Martin, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/28/1990
* USD 54,000.00

The aim of this research is to characterize the proliferation and
differentiation behaviour of stem cells during embryogenesis using monoclonal
antibodies. The research will utilize the interstitial cell system of hydrozoan
planulae, the larval form of the phylum Cnidaria, in efforts to elucidate at the
cellular level controlling factors which regulate stem cell commitment and
differentiation during embryogenesis. Moloclonal antibodies specific for
planular interstitial cells, their differentiative intermediates and their
progeny will be identified. Dr. Hans Bode has a library of monoclonals specific
for adult hydra cells, some of which label all the interstitial cells of hydra
while others label specific I-cell lineages. Dr. Bode has agreed to supply these
monoclonals to determine if they can serve as cell type specific markers for
embryonic cells. If hydra monoclonals do not work, Dr. Martin will generate a
library of planular monoclonals. Very little is known about how the spatial
pattern of differentiated cells is established during embryogenesis and
consequently maintained in the adult state. An important question in
developmental biology is how cells become restricted to a specific pathway of
differentiation. This research is part of a continuing plan to examine the
processes involved in the commitment and differentiation of stem cells during
embryogenesis.