* 8711330
* The Function of the Nuclear Pores During Cell               Proliferation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1991
* Carl Feldherr, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 08/31/1991
* USD 240,000.00

Experiments are proposed to investigate the permeability properties of the
nuclear pores during periods of cellular activity in which there are differences
in macromolecular exchanges between the nucleus and cytoplasm. Since qualitative
and quantitative changes in RNA and protein synthesis are known to occur during
cell proliferation, the experiments will be performed on quiescent, growing, and
dividing human diploid fibroblasts, and also HeLa cells in different stages of
the cell cycle. Pore function will be analyzed by microinjecting various size
colloidal gold particles coated with 1) endogenous proteins that are transported
into the nucleus, 2) exogenous macromolecules that lack transport signals but
can diffuse through the pores, and 3) RNA which is transported out of the
nucleus. The coated gold particles will be injected into either the nucleoplasm
or cytoplasm, and the cells will be examined with the electron microscope. By
analyzing the size distribution and number of particles present in the nucleus
and cytoplasm it should be possible to determine the functional size of the
transport and diffusion channels, as well as the relative rates of exchange
across the envelope. In addition, the percent of pores involved in transport
during specific periods of activity will be determined. Nuclear pores
selectively control the flow of macromolecules between the cytoplasmic and
nuclear compartments of the cell. The rules governing transport are currently
unknown. The studies proposed are significant in that the results obtained will
provide a clearer understanding of the types of signals that are involved in
establishing the direction and rate of transfer.