* 8711148
* Acquisition of an Atomic-Resolution Transmission            Electron Miscroscope
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/1987,04/30/1989
* James Howe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Yvette Jackson
* 04/30/1989
* USD 400,000.00

The principal emphasis in materials science is to understand and control the
processing-structure-properties relationships in materials. In order to achieve
this, it is necessary to quantitatively characterize the composition, crystal
structure, interfacial structure, defect structure and morphology of the
component phases at the highest levels of resolution. In this proposal, funds
are requested for the purchase of a JEOL 4000EX atomic-resolution transmission
electron microscope and a Gatan Model 622 video system and recorder. The Jeol
4000EX microscope has a point-to-point resolution of - 0.19 nm and will permit
direct imaging of the atomic structures of defects and interfaces in most
materials, whereas the Gatan video system will allow rapid correction of
microscope aberrations and recording of dynamic events. Carnegie-Mellon
University currently has a number of multi- disciplinary comprehensive materials
research programs, such as a University Research Initiative in high-temperature
composites, an International Business Machines Center for thin-film sciences,
and a NSF Materials Research Group in magnetic materials. In all of these, as
well as in many individual investigator programs, characterization of internal
defects, phase transformations and interfacial structures and compositions at
the atomic level is essential for understanding material behavior. Having an
atomic-resolution microscope will considerably strengthen our ability to
establish fundamental interrelations among the processing-structure-properties
in electron optics facility at Carnegie-Mellon University as well as at other
materials facilities in the Pittsburgh area, none of which has a high-resolution
microscope. Carnegie-Mellon University has both faculty and staff with
sufficient expertise in conventional and atomic-resolution microscopy techniques
to ensure that the atomic-resolution microscope is utilized for the highest
quality materials research, and that it is maintained at an optimum level of
performance. Carnegie-Mellon University pledges to provide significant matching
funds for purchase of the instrument and resources for its maintenance.