* 8711573
* Measuring Strength of Evidence
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* David Krantz, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1991
* USD 264,971.00

In science, in the law, in business, and in everyday social interaction, people
attempt to base their beliefs on the available evidence. The standard (Bayesian)
theory asserts that people's beliefs consist of probabilities for various
propositions, for example, the probability that a particular scientific
hypothesis is correct or the probability that an accused person is guilty as
charged. But proposed applications of the Bayesian theory in science and in law
have encountered strong and quite justifiable resistance, largely because the
theory demands that people express detailed beliefs even in the absence of any
evidence (prior probabilities). This research will develop non-Bayesian theories
in which perceived strength of evidence will be measured on a numerical scale
quite different from probability. This measurement system is well adapted to
science and the law since, in the absence of evidence, all beliefs can be rated
as zero. One main research activity will be to determine formulae for converting
probabilistic and statistical information to the strength-of-evidence
measurement scale, and thus will provide a basis for systematic integration of
such information with other kinds of evidence. Another research activity will be
to develop graded standards of statistical and nonstatistical evidence, against
which arbitrary items of evidence can be compared and evaluated, much as a
meterstick provides a graded series of lengths, against which the lengths of
other objects can be measured. The graded standards for evidence will be most
useful if they can be applied analytically, decomposing a complex body of
evidence into parts, each of which can be evaluated by comparison with the
standards. One of the principal research activities will be to evaluate the bias
inherent in such analytic decompositions. That research will compare evaluations
of partial evidence by two groups of people, those who are aware of the full
body of evidence and those who are not. If possible, conditions will be found
for which these two groups evaluate evidence identically, i.e., there is no
appreciable bias due to parts of the evidence that are ignored in any step of
the analytic process. The research will also test conditions under which strong
biases are expected.