* 8711037
* The Active Minority: Collaborative Research on Presidential Selection and the Political Parties
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Walter Stone, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/1990
* USD 36,629.00

This research focuses on the "active minority" of citizens who will participate
in the presidential nomination and general election campaigns of 1988. The
investigators are interested in the factors that explain participants' support
for candidates as well as the relationship between their activity in the
preconvention campaigns and their willingness to work for their party's nominee
in the fall campaign. The design of the project specifically recognizes the
dynamic character of the process and permits monitoring of changing attitudes
and behavior throughout the campaign. Based on their prior research, the
investigators will test an explanation of candidate support that includes
activists' judgments about how likely each candidate is to win his or her
party's nomination, the candidate's chances against the opposition party in the
fall, the issue and ideological preferences of the activist, and the personal
characteristics of the contenders. Assessing the relative importance of these
factors is crucial to understanding the implications of nomination campaigns for
the health of the American political parties. For example, activists who
emphasize issues and ideology interests in choosing a candidate contribute to
the divisiveness of the preconvention campaign and may be less likely to work
for the party in the fall should their preferred candidate not receive the
nomination. Activists more concerned with nominating a winner, in contrast, may
be more likely to work in the fall campaign even if the party fails to nominate
their preferred candidate. The research design involves surveys of activists in
three states: Iowa, Michigan, and Virginia. These states were selected due to
their diversity in political culture, and because precinct caucuses will be held
in them at different times during the nomination campaign. Moreover, the
investigators have data from these same states from surveys they conducted
during the 1984 campaign. The investigators will draw comparisons with their
results from 1984 as well as re-contacting the 1984 respondents in order to
follow them through the 1988 campaign. The investigators will contact their 1984
samples of caucus-attenders three times during 1988: first in January, then in
June after the primary season but before the summer conventions, and finally
just after the November election. In order to facilitate comparisons with their
1984 data on caucus-attenders, they will also draw new samples of 1988 caucus-
attenders in both parties in each state. These respondents will be contacted
twice: once immediately after the caucuses in their state, and again following
the fall election. Finally, the investigators will survey samples of state and
local party leaders in the three states, who will be contacted at exactly the
same times as the caucus attenders in their states. The goal is to collect data
on those who are more or less permanently active in the state parties in order
to assess the relationship between the state party organizations and the
presidential selection process.