* 8711632
* Completion of Part 2 of a World Catalog of Scolytidae       and Platypodidae
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1992
* Stephen Wood, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 03/31/1992
* USD 55,387.00

Bark and ambrosia beetles (families Scolytidae and Patypodidae) are among the
most destructive of insect pests. Nearly 60 percent of all natural tree
mortality in the United States is caused either directly or indirectly by
members of these families, including southern pine beetles, mountain pine
beetles, western pine beetles and dutch elm disease (carried by the European elm
bark beetle). Although more than 20,000 scientific articles have been written on
these insects and the problems they cause, this literature is scattered and
difficult to locate. The only existing index to this literature was written in
1910, when only one-fifth of the currently recognized species were known. A new
bibliography containing references to this literature has been completed by Dr.
Stephen Wood and will be published in late 1987. This project will support
production of an index to the literature cited in Wood's bibliography. The index
will greatly accelerate the speed and efficiency with which researchers can
locate and use published sources and it will greatly enhance the thoroughness of
their review of the literature. Curators of insect collections, entomologists
and foresters concerned with the identification of pest species of bark and
ambrosia beetles will greatly appreciate the updated scientific names and
classifications presented in the catalog as well as the literature citations
that apply to each species. The index should save thousands of hours of valuable
research time annually for at least two or three decades. Dr. Wood is the only
living world authority on bark and ambrosia beetles. He has worked on their
taxonomy and behavior for over 40 years. Library and computer facilities at
Brigham Young University are excellent.