* 8711463
* Role-Taking, Interaction, and the Dynamics of Delinquency
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Ross Matsueda, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 01/31/1990
* USD 62,053.00

This study examines the relationships among families, peers, and delinquency by
specifying and testing a structural-interactionist theory of delinquent
behavior. The key process within this perspective is role taking, the mechanism
by which groups control the behavior of individuals, and which, consequently,
links social structure to individual action. The concept of role taking or
reflective appraisal is operationalized and used to help explain how parents,
peers and teachers influence the moral and unlawful behavior of adolescents. The
causal mechanisms of conventional theories, are shown to be special cases of a
structural-interactionist perspective; this nested structure provides a way of
testing the proposed theory against competing explanations. Data for the
empirical analysis come from the 1976-1980 National Youth Survey, a longitudinal
dataset collected on a national sample of adolescents, aged 11-17. Two kinds of
models, each incorporating the processes of roletaking, differential
association, and social control, are specified, estimated, and tested. The
first, a conventional panel model of delinquency treats the individual as the
unit of analysis, and seeks to explain variation in delinquency across persons
and over time. The second, a family model of delinquency, treats the sibling
pair as the unit of analysis, and attempts to account for both the common
variation (covariation) in delinquent behavior for pairs of siblings as well as
the variation in delinquent behavior across different pairs of siblings.