* 8711423
* Electron Spectroscopic Studies of the Electronic            and Geometric Structure of, and Chemisorption on,           Transition Metal Oxide Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1987,03/31/1991
* Victor Henrich, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 03/31/1991
* USD 542,162.00

During the past few years the Surface Science Laboratory at Yale has become
established as the world's foremost research center for the study of the
fundamental properties of oxide surfaces. Professor Henrich's approach is to use
single crystal samples, prepared and studied in an ultrahigh vacuum environment
or under controlled chemisorption conditions, and to measure their geometric and
electronic structure by using a wide range of surface sensitive electron
spectroscopic techniques. Particular attention has been given to the transition
metal oxides, whose cations can have any of several different valence states
depending upon their ligand environment; these oxides are the most important
ones in catalysis and surface chemistry. Measurements on nearly perfect, vacuum
cleaved surfaces are a necessary starting point, particularly for comparison
with theoretical calculations. However, his primary interest is in the
properties of surface defects and their interaction with adsorbed molecules.
Surface defects have been shown to be the active sites for chemisorption on
almost all oxides that have been studied, with nearly perfect surfaces being
relatively inert. Professor Henrich proposes here a three-year research program
consisting both of a continuation of the most productive research areas that are
currently being pursued and of several new directions that will address some of
the important questions that research to date has left unanswered. Empty
electronic states on oxide surfaces will be examined by using inverse
photoelectron spectroscopy, and a newly acquired high resolution electron energy
loss spectrometer will be used to study the subtleties of the interaction of
molecules of catalytic interest with oxides. A collaborative effort with the IBM
Watson Research Center will use scanning tunneling microscopy to determine the
geometry of both perfect and defect oxide surfaces and to measure the spectra of
their filled and empty electronic levels.