* 8711901
* Development of Programs for Spin Projection, Energy         Derivatives and Advanced Graphics in MO Calculations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1991
* H. Bernhard Schlegel, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* David M. Stanbury
* 08/31/1991
* USD 242,560.00

This project is being funded under the Computational Science and Engineering
Initiative in the Theoretical and Computational Physical Chemistry program.
Professor Schlegel's aim is to develop techniques for rapid calculation of
reaction pathways for chemical reactions and the accurate theoretical prediction
of energy barriers and bond- breaking energies. This work, and prior work by
Professor Schlegel, are expected to be of great utility to experimental
chemists. When unrestricted Hartree-Fock and Moeller-Plesset perturbation theory
are used for reactions of open shell systems and for bond dissociations,
contamination from unwanted spin states can sometimes be large enough to distort
the energy surface severely. Annihilation of the largest spin contaminant
dramatically improves calculated barrier heights and bond dissociation
potentials. The present project will address the annihilation of all spin
contaminants, calculation of gradients of spin-projected energies, spin
annihilation applied to correlation corrections, and full CI and high order
perturbation theory to test the spin projected methods. Chemical applications to
demonstrate the utility of the spin projected method will include studies of
radical additions to multiple bonds, radical abstraction reactions, bond
dissociation potentials, and diradical intermediates in cycloaddition reactions.
New algorithms will also be developed for gradients of spin projected energies,
transition state optimization, reaction path following, basis set optimization
using analytical gradients, and IR intensities using electric field-dependent
functions.