* 8711304
* RUI:  Mechanisms of Maternal-Embryonic Nutrient Transfer    in Viviparous Sharks
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1992
* Julian Lombardi, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 12/31/1992
* USD 188,800.00

Embryonic growth in viviparous matrotrophic fishes is facilitated by structural
and functional adaptions for maternal-embryonic nutrient transfer. Although much
is known about the mechanisms of such transfer in mammalian systems, some
reptiles, and teleost fishes, very little information is available on sharks.
Lombardi proposes to identify and examine the major cellular, developmental, and
physiological mechanisms of maternal-embryonic nutrient transfer in two
representative species of viviparous matrotrophic shark; Mustelus canis and
Rhizoprionodon terraenovae. The ultrastructure and physiology of transplacental
and paraplacental transfer will be examined. Objectives of this study are to: l)
describe the ultrastructural morphology of both the maternal and embryonic
adaptions for maternal-embryonic nutrient transfer; 2) establish a developmental
series for both species; 3) determine nutrient transfer efficiencies for both
species; 4) describe and quantify protein uptake by embryonic tissues in utero
and in vitro; 5) analyze the composition of uterine secretions and maternal
blood sera during gestation; 6)assess apendicular function in R. terraenovae;
and 7) identify, characterize, and compare transplacental and paraplacental
routes of protein transfer in both species. These studies are significant
because they establish, for the first time, a morphological and physiological
basis for maternal-embryonic nutrient transfer in viviparous matrotrophic
sharks. Since many of the structures involved in maternal-embryonic nutrient
transfer in higher vertebrates are also present in the sharks, the results of
these studies will be integral to an understanding of the function and origin of
the maternal-embryonic relationship in both the fishes and higher vertebrates.