* 8711132
* Formation of Dissolved Free Amino Acids in Seawater and Its Coupling to Uptake
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1987,11/17/1988
* Jed Fuhrman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/17/1988
* USD 88,305.00

This renewal proposal from Dr. Fuhrman is for an extension of studies on
dissolved free amino acids (DFAAs), with new emphasis on the open sea. The DFAAs
are important sources of organic C and N, and represent excellent models of
biologically- labile dissolved organic matter (DOM). DOM flux is now known to be
a major part of the marine C and N cycles. Recent work demonstrating very rapid
turnover of small DFAA pools has shown a need to revise previous ideas in this
area. This proposal includes extensive studies of DFAA turnover, flux, and
availability in the oligothrophic and deep ocean, from which reliable data are
sparse. Other proposed work includes measuring DFAA release from zooplankton
fecal pellets, the microbial responses to sudden DFAA enrichment as might be
found in "enriched microzones," algal assimilation of DFAAs, ammonium
regeneration from DFAAs, and degradation of peptides and proteins. In addition
to the usual tritiated tracers, for some of this work the fate of the amino acid
nitrogen will be traced with the short-lived isotope N-13. This isotope has a
very high specific activity, so it can be added at true trace levels with great
sensitivity. But due to its brief useful lifetime (ca. 90 min.), samples must be
transported to the cyclotron, so for these experiments the use of a helicopter
to sample offshore waters is required.