* 8711252
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Chemical and Crystallo-    graphic Studies of Silver in Zeolite A
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Karl Seff, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1991
* USD 11,403.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Karl Seff, Department of Chemistry,
University of Hawaii, to pursue with Dr. Yang Kim, Department of Chemistry,
Pusan National University, for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative
research to continue the synthetic and crystallographic study of the
intrazeolitic chemistry of silver in zeolite A. New conditions for the
preparation of silver clusters within the zeolite, which may result in the
formation of new clusters of high symmetry, will be tried. The crystallographic
study of the structure of these clusters will be determined by x-ray diffraction
methods. This is a basic research project dealing with the synthesis and
structure of silver atoms and silver ions in zeolite A and the preparation of
molecular complexes of this silver within the large cavity of zeolite. While
small clusters of metal atoms are known to have pronounced catalytic activity
for a variety of organic reactions, this project is not concerned with the
potential catalytic properties of silver in zeolite A. Drs. Seff and Kim are
highly respected scientists who have collaborated successfully in the past,
under NSF Grants No. INT-8316234 and INT-8113065. The present project will allow
them to continue this collaboration. This project is relevant to the objectives
of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level
of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.