* 8711802
* Curation and Revitalization of the Invertebrate             Paleontology Collection
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1990
* Douglas Jones, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 03/31/1990
* USD 97,857.00

The Florida State Museum, located on the University of Florida campus in
Gainesville, contains the largest collection of fossil invertebrates in the
southeast. Most of these specimens were collected from highly fossiliferous
strata that occur throughout the state. The remainder derive principally from
sites around the Gulf and Atlantic Coastal Plain and the circum- Caribbean. The
fossil invertebrates provide us with a unique opportunity to understand the
environmental conditions which existed in this part of the world throughout the
Cenozoic Era (last 65 million years of Earth history) and to appreciate the
substantial biological changes which have occurred. Over the last decade, the
collection has suffered without a curator or collection manager. Nevertheless,
private donations of fossils continued to pour in while faculty and students at
the University of Florida deposited considerable amounts of fossil materials
from their research efforts. This combination of events resulted in a tremendous
backlog of uncurated and uncatalogued specimens. Therefore, one of the most
important tasks facing the newly hired staff of the invertebrate paleontology
division is to reduce the large curatorial backlog. This project provides funds
to attack this problem. The goals of the project involve substantially reducing
the curation backlog by preparing and cataloguing several thousand of the most
important specimen lots, computerizing the entire catalogued collection, and
preparing an up-dated type catalogue and summary of holdings. Attainment of
these goals will affect dramatically the significance of the collection and its
value as a national research resource. Computerization will allow scientists to
search and scan the data files quickly and to perform complex sorts for the
information they desire. Publication of a type catalogue and summary of holdings
will help familiarize the scientific community with the resources in the
collection. When the contents and organization of the invertebrate paleontology
collection are publicized, many more earth scientists will be able to take
advantage of the extensive amount of unique material contained therein.