* 8711141
* Ensemble Coding in the Crayfish Lamina Ganglion
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1991
* Raymon Glantz, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 07/31/1991
* USD 182,188.00

The means by which information from sensory receptors is encoded is an
important general problem in neurobiology. This project is a study of a specific
example of this problem, the coding of visual information in a relatively simple
neuronal network, the crayfish lamina ganglion. The ganglia of the crayfish
optical system are arranged in columnar fashion. Their neurons are distributed
in an ordered manner such that they form a map of the retina. Each point in
visual space is encoded by five ganglion neurons which form a single column.
These neurons have graded responses to light. Thus, each column can encode
intensity, local contrast, orientation of polarized light, and wavelength
(color) at a small region of the visual field. The Principal Investigator has
characterized the morphology and connections of many of the ganglion cells in
this neural network, and has also determined the chemical messengers by which
some of them communicate. In this project he hopes to determine how the neural
circuits already identified compute the values of various aspects of the
stimulus, including polarization angle and velocity of movement, and how visual
behavior is influenced by their activity. The methods he is using include
electrical recording from neurons that can be identified microscopically from
dye injected into them at the time of recording, and using immunocytochemical
and pharmacological procedures to identify their chemical messengers
(neurotransmitters).