* 8711818
* U.S-Korea Cooperative Research: Ultrafast Measurements on   Surfaces Using Photothermal Detection
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Anthony Siegman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1991
* USD 3,890.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Anthony E. Siegman, Department of
Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, to pursue with Dr. Sang Soo Lee and
Dr. Hong Jin Kong, Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative
research to develop a novel picosecond-time-resolved photothermal detection
method for making ultrafast lifetime measurements of charge carriers and other
excited states on the surfaces of semiconductors and other materials. The
proposed technique will combine the time resolution of picosecond or femtosecond
optical pulses with the unusual advantages of photothermal detection as a
sensitive, flexible, noncontacting technique applicable to a large variety of
metals, semiconductors and insulators, crystalline or amorphous, with
essentially no requirements on surface preparation. The experimental research
will be carried out by Dr. Kong, with guidance from Drs. Siegman and Lee, using
the experimental facilities available at Dr. Siegman's laboratory at Stanford
University. In this research a photothermal detection apparatus will be
assembled and used to make measurements on various physical systems. The
photothermal detection technique, in contrast to nearly all other picosecond
measurement techniques, is a completely noncontacting method which does not
require any special surface characteristics, polishing, or other special
preparation. The collaborators are highly respected scientists with outstanding
credentials in the field of the research. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase
the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers
through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques
and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.