* 8711391
* Local Public Sector Wages, the Local Fiscal Environment, andTheir Effects on Land Values
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1989
* Joseph Tracy, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1989
* USD 55,228.00

The last thirty years have witnessed dramatic changes in public sector labor
markets. Since the 1950's, the local public sector has grown rapidly in size and
become increasingly unionized. This transformation has prompted considerable
research on local public labor markets emphasizing the impact that unions have
had on employment, wages, and productivity in the public sector. A shortcoming
of many of these studies is their failure to adequately recognize that public
sector compensation is set within a broader context of a local budgetary
process. As a result, the full influence of local economic conditions, the
fiscal environment in particular, on public wages has not been captured.
Potentially important city-specific traits helping influence the level and
pattern of local public wages have been omitted from previous wage/earnings
specifications. The contribution of this project comes from reestimating local
public wage equations on a variety of data and from testing for the importance
of the neglected local fiscal variables. These variables include proxies for the
community's "ability to pay" wage premia to public workers and measures of the
"bargaining power" of the local workers, i.e., their ability to appropriate
local rents. In addition, the project investigates the degree to which measured
local public wage differentials are reflected in lower land prices in the
communities.