* 8711478
* Mechanisms of Bond-Making and Bond-Breaking; Role of RadicalIons (Chemistry)
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1991
* Frederick Greene, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 11/30/1991
* USD 263,500.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports reserach
by Prof. Frederick Greene, which is centered around the elucidation of reaction
mechanisms. Reaction mechanisms are the detailed sequences of bond-making and
bond- breaking which constitute chemical change; understanding these processes
and their controlling factors is a critical element in controlling chemical
reactivity. Dr. Greene's research will focus on the mechanisms of bond formation
and rupture by both catalytic and non-catalytic means. This work will pursue a
relatively new way of initiating organic reactions by "electron catalysis," that
is: the addition or removal of an electron from a reactant to form a highly
reactive radical ion. Although much is known about the groups of reactive
intermediates known as radicals (unpaired electrons) and ions (electrically
charged), much less is currently known about the chemistry of radical ions,
which are odd-electron species also carrying charge. A major objective of the
Greene group is to obtain new information on the chemical properties of radical
ions. An exploratory study is planned to examine the role of radical ions in
selected addition, cycloaddition, retrocyclo- addition, and rearrangement
reactions. Various electron donors and acceptors will be evaluated, with
attention to electrochemical information and to some consideration of new
donors. Retrocycloaddition reactions of four-membered ring cyclic azo compounds
(diazetines) constitute an important test case for mechanisms of bond-breaking
processes. Recent results have provided promising routes for syntheses of
substances needed. Experiments are also planned to probe the mechanism of
retrocycloaddition of diazetines initiated by electron acceptors.