* 8711801
* The Molecular Organization of Yeast Chromosome I
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1987,04/30/1991
* David Kaback, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 04/30/1991
* USD 272,200.00

There is much to be learned about how chromosomes are faithfully transmitted
during mitosis and meiosis. Determining the detailed structure of an entire
eukaryotic chromosome should yield much information about its function. As a
first step toward this goal, we have been cloning and studying the sequence
organization of the 260 kb DNA molecule from chromosome I, the smallest
Saccharomyces cerevisiae chromosome. We have cloned approximately 75% of it and
determined the physical location of most if its known genes. We propose to clone
and restriction map the remaining DNA, further map all vegetatively expressed
transcribed regions and physically map the not yet located known genes. These
studies will provide the foundation for locating ARS elements and other
sequences that could be involved in chromosome function. To address the question
of meiotic chromosome function, the relationship between physical and
recombination distances over the entire length of the DNA molecule will be
examined and the total recombination map-length between molecularly defined ends
will be determined. These experiments will enable us to estimate how often
chromosome I homologues undergo recombination and will enhance our understanding
of the meiotic behavior of a single chromosome. Hybridization studies suggest
that chromosome I contains approximately 100 protein encoding genes. Despite
intense effort, only 5 genes essential for growth on rich medium and 5 other
genes were defined by classically induced mutations. Thus, like all other yeast
chromosomes, the function of most chromosome I genes has yet to be determined.
To define additional essential and nonessential genes on chromosome I, gene-
disruption mutations in transcribed regions with no defined function will be
induced by "shuttle mutagenesis". These studies will be used to estimate the
total number of essential genes on chromosome I and should provide the basis for
estimating the total number of essential genes needed for growth and division of
a simple eukaryotic cell. This work is unique in that no complete eukaryotic
chromosome has yet been cloned and characterized. The resulting information
should increase our understanding of chromosome structure and function.