* 8711835
* Pre-rRNA Processing in E. coli
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* David Schlessinger, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1991
* USD 240,000.00

The importance of ribosomes is clear. They are obligatory for gene expression,
and large numbers are required for even slow cell growth. That ribosomal RNA
accounts for half of the transcripts in cells has facilitated studies of the
formation and metabolism of large ribosomal precursors which contain up to 20%
"extra" sequences that are processed away as they mature to produce rRNA and
form ribosomes. The processing pathway itself has been made clear but three main
features remain poorly understood. In this grant, Dr. Schlessinger will focus on
these features: the mechanism of formation of mature rRNA termini in E. coli;
the link, if any, between protein synthesis and rRNA processing; and the
sequences in precursor rRNA required to induce for rRNA formation or processing
and how they function. The enzymes and factors required to form the mature
termini of 16s and 23s rRNA in vitro will be identified. The nature of the
minimal substrate will also be assessed, as will the features of protein
synthetic conditions required to optomize the processing reactions. Site
specific mutagenesis will be applied to produce systematic deletions of "extra"
spacer sequences at the ends of 16s mRNA. The resulting mutants will be studied
in vivo. Additionally, the secondary structure of the rRNAs will be examined by
electron microscopy. The investigator has long been a major contributor in this
area and this proposal indicates that he will continue to be. Support with a
very good priority is recommended.