* 8711572
* Measurements of Atmospheric Composition Using Infrared      Techniques
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Frank Murcray, University of Denver
* Continuing grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 07/31/1991
* USD 600,000.00

A research program is proposed which will yield additional experimental data
pertinent to two environmental problems of current interest. These problems are
the possible perturbation of the stratospheric ozone layer by man's activities
and the possible change in climate caused by the increase in atmospheric
concentration of radiatively active compounds (CO2, CH4, N2O, etc). Data
pertinent to these two problems will be obtained by the analysis of infrared
solar spectra obtained from the ground at various locations (Denver, Mauna Loa
and Lauder, New Zealand) at various times of the year. Solar spectra will be
obtained at various altitudes and solar zenith angles by means of balloons. The
ground based spectra will be used to study the temporal and spatial variability
of the stratospheric column density of HCl, HNO3, ClONO2. They will also be used
to compare the absorption features due to CH4, CO2, N2O, O3 and H2O with
theoretical calculations of the same feature based on our knowledge from other
measurements (GMCC, Dobson, rawinsonde, etc). Differences between the calculated
and observed spectra will be examined to determine the cause of the
disagreement. The spectra obtained during the balloon flight will be used to
determine the distribution of various constituents with altitude particularly in
the stratosphere. Profile data will be obtained for HCl, HNO3, ClONO2, NO, NO2,
HNO4, CH4 and N2O and the high resolution spectra will be examined for
absorption due to other compounds which are predicted to be present (HOCl, H2O2)
but have not been observed in solar spectra obtained at lower resolution.
Atmospheric emission spectra will be obtained both from the ground and from
various altitudes up to 40 km using a balloon-borne spectrometer system. Spectra
will be obtained while viewing various angles close to the earth's limb and the
nadir. These spectra will be used to obtain altitude profile data for NO2, N2O5,
ClONO2, HNO3, O3, and H2O. The change in concentrations of these compounds with
time during sunrise and/or sunset will also be measured.