* 8711164
* Engineering Research in Land-Grant Universities: A History  of Engineering Experiment Stations
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1988
* Bruce Seely, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 05/31/1988
* USD 10,414.00

At the start of the twentieth century, Americans entered what historians have
identified as the Progressive period, so named for its characteristic optimism
about the chances for building a better society in this country. A crucial
element in the reformers' belief that they could defeat corruption as well as
resolve stubborn economic and social problems was an enthusiasm for harnessing
scientific experts as unbiased problem solvers. The establishment of the first
engineering experiment stations on land-grant college campuses is one
implementation of the idea of research as the key to a better society. According
to such early promoters of the concept as Dean Anson Marston of the Iowa State
Agricultural and Mechanical College, the stations would provide unbiased answers
to the questions faced by municipal and state government and interested citizens
as a result of rapid urbanization and industrialization. Dr. Seely's novel and
timely study shows that the influx of federal funding marks the gradual movement
of American engineering education away from an emphasis on hands-on, practical
instruction in the use of tools and machinery toward a curriculum stressing
calculus, physics and other science courses which undergirds basic research.
Specifically, Dr. Seely examines the leading engineering experiment stations.
His study traces the history and development of an important element of
engineering education in land-grant colleges. It also adds to our understanding
of the history of R & D by examining the interaction of universities with the
other major sponsors of scientific research in this country. And, what is
particularly interesting in view of currently increasing federal funding of
research in engineering, he shows how shifts in the sources of funds affected
both the types and goals of station research. Dr. Seely is highly qualified to
undertake this study which flows naturally from the solid work that he did for
his dissertation on the Texas A & M University engineering experiment station.
In addition, he has already done in-depth work on a number of the leading
stations which provides him with a foundation for excellence in his future work
in this area.