* 8711506
* Models of Choice for Schooling, Work, and Crime by Youth
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1989
* Harold Votey, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1989
* USD 32,612.00

For the past several years, Drs. Phillips and Votey have been collaborating on a
set of studies using the National Longitudinal Survey as a data base to model
the choice to engage in criminal behavior. Operating from a rational choice
model of behavior but attentive to a broader range of social and economic
variables than are often the focus of economic models, they have produced a
number of important papers that look at the choice of criminal activity as a
function of opportunities and of costs and rewards. They now plan to follow up
on two of the most important issues that theoretically would explain youth
crime: The first is to estimate the effects of past contact with the criminal
justice system on present behavior controlling for such factors as schooling,
achievement in school, and the individual attributes that determine the choices
among school, work, and crime. The second is to test a model that decisions
about work and crime are a continuous process. Their objective is to examine
whether and under what circumstances crime is not a time- intensive activity
that substitutes for work but an additional and complementary option to work and
school. Drs. Phillips and Votey have already contributed significantly to
unraveling the causes of crime. This research holds considerable promise of
further illuminating the theoretical and empirical dimensions of criminal
behavior among juveniles and young adults who vary by age, race, sex, and a
broad array of individual characteristics. To date, no one using individual data
has successfully evaluated the contributions of deterrence effects, aspects of
family and other economic support, and social and moral factors on the choices
among school, work, and crime with models where such activities do not need to
be mutually exclusive. Also, the decision to integrate a broader range of
potential influences explicitly into the choice process is a major advance in
assessing the very real social, psychological, and economic trade-offs involved
in crime.