* 8711403
* RUI:  Crustacean Pigment-Dispersing Neuropeptide Hormones:  Heterogeneity, Actions, and Distribution
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1991
* K. Rao, University of West Florida
* Continuing grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 08/31/1991
* USD 247,280.00

Recent evidence, derived largely from studies on vertebrates, indicates that
hormonal proteins and peptides occur as "families." Each family contains
structurally related molecules, two or more of which may be found in a single
species, or among diverse species in a phyletic group, or even among
representatives of diverse animal phyla. Contemporary research attests to the
importance of elucidating the structural basis of the consistancy and
variability in peptide families as well as the functional and evolutionary
relationships among such hormones. This project focuses on a newly discovered
family of peptides isolated from crustacean and insect sources. Because of the
simplicity in assessing its cellular actions, this invertebrate hormone family
serves as an excellent model for evaluating peptide hormone control mechanisms,
functional relationships, and hormone- receptor interactions. This project
involves the isolation, characterization, and chemical synthesis of pigment-
dispersing hormones (PDHs) from representative species of crabs, prawns, and
crayfish. The purified and synthetic hormones will be tested for their relative
potencies in diverse bioassay systems. By means of radioimmunoassays, the
hormone levels in blood and neuroendocrine tissues will be monitored under
various experimental conditions. Immunocytochemical tests will be employed to
localize hormone-producing cells in representative crustaceans as well as in
selected species of invertebrates. Depending on the progress in the above areas,
studies will also be carried out to evaluate the molecular basis of hormone-
receptor interactions. The knowledge derived from these studies would be of
comparative interest to those working with neuropeptides from other
invertebrates and vertebrates. The inferences drawn from the simple invertebrate
system employed here would be of value in understanding the basis mechanisms of
hormonal molecular diversity and actions. This project will provide
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to participate in
mainstream research in a rapidly advancing research field, thereby contributing
to their career advancement in science and biotechnology.