* 8711659
* The Accuracy, Credibility, and Impact of Children's         Eyewitness Testimony
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Michael Leippe, Adelphi University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 02/28/1991
* USD 143,462.00

More and more children come forth as eyewitnesses in legal proceedings. To date
research findings are suggestive but inconclusive that children may be
unreliable memory sources and be perceived as such by jurors. Previous studies,
however, have seldom focused on children's memory for legally realistic events
or examined adults' reactions to the actual eyewitness reports of children. Dr.
Leippe plans to accomplish both of those tasks through a carefully planned
program of research, including simulation experiments. In a first set of
studies, first graders, fifth graders, and college students watch a theft on
videotape and then attempt to identify the perpetrator and provide verbal
reports of the crime while also being taped. The "subject-witnesses'" reports
are shown to adult "subject-jurors" who judge their accuracy and "delivery
style" (e.g., confidence, consistency). Based on jurors' assessments, trained
observers' ratings, and performance indices of witness accuracy, analyses
address what accounts for actual and perceived age differences in testimony. In
a second set of studies, subject- jurors, drawn from college and jury eligible
populations, are presented with trials that include testimony from the first
studies. These experiments aim to isolate the effects of such factors as age of
witness, strength of testimony, and reasonable doubt instructions on jury
behavior. This program of research should contribute substantially to a
scientific understanding of the accuracy of children's testimony and its impact
in court. By viewing the child witness as a source of information and the jury
as a receiver of such information, Dr. Leippe brings together theoretical work
on information processing and persuasion to explain a basic legal phenomena--the
causes of juror belief and disbelief in testimony.