* 8711082
* Professional Values and Ethical Issues in the Education of Scientists and Engineers
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Judith Swazey, Acadia Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 11/30/1989
* USD 69,730.00

Education in science and engineering fosters personal and professional values as
well as technical knowledge and skills. Traditionally, the former kind of
educational experience has been more implicit than explicit. Recently, questions
have arisen about the moral content of professional training and conduct, and
about how value conflicts affecting professional training ought to be resolved.
Co-sponsored by the Committee on Scientific Freedom and Responsibility of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, the Council of Graduate
Schools in the U.S., and Sigma Xi's Committee on Science and Society, this
project will compile and provide an assessment of current knowledge about
policies and practices that affect professional values in graduate education in
science and undergraduate and professional education in engineering. Working
papers on the topics of academic guidelines, research sponsorship, misconduct,
and ethics in engineering education will be prepared. Plans and pretests for a
survey of students and faculty, to identify how socialization occurs and
knowledge of institutional policies and procedures on these matters, will be
developed. In addition project staff will solicit, devise, and pretest scenarios
of cases in which ethical or value issues for students and faculty have arisen.
Besides identifying the issues and developing a plan for further study of them,
the project will establish contacts with investigators and organizations with
related interests. Results from the project will include an initial "state of
the art" assessment of relevant literature and practice and the identification
of related programs. Several from the series of working papers should merit
publication. Finally, the co-sponsors will develop a comprehensive plan for
further work. This project will define the substantive issues and appropriate
methodologies to investigate normative components in science and engineering
education. The investigative team and consultants are very well qualified to
undertake the project, and the institutional co- sponsors are most appropriate.
Results are likely to be revealing, useful, and widely disseminated. The
research design is very appropriate for this exploratory phase, and costs are
reasonable. Total support is recommended in the amount of $47,572.