* 8711549
* Synthetic and Mechanistic Studies in Metal Cluster Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1987,04/30/1991
* Edward Rosenberg, California State University-Northridge
* Continuing grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 04/30/1991
* USD 182,513.00

Previous participants in this research project at a primarily undergraduate
institution have included a number of students currently enrolled in PhD
programs in major chemistry departments. The project is expected to provide
much-needed information about the mechanisms of structural transformations of
metal cluster compounds. Such compounds are an important class of catalysts and
are also important as precursors for the preparation of new solid materials. The
photochemical synthesis of mixed transition metal clusters from mercury bridged
mixed transition metal clusters (containing M = Ru, Os and M'= group VI thru
group VIII, first, second or third row transition metal moiety) will be
investigated. Crossover experiments using suitably labelled complexes will be
conducted in order to evaluate the molecularity of the photo-induced reductive
elimination of mercury which leads to formation of M2M'clusters and also to
investigate the thermal exchange reactions between the starting clusters. The
electron transfer chemistry of these mercury bridged metal clusters will be
examined with a view towards promoting reductive elimination of mercury electro-
chemically. The mechanisms of hydrogen transfer between coordinated ligands and
the metal core (and the reverse reaction), in polynuclear metal clusters will be
studied utilizing the observed kinetic deuterium isotope effects on these
processes. The mechanisms of hydrogen transfer between metal atoms in
polynuclear transition metal clusters and the relationship of this process to
other ligand migrations will be studied utilizing the kinetic deuterium isotope
effects previously documented for hydrogen migrations in several hydrido-metal
clusters.