* 8711012
* International Atmospheric Chemistry Meetings, 1987
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1987,08/31/1988
* Robert Duce, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 08/31/1988
* USD 15,000.00

The troposphere is presently receiving increasing quantities of waste products
from our continually growing technological society. The rapid movement of these
substances over great distances causes chemical disturbances to the natural
troposphere, not only in urban areas but on the hemispheric and global scales as
well. Current issues such as the causes and effects of acidic precipitation,
possible climate modification as a result of increasing concentrations of
radiatively active trace gases, and concern that important nutrient components
of the global tropospheric nitrogen and sulfur cycles are being altered
highlight the concern about global changes to our tropospheric environment. The
Commission on Atmospheric Chemistry and Global Pollution (CACGP) of the
International Association of Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics (IAMAP) is
convinced that a thorough understanding of atmospheric chemistry on a wide range
of spatial and temporal scales is essential if impacts of human activities on
the atmospheric environment are to be anticipated and harmful effects mitigated.
The CACGP especially calls attention to the global aspects of this problem,
which are estimated to impact all nations of the world. The current issues
outlined above highlight the concern about global scales changes to the
atmospheric environment. The CACGP has therefore strongly urged increased
international research efforts devoted to global atmospheric chemistry. As part
of its objectives to foster international communication in global atmospheric
chemistry and to act as a forum for the development of cooperative international
research efforts in this area, CACGP has sponsored international meetings since
1967. The CACGP's Sixth International Symposium on Atmospheric Chemistry is to
be held at Peterborough, Ontario, Canada the week of August 24-29. These
international CACGP symposia are held every four years and have been generally
recognized as the best and most comprehensive international meetings on
atmospheric geochemistry. This award will provide partial travel support for up
to 40 U.S. scientists to attend this symposium. To select recipients of travel
support CACGP will set up a two-person committee to evaluate the applications
received. Support of younger scientists will be emphasized. Only U.S. scientists
will be eligible. Decisions will be based on the relevance of the individual
abstracts to the primary themes and objectives of the meetings.