* 8711365
* A Study of the Cosmic Ray Modulation and Solar Cosmic Ray   Events Using Ground-Based Neutron Monitors and Spacecraft   Cosmic Ray Detectors
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1990
* William Webber, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 05/31/1990
* USD 197,400.00

Cosmic rays represent one of the longer data bases for studying the temporal
variation of solar activity. The availability of continuous data records during
several solar cycles from a neutron monitor is important for a wide variety of
investigations of the cosmic ray modulation. For example, data from neutron
monitors are essential for evaluating the extent of the modulation of high
energy cosmic-rays and possible asymmetries in this modulation from cycle to
cycle: these data also serve as a baseline for lower-energy cosmic-ray gradient
measurements and help to understand the propagation of energetic particles in
solar cosmic-ray events. This grant will continue the operation of the cosmic-
ray neutron monitors at Mt. Washington and Durham and continue studies which
relate these ground-based cosmic-ray observations to near earth cosmic ray
telescope data from the IMP series of spacecraft and similar data at large
distances from the earth acquired from Pioneers 10 and 11 and Voyagers 1 and 2.
Mt. Washington is the only high latitude neutron monitor providing continuous
data coverage over almost three solar cycles, the data from that station have
been used as standard indicators of the energetic cosmic-ray flux at earth by
balloon and satellite experiments on a worldwide basis. Currently many other
groups request the data as a time base for spacecraft and balloon measurements.
The inclusion of these ground-based observations provides an essential
additional dimension to the spacecraft measurements. The grant will support the
following specific problems using the Mt. Washington and spacecraft data
described above: (1) the cosmic ray intensities at earth and at heliocentric
distances beyond 15 Astronomical Unit (AU) during the recovery phase of the
current modulation cycle; (2) the integral and differential radial cosmic-ray
gradients 45 AU; (3) latitudinal intensity gradients; (4) the effect of the
heliospheric boundary upon the cosmic-ray intensity; (5) other studies, to
include the phase-lag effects during the decreasing and increasing portions of
different solar cycles, a comparison of the cosmic-ray modulation in the last
three solar cycles particularly at periods of minimum modulation, the Forbush-
type decrease of February 6, 1986, and (6) the acceleration, injection and
propagation of the protons in the May 7, 1978 and February 16, 1984 solar cosmic
ray events.