* 8711827
* Chronic Central Neural Control of Blood Pressure
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Alan Sved, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 06/30/1991
* USD 143,980.00

The regulation of blood pressure is a complex process, involving the integrated
action of many systems. The central nervous system is a key component of this
regulatory process, and one site in the brain which has received considerable
attention in this regard is the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS). This nucleus
is the site of termination of the vast majority of baroreceptor afferent inputs,
and is therefore the first site in the central nervous system involved in the
mediation and integration of the baroreceptor reflex. Bilateral destruction of
the NTS in rats leads rapidly to severe hypertension, resulting in death within
several hours. The hypertension is caused by increased sympathoadrenal activity
and increased release of vasopressin into the circulation. In contrast, it has
recently been observed that if rats are pretreated to prevent the acute phase of
this hypertension, they survive and chronically maintain a normal resting blood
pressure, although baroreceptor input and integration should be totally
abolished. The present proposal is designed to examine the mechanisms by which
normal resting blood pressure is restored in rats with bilateral lesions of the
NTS. The first group of experiments is designed to verify that baroreceptor
reflexes are abolished in rats with chronic lesions of the NTS. Following this,
experiments will examine whether sympathetic activity and vasopressin release
are chronically enhanced in rats with NTS lesions. Experiments will then address
(a) how sympathetic activity and vasopressin release return to normal following
NTS lesions or (b) how normal blood pressure is restored in the presence of
chronically enhanced sympathetic outflow and vasopressin release. Thus, these
studies will examine the ability of the cardiovascular system to adapt to
disruption of the central neural control of blood pressure caused by destruction
of the NTS. It is expected that these studies will provide important new
information on the regulation of blood pressure exerted by the brain, and the
integration of the many systems normally involved in the regulation of blood
pressure.