* 8711517
* Healing of Broken Eucaryotic Chromosomes
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/1987,10/31/1991
* James Haber, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 10/31/1991
* USD 350,150.00

Telomeres, specialized structures at chromosome ends, are essential to maintain
chromosome stability. Broken chromosomes are unstable, but may become "healed"
by recombination with an intact homologue, or by more novel means to produce
terminally deficient chromosomes. These may arise either by de novo telomere
formation or by translocations. A detailed analysis of chromosome repair will be
carried out in the yeast Saccharomyces Cerevisiae, using several methods to
introduce chromosome breaksat one chromosomal location. Strains containing de
novo telemeres will be analyzed to determine the molecular mechaniswm by which
these ends are added to broken chromosomes. Translocations will be monitored by
an improved method of detection. We have discovered a novel form of repair of
broken chromosomes, by recombination between homologous regions well-separated
from, but flanking the break-point. This intra-chromosomal repair system will be
analyzed in detail, to determine how far homologous sites can be separated and
how much homology is required. This event can be induced synchronously and
followed in "real time" by DNA analysis. Special emphasis will be given to
understanding the mechanism by which broken chromosomes become shorter. The
structure of normal telomeres will also be examined to determine the origin of a
high degree of polymorphism and rearrangement in the regions immediately
adjacent to telomeres. Finally, we will extend our study of the repair of broken
chromosomes to another, evolutionarily divergent yeast, Schizosaccharomyces
cerevisiae. Linear dicentric chromosomes will be generated by meiotic
recombination between a linear chromosome and a circular chromosome constructed
by recombinant DNA techniques. The differences in chromosome structure and DNA
repair mechanisms between S. pombe and S. cerevisiae are expected to reveal
different types of healing events. Little is known of chromosome structure and
how it is maintained. The stability of chromosomes which allows faithful
segregation must be inherent in the structure and this work will provide insight
into that structure.