* 8712359
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research: The Econometrics of      Spatial Search Processes (Social and Economic Science)
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Peter Rogerson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1990
* USD 3,408.00

This award will support a one-year cooperative research project between
Professor Peter A. Rogerson, Department of Geography, State University of New
York at Buffalo, and Mag. Gunther Maier, Institute for Urban and Regional
Studies, University of Economics, Vienna, Austria. The primary goal of this
research is to develop and evaluate methods for making practical applications of
various mathematical models that have been constructed in the field of optimal
search theory. In this study, particular emphasis will be given to search
processes that have a spatial aspect, that is, where variables such as location
and distance are important in the search decisions, as they would likely be, for
example, to an individual searching for housing or employment. The cooperating
scientists expect to contribute to the theory of spatial search processes and to
investigate the possibilities and potentials for empirical estimation and
application of these processes. They will study the relationship between optimal
search models and so-called discrete choice models. Spatial search is central to
a broad body of geographic theory. The work to be carried out here has potential
application in modeling such areas as consumer behavior, journey-to-work
decisions, recreational preferences, housing-market searches, and labor
migration, among others. Complementary skills, knowledge, and experiences of the
two investigators will be combined in the project. Professor Rogerson's
background includes geography and mathematics, and he has particular expertise
in the area of optimal search processes. His Austrian colleague has a background
in economics and is especially knowledgeable about the discrete choice model,
which is relevant to the spatial search processes being studied here. Previous
collaboration between the scientists has been productive, and this current study
will broaden and extend their past efforts.