* 8712119
* A Replication of Lenski's Detroit Area Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1990
* Duane Alwin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 08/31/1990
* USD 231,774.00

Abstract In l958, Sociologist Gerhard Lenski conducted a survey in metropolitan
Detroit focusing upon people's religious attitudes and experiences, and the way
they affected people's behavior in a variety of non-religious contexts. In their
family lives, their political orientations, their friendships networks, and so
on, Lenski documented consistently different patterns among Protestants,
Catholics and Jews. Lenski reported most of his major findings in a subsequent
book entitled, The Religious Factor. This book is widely considered to be a
landmark study of religion in America, and in the 30 years since Lenski's study
there have been numerous detailed examinations of specific aspects of Lenski's
findings. However, none of the more recent analyses have approximated a complete
replication. Alwin will survey a representative sample of Metropolitan Detroit,
the same population from which Lenski sampled. The same questions will be asked,
supplemented by questions which have appeared in more recent national surveys.
Thus, it will be possible to relate the Detroit Area findings to themselves, 30
years earlier, and to national patterns as well. The analysis will focus both
upon trends within the major religions and the degree to which, in people's
secular lives, there has been convergence among the major religious
denominations.