* 8712016
* Reaction Steps and Mechanism for Chemical Vapor Deposition  of Tungsten
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1991
* Carol McConica, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1991
* USD 312,746.00

The PIs propose a comprehensive research program to study the chemical vapor
deposition (CVD) reaction between tungsten hexafluoride (WF6) and
silicon/silicon dioxide surfaces. Understanding of this reaction could help
semiconductor processing companies in the manufacture of very large scale
integration (VLSI), ultra large scale integration (ULSI), and wafer scale
integration (WSI) chips. Tungsten has potential usage because of (1) its
resilience to electromagnetism, (2) low resistivity, (3) high melting point, and
(4) a thermal coefficient of expansion that is close to silicon. The selective
nature of tungsten along with its electrical and physical properties makes it
suitable for many VLSI large circuit applications because selectively-deposited
tungsten films provide highly reliable, low resistance, and low cost contact
barriers for shallow junctions. As the scale of devices decreases, tungsten's
potential use will increase as an interconnect for multilevel metallization.
This will be essential for advances in ULSI and WSI technology. CVD of tungsten
has the advantages of low temperature processing, selectivity, radiation-damage-
free deposition and conformal coverage. To obtain a better understanding of the
gas-solid reaction between silicon and WF6, the PIs plan to use a Auger electron
spectroscopy (AES), temperature- programmed reaction (TPR), and high resolution
electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS) in ultrahigh vacuum. AES permits
analysis of a surface to determine its elemental composition. TPR gives the rate
that each gaseous product forms during reaction. HREELS determines chemical
bonds present in adsorbed species. This combination of measurements of gaseous
products, adsorbed species, and elemental surface composition should provide a
complete picture of the reaction process.