* 8712135
* Introduction of Course on VLSI CAD Tools
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1988
* Steven Rubin, Schlumberger Palo Alto Research Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 06/30/1988
* USD 27,000.00

Dr. Rubin has just published a book, "Computer Aids for VLSI Design", which will
be the basis for a course of instruction with the express purpose of preparing
university faculty members to teach a course in VLSI design and tools. The
setting for the course will be Stanford University, where the students can visit
a forefront VLSI research center, the Center for Integrated Systems. Dr. Rubin
is exceptionally well qualified to teach the course because of his
accomplishments in both research and teaching of CAD topics. VLSI (very large
scale integration) is a recent field that explores how to design highly complex
integrated circuits and related electronic systems. The need for this field of
study is clear from trends in current technology. Development of the field is
important to the nation's competitive lead in electronics. There are
instructional materials at the level of detailed circuit design; but until now,
there have been no instructional materials dealing with the scope and use of
computer-aided design (CAD) tools necessary for VLSI design development. A new
textbook which fills this gap in VLSI education has been written by the
principal investigator and recently published. This book, "Computer Aids for
VLSI Design", presents a broad view of the tools necessary for modern VLSI
design systems. The instruction proposed by the principal investigator will
educate a core of instructors who can return to their institutions with an in-
depth knowledge of VLSI design tools and prepare courses on their use.