* 8712027
* Development of Auroral Radiative Transfer Models
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1987,11/19/1987
* G. Randall Gladstone, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 11/19/1987
* USD 0.00

The primary objective of the proposed research is to develop the capability to
model the trapping and radiative transport of auroral ultraviolet resonance line
emissions measured by spacecraft and rockets. Since auroral emissions vary
strongly with horizontal position, this requires the development of a two-
dimensional radiative transfer code to model the transport of EUV resonance line
photons under distinctly non-plane-parallel conditions. This radiative transfer
program will utilize a matrix-method solution, with the two-dimensional problems
by using Fourier transforms. To provide input for the radiative transfer
program, we also require auroral electron transport codes with variable energy
grids to handel the high energy electrons found in auroras. After the successful
development and testing of these programs, they will be applied to data from a
variety of experiments (e.g., the Viking UV Imager, the STP78-1 EUV
spectrometer, and nightside auroral rocket data). The results will provide
valuable information about the energy and flux of the precipitating electrons,
on both local and global scales. In addition, the programs will be made general
enough to apply to auroras occurring in the atmospheres of other planets, such
as Jupiter. The principal investigator has a sound record of previous research
in the field of radiative transport, and the probability of success of this
endeavor is high.