* 8712211
* Third Conference on the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory,Irvine, California, October 14-17, 1987
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1988
* James McGaugh, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1988
* USD 6,000.00

This action is to provide partial support for the Third Conference on the
Neurobiology of Learning and Memory. This conference is being organized by the
Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory and will offer presentations
and discussion by leading investigators from around the world. The topic of the
conference will be the relationship between the design of cortical and cortico-
subcortical circuitries and the emergence of particular aspects or types of
memory, including those involved in cognition. Three issues related to this
topic will be discussed on successive days. First, the question of the forms of
memory will be explored; speakers on the first day of the meeting will address
the question of how many types of memory systems co-exist in brain as well as
the neurobiological and psychological relationships existing between them.
Descriptions of the substrates of memory, either in terms of cellular
chemistries or neural networks, very often fail to specify what is meant by
"memory". This practice has generated considerable an unnecessary confusion.
Accordingly, the conference will begin with an extended analysis of the
characteristics of a wide range of learning paradigms and preparations (from
conditioning in invertebrates to episodic memory in humans) and seek to identify
commonalities and differences. Nearly all learning theorists assume that most of
the storage and processing of memory by humans and other big- brained mammals is
accomplished by networks which run through the neocortex and connect it with
specific subcortical regions such as the amygdala and hippocampus. The second
day of the conference will be concerned with the organized of cortical
circuitries, what we know of their plasticity, and how their specialized
features might be utilized for memorial operations. Surprisingly enough, there
have been very few attempts to link the neurobiology of neocortex with higher
psychological functions such as integration and partitioning of memory; in many
senses, the second session, which will be directed at this issue, will be
breaking new ground. The third and last day of the meeting will explore cortical
memory systems using computer models. A spectrum of network models will be
discussed, ranging from those grounded in physiology to more purely theoretical
constructions. In summary, the conference is designed to explore in sequence
three related questions: 1) How many forms of memory are there? 2) How do these
forms relate to the specialized circuitry that characterizes cortex? and 3) What
types of computational operations must these circuits perform in order to
produce memory?