* 8712122
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research: Comparison of            Interferometric Measuring Methods (Physics and Materials    Research)
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Samuel Werner, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1991
* USD 12,200.00

This award will support a two-year cooperative research project in neutron
physics between Dr. Helmut Kaiser and Dr. Samuel A. Werner, University of
Missouri-Columbia, and Professors Helmut Rauch and Anton Zeilinger, Atomic
Institute of the Austrian Universities, Vienna, Austria. The scientists are
collaborating in a series of joint experiments that will permit a comparison to
be made of neutron interferometric methods developed in their respective
laboratories. Planned are comparative coherent scattering length measurements,
the exchange and testing of advanced interferometers, a phase echo experiment,
and a Fizeau effect (rotating wheel or disk) experiment using very cold
neutrons. Much of the work of the Austrian group is carried out at the Institut
Laue-Langevin (ILL), in Grenoble, France. The ILL and Missouri facilities are in
some ways complementary, particularly in the energies, and therefore
wavelengths, of the neutrons available. Comparative work at the two research
facilities, using independently developed techniques and instrumentation to make
measurements on the same physical samples, will also permit the U.S. and
Austrian scientists to check for systematic errors in their work. The major
impact of these studies will be in the field of fundamental physics. The
experiments are expected to increase our understanding of the basic properties
of neutrons and their interaction with matter. The Missouri and Vienna groups
are among the very few in the world working on fundamental studies in neutron
interferometry. The sharing of expertise, instrumentation, and samples should
significantly enhance the efforts of both research groups.