* 8712670
* U.S.-Finland Cooperative Research on a Model Relating       Predation Rate and Habitat Structural Complexity
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1989
* Walter Nelson, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 04/30/1989
* USD 6,000.00

This award will enable Dr. Walter G. Nelson of the Florida Institute of
Technology to collaborate with Dr. Erik Bonsdorff of the Abo Akademi, Finland in
a study of the relationship between habitat complexity and prey vulnerability to
predation. Specifically, they will carry out rigorous laboratory experiments
with fish and amphipods to determine whether there is a threshold level of
spatial complexity below which variations in complexity have no effect on prey
survivorship. The researchers will perform their laboratory experiments at the
Huso Biological Station where Dr. Bonsdorff has done extensive field data
collection and experiments on shallow water interactions between fish predators
and benthic prey. The basic biology of the local organisms is well known. The
reed beds in the Aland Islands of Finland near this laboratory are a simple
enough system, due to low species diversity, for trophic relationships to be
modelled realistically in laboratory experiments. The laboratory studies will
lead to hypotheses concerning prey distribution and abundance within the reed
beds which can be tested by future field experiments. Dr. Nelson has experience
in studies of predator-prey relationships and disturbance among the fauna of
complex seagrass communities in the eastern U.S. He will benefit from access to
a field system that is particularly well suited to modelling these types of
ecological relationships. The collaboration will allow the researchers to
combine their expertise and insights in an effort to advance understanding of
predator-prey relationships. Recent work by Dr. Nelson and others has suggested
that prey vulnerability does not have a simple linear relationship to substrate
complexity, but rather, it is better described by a step function, at least at
the low end of the complexity spectrum. However, this hypothesis has not yet
been carefully tested experimentally. If the concept of a threshold of spatial
complexity in predator-prey interactions can be confirmed (or refuted), this
will provide a valuable insight into the effect of habitat on biotic
interactions. If the hypothesis is substantiated, the knowledge will improve
prediction of the potential impact of certain kinds of human disturbance on
natural systems, and will improve efforts to restore damaged habitats or create
artificial habitats.