* 8712070
* The Earliest Metals Smelting in Europe
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Judith Todd, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1990
* USD 107,770.00

This grant permits Drs Todd and her colleagues to conduct metallurgical analyses
on a large series of samples from Eastern Europe. These include copper ores,
lead ores, slags, copper artifacts and crucibles. Most of these are securely
dated to the Neolithic period. The investigators will employ microstructural
observation using optical and scanning electorm microscopy to make detailed
characterizations. Electron probe microanalyses will also be conducted and if
appropriate further Positron Induced Xj. ray Emission studies will be used. On
this basis it should be possible to determine if the slags and metals produced
are consistent with the ore samples and whether deliberate additions of fluxing
agents appear to have been made. In order to gain familiarity with the
conditions required for copper and lead smelting, laboratory experiments will be
undertaken using copper carbonate, sulphide and lead minerals. This research has
two goals. The first is to trace the process by which metallurgy developed in
Eastern Europe. Given the investigators excellent access to relevant
collections, they have ammassed a series of samples which should allow them to
address this question. The second goal is methodological. Because smelting, by
its very nature, changes the composition of materials, it is very difficult to
relate finished products either to the possible ores from which the metal is
derived or the slag which is the byproduct of the smelting process. This project
will attempt to develop means to accomplish this. Archaeologists want to
understand how complex societies such as our own appear and are maintained.
While many factors are involved, the development of technological competence
plays a major role. In this context the ability to smelt metals is important.
This study will not only develop analytic techniques applicable in a wide range
of situations, but also shed light on the development of social and
technological complexity.