* 8712153
* U.S.-Switzerland Joint Seminar in Geophysical               Fluid Dynamics, Interlaken, Switzerland,                    September 18-24, 1988.
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Susan Friedlander, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1989
* USD 9,000.00

This award provides partial support for nine U.S. scientists to participate in a
seminar on geophysical fluid dynamics at Interlaken, Switzerland in September,
1988. Four Swiss researchers and other scientists from Australia, Germany, the
United Kingdom and Canada are also expected to attend. Dr. Susan J. Friedlander,
University of Illinois, Chicago, and Dr. Kolumban Hutter, Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology, Zurich, are organizing the seminar. The purpose of the
seminar is to bring together a group of scientists from several disciplines to
exchange their research findings and ideas about internal waves in geophysical
contexts. The participants include applied mathematicians, geophysicists,
meteorologists, limnologists, oceanographers, and others. The unifying theme of
the conference is the study of wave motion in rotating, stratified fluids. Such
fluids possess a variety of wave motions that are significant to a large number
of phenomena in lakes, oceans, the atmosphere and the earth's core. The seminar
will cover four broad topics: (1) Effects of boundaries on internal waves, (2)
Planetary waves on the beta-plane and in spherical shells, (3) Nonlinear
internal waves, particularly solitary waves, and (4) Magnetohydrodynamic waves
in rotating fluids. These topics have applications in understanding lake and
ocean waves in various topographical conditions, atmospheric and planetary
waves, earth core waves, interactions of different waves, and certain
geophysical and astrophysical phenomena. The conference format will be several
presentations of invited lectures followed by discussions each day. The
proceedings of the conference will be published in a special issue of
Geophysical and Astrophysical Fluid Dynamics with the seminar organizers as
guest editors.