* 8712793
* U.S.-Finland Cooperative Research: New Techniques for       Ensuring Sound Spheroidal Graphite Iron Castings with BetterYield
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1991
* John Berry, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1991
* USD 16,550.00

This award will enable Professors John T. Berry and Doru M. Stefanescu,
University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, to collaborate with Mr. Arno Louvo and Mr.
Asko Renkonen, Technical Research Center of Finland in Espoo. Associated with
these researchers on a subcontract are Professors Prateen V. Desai and James G.
Hartley, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta. The research will examine new
techniques for ensuring sound spheroidal graphite iron castings with better
yields. The aim of the research is to characterize the ways modular iron alloys
solidify and undergo shrinkage. The researchers hope to eliminate cast
unsoundness problems and to improve efficiency and quality in modular castings
manufacture. Data will be collected in the U.S. and Finland on the interactions
of fluid flow, heat transfer, and microstructural evolution of the materials as
they affect shrinkage behavior. A computer simulation model of casting
solidification will be tested and refined, using the data. The research will
require the specialized expertise of the cooperating scientists in computer-
aided design, thermal analysis, and experimental techniques in nucleation and
growth studies on iron-based alloys. The research is an extension of the
collaborative work already done by the Finnish and American researchers.