* 8712196
* ASL/LSA Conference on Linguistics and Logic to be held      July 10-12, 1987 at Stanford University
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1988
* Stanley Peters, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 06/30/1988
* USD 10,571.00

Abstract Narrative The development of logic in the twentieth century has
exhibited a preoccupation with logic as a specialized branch of mathematics.
Since natural languages exhibit many features that are foreign to mathematical
formalisms and that resist analysis by familiar logical techniques, many
logicians have tended to neglect the goal of accounting for human languages and
communication. All along, however, there has also been a strong countercurrent
within logic devoted to these larger interests. In recent years, the challenges
of natural language have seemed more urgent to logicians because of the need in
artificial intelligence for theories of natural language and communication.
Within linguistics as well, the need for a robust semantic component has been
felt almost since the beginning of genera- tive grammar. Since modern syntax
stresses the theory of syn- tactic units of arbitrary size and complexity, it
requires a theory of meaning that will serve to accommodate this sort of
complexity. Approaches based on logical theory have come to predominate in this
area. Since applications to natural language strain symbolic logic in many
interesting ways, linguists cannot in general apply logical theories "off the
shelf"; the process calls for creative adaptation and develop- ment of logical
material. Much of the interdisciplinary work in logic and linguistics is devoted
to such problems. Since linguistics and logic are separate, well-developed
disciplines with many subspecialties, it is likely that the relatively informal
communication across disciplinary boun- daries that has taken place so far has
left unexploited many opportunities for scientific advances that can only take
place by bringing together specialists from the two fields in meetings such as
the one proposed here.