* 8712180
* Archaeological Research on Marajo Island, Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Anna Roosevelt, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1991
* USD 82,284.00

This grant permits Dr. Roosevelt and her colleagues to continue their
archaeological investigations on Marajo Island located at the mouth of the
Amazon River in Brazil. Previous work by Dr. Roosevelt and other investigators
has revealed a long prehistoric sequence. Dr. Roosevelt will focus on the
impressive Marajoara Phase mound which dates between 500 and 1300 AD. The team
will investigate structures and chronology at the site and sample nearby
cemeteries in preparation for excavation. On the basis of these the team hopes
not only to obtain more precise dates for the site, but also to provide detailed
reconstructions of subsistence practices, social organization and demography. It
is unclear how this large prehistoric Amazonian group subsisted, whether it had
a chieftan system of organization and whether this level of complexity present
at Marajo Island developed locally or results from migration of peoples from
elsewhere. This project should help to answer these questions. Although humans
have inhabited tropical South America for a long time, prehistoric adaptations
to this tropical environment are not well understood because tropical vegetation
makes sites hard to locate and humid conditions do not favor preservation of
organic remains. The sites at Marajo Island are rich and should yield valuable
scientific data.