* 8712787
* Macro Models Based on Aggregation of Micro Behavior Using   Models of Changes in the Distribution of Individuals
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Arthur Lewbel, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1990
* USD 75,207.00

A great deal of applied econometric analysis uses aggregated data (from Census,
the Bureau of Labor Statistics and so on) to test and apply theories about the
behavior of individuals in the economy. For instance, studies estimating systems
of demand equations for many types of consumer goods are based on the
microeconomic theory describing individual optimizing behavior, but use consumer
expenditure data of the entire country, thereby implicitly treating the
aggregated data as if they were generated by a single person. In a similar
circumstance the output of a firm is theoretically derived based on the
principle of profit maximization. Estimation of production functions of firms,
however, is often done using data based on an entire industry or country. The
assumption of a single consumer or firm being a representative of the entire
economy is a convenient one, in that it allows application and testing of
microeconomic theories with available aggregate data, and it avoids intractable
problems of aggregation and collective choice. Unfortunately, there is no reason
deriving from economic theory to assume that national aggregate data, which is
the result of adding the economic activities of millions of diverse individuals,
will resemble the economic activity of a single firm or consumer. The researcher
must thus assume some general parameters for the aggregated data in order to
uncover the underlying optimizing behavior. Past theoretical work has shown that
very little structure need be assumed on the aggregated data to infer the
existence of aggregate demand or supply functions, and that those restrictions
need be placed only on the statistical distribution of the aggregate data. Thus
one can validly restrict the distribution of consumer expenditures to remain
unchanged through time or to change in general specified ways. Such
distributional assumptions can also be applied to production. Professor Lewbel
derives aggregate demand equations for the economy by considering the
restrictions on the changes over time in the distribution of total expenditures
in the population, and combining them with specific individual demand behavior.
These aggregate demand equations satisfy all the conditions of utility
maximization on which individual demand equations are based. Technically, he
constructs nonlinear models of macroeconomic data based on explicit models of
both heterogeneous microeconomic behavior and of the evolution over time of the
distribution of individual agents in the economy. This allows for the
construction of models of shifts in the distributions through time that are
compatible with aggregation theory. Professor Lewbel tests the theoretical
validity of aggregate models by estimation using cross sectional or panel data,
and by studying the distribution data in several time periods. These methods are
applied to various national data sets like the National Income and Product
Accounts, the Consumer Expenditure Survey, and the U. S. Current Population
Reports.