* 8712396
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research: Volterra Integral        Equations and Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,10/31/1990
* Ronald Grimmer, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1990
* USD 8,945.00

This award will support a two-year collaborative research effort in mathematics
involving Professor Ronald C. Grimmer, Southern Illinois University at
Carbondale; Professor Richard K. Miller, Iowa State University; Professor
Wilhelm Schappacher, University of Graz, Austria; and Dr. Wolfgang Desch, also
at the University of Graz. The cooperating mathematicians are studying a number
of related problems involving so-called Volterra integrodifferential equations
in Banach space. Their research will deal with various questions concerning
control and qualitative behavior of solutions of partial differential integral
equations. Of particular interest will be determining the behavior of solutions
which have singularities in the initial or boundary data. It is important to
determine if these singularities propagate and, if so, additionally to determine
the behavior of these singularities. Included also will be the study of
asymptotic behavior of solutions especially as it is related to control
problems. The expected results of this research will be largely of an abstract
mathematical nature, but the work may well lead to mathematical techniques which
are applicable to practical problems, as for example in the study of the
physical behavior of materials having both viscous and elastic properties.
Examples of such viscoelastic media are polymeric solids, high molecular weight
polymer fluids, blood, and fluidized coal. Another application of the equations
being studied here is to electrodynamics. The mathematicians collaborating in
this project have both similar and complementary strengths and interests. They
have worked together productively in the past, and this award will permit them
to continue their mutually beneficial cooperation.