* 8712192
* Algebraic Approaches to Programming Concepts and Their      Semantics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Edward Blum, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1989
* USD 66,424.00

This project will pursue two related lines of research: (a) the semantics of
parallel systems and programming constructs for parallel computation; (b) the
algebraic and analytic dynamics of large quasi- neural networks for parallel
computation. In (a), an investigation of programming constructs for vector
computation will be carried out with multi-tasking as one of the main
approaches, as in Ada for example. A theoretical foundation for parallel
algorithms will be sought within the framework of partially- ordered sets of
algebraic operations. Some preliminary studies have already suggested that Ada-
like constructs are insufficient for efficient parallel numerical computations.
This finding will be placed on a more rigorous basis by setting up a suitable
algebraically- oriented theory of multi-task algorithms, with particular
attention to asynchronism. In (b), studies will be continued on the dynamics of
computational systems. However, the previous Turing network model will be
replaced by models based on networks of threshold-logic elements analogous to
McCulloch-Pitts neurons, which are called quasi-neurons. Of particular interest
are the algebraic dynamics of such systems and the analytic dynamics of special
models of the quasi-neurons. Related to part (a), will be a study of the
mathematical foundations of asynchronism in quasi-neural networks.