* 8712576
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research:  Models for Fluids   Exhibiting Percolation
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1988,02/29/1992
* James Dufty, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/29/1992
* USD 8,683.00

This award will enable Professor James T. Dufty of the University of Florida to
collaborate with Professor Matthieu H. Ernst and others of the State University
of Utrecht, The Netherlands in research on mathematical models of percolation in
fluids. Their general objective is to gain an improved theoretical understanding
of the microscopic basis for transport properties of simple fluids. Diffusion is
among the most fundamental of dynamical processes in fluids and other materials.
The researchers will work first on random lattice models that represent
diffusion as random walks on a disordered lattice, approximating the confinement
of an atom or particle in a dense liquid (as, for example, in percolation
processes). Such models are the simplest in a hierarchy of increasingly
realistic descriptions of fluid dynamical behavior. Results from these random
lattice models will provide the basis for a similar study of the Lorentz gas, an
idealized fluid, to resolve discrepancies between theory and computer
simulations. Professor Ernst and his colleagues at Utrecht possess outstanding
theoretical and computational expertise in random lattice models and the Lorentz
gas. Professor Dufty has developed numerical and analytical tools for kinetic
models of bound state transport properties. These complementary strengths, and
the overlapping background of the collaborators in modern kinetic theory
methods, should lead to significant progress in this area of statistical
mechanics. Ultimately, a better understanding of transport properties in systems
with percolation will have value in many scientific disciplines and industrial
applications.