* 8712461
* Materials Processing Initiative:  New Ion Implantation      Technique for Improved Performance of Cutting Tools and Dies
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Richard Dodd, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 10/31/1991
* USD 767,900.00

This grant is an award by the National Science Foundation under the Materials
Processing Joint Initiative. The objective of the research is to study the
effects of plasma source ion implantation on the microstructural, mechanical,
and tribological properties of hard materials. The research emphasizes
investigation of plasma physics scaling laws (for example, variation of plasma
density, implantation energy, pulse length, and spatial uniformity of dose),
characterization of the micro chemical composition and microstructure of the
implanted materials (for example, electron microscopy, energy dispersive x-ray
analysis, and Auger electron spectroscopy), characterization of the mechanical
properties (for example, hardness), and tribological evaluation (for example,
wear resistance, wear damage mechanisms, coefficient of friction). The program
includes preparation of cutting tools for field testing in an industrial
environment to determine the effectiveness of ion implantation in increasing the
hardness and wear resistance of the materials for cutting tool applications. The
research program represents an innovative and cost- effective approach to
improving the wear resistance of materials via modification of the surface of
the material using plasma source ion implantation. Ion implantation has been
used routinely by the semiconductor industry to improve the electronic
properties of integrated circuits. The implantation techniques and equipment
used in the electronics industry is too expensive and impractical for scale-up
for use on large area manufacturing of parts such as cutting tools. This program
is to investigate the effectiveness of plasma source ion implantation for
treating the surface of parts having large surface area and complex shapes. The
effectiveness of modification of the hardness and wear resistance of metals,
ceramics and polymers has been shown for small specimens, and this program will
investigate the fundamental aspects of large area plasma sources.