* 8712629
* Spectroscopic Investigation of the Chemical Changes in Bulk Lubricant and Lubricant Solid Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1991
* Erdogan Gulari, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 03/31/1991
* USD 265,591.00

Knowledge of the physical and chemical changes occuring in the bulk lubricant
and the solid-lubricant interface is essential in order to control friction and
wear. This program will employ spectroscopic techniques to study these physical
and chemical chances under realistic conditions. Laser light scattering and
vibrational spectroscopy will be used to investigate the micellization and
oxidation phenomena in bulk oil,as a function of temperature, wear and anti-
oxidation additives and oxygen pressure. The changes occurring at the interface
will be followed both under static and dynamic conditions. Under static
conditions attenuated total internal reflection IR spectroscopy will be used to
monitor the adsorption-desorption, and reaction kinetics of the oil and the
additives at the solid-lubricant interface. Analysis of the data will yield rate
constants as well as chemical information about the alignment and binding of the
lubricant molecules to the solid surface. The oxidation kinetics of the solid
surface will be determined from an analysis of the vibrational bands due to the
formation of metal oxides. Perhaps the most informative measurements will be
obtained under realistic conditions with a diamond slider. Using single
reflection FTIR and Raman scattering the chemical condition of the lubricant
film and the solid surface will be measured in real time right behind the
contact point as a function of load and temperature.