* 8712036
* Sediment and Ocean History of the N.E. Pacific During the   Pleistocene:  A Pilot Study
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/1987,03/30/1990
* Robert Karlin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 03/30/1990
* USD 89,986.00

The purposes of this research (a one-year pilot program) are to examine the
sediment and isotope geochemistry and paleomagnetism of cores from the N.E.
Pacific Ocean and to establish a framework for later sedimentological,
micropaleontological, and geochemical studies of the paleoceanography and
sediment history in conjunction with the JOIDES RESOLUTION operations in the
region in 1990-1991. Our immediate goal is to establish a regional isotope and
carbonate stratigraphy using existing cores and material to be collected on a
Canadian cruise to the Gulf of Alaska in August, 1978. However, the geochemical
information obtained in this study will also provide important information on
outstanding questions concerning the history of the N.E. Pacific. Specifically,
we will 1) examine the temporal and spatial behavior of the carbonate
compensation depth (CCD) during the Quaternary; 2) establish whether North
Pacific Bottom Water (NPBW) was formed during glacial times; 3) evaluate the
history and extent of marine and backarc volcanism; and 4) examine the effects
of climatic change on the provenance, supply, and dispersal pathways of
continentally-derived material. If, indeed, the North Pacific has been a locus
of deep water formation, then its history becomes of major importance in
understanding global climatic change. The REU supplement will enable a
University of Washington undergraduate to participate in this work and gain
valuable experience in both observational and analytical aspects of marine
geology. Under the guidance of the PI, the student will participate in core
opening, description, and sampling for sedimentology, geochemistry, paleo/rock
magnetism, and isotope analysis. He will assist in routine paleomagnetic
measurements and learn to apply quantitative analytical techniques to
geochemical and paleomagnetic data. He will also work with the PI in the
interpretation and synthesis of the results with available geophysical data to
understand temporal and areal patterns of sedimentation.