* 8712674
* U.S.-Philippines Cooperative Research on Cytotoxic and      Anti-viral Agents in Philippine Plant and Animal Species
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1987,09/30/1990
* Wayne Shier, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 09/30/1990
* USD 24,641.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Wayne T. Shier, Professor, Department
of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, University of
Minnesota, to pursue with Dr. William G. Padolina, Director, National Institutes
of Biotechnology and Applied Microbiology, University of the Philippines, Los
Ba~os, for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research on cytotoxic
and antiviral agents from natural sources in the Philippines. A minimal
mammalian cell culture capability will be established in the Philippines. It
will be used to conduct cytotoxicity assays against normal and transformed
permanent cell lines and antiviral assays against a DNA virus (Herpes simplex
type 1) and an RNA virus in ethanol extracts from Philippine medicinal plants
with emphasis on plants known to be toxic or to contain anti-fertility or
insecticidal activities. A second source of extracts will be marine plants and
lower animals, with particular emphasis on sponges and tunicates. A third source
of extracts will be toxic fungi from agricultural extension samples received
from all parts of the Philippines. Extraction, purification, and structure
identification efforts will be carried out on any specimen found to have
noteworthy cytotoxic or antiviral activities. Some 200 medicinal plants, marine
organisms, and fungal isolates will be screened for cytotoxic and antiviral
agents. The researchers will attempt to gain some insight into the roles of
toxins in the organisms that produce them. The search for antiviral agents is
presently one of the most active areas of research in the pharmaceutical
sciences. Efforts in this area have been spurred on by (1) the lack of effective
agents for viral chemotherapy in general, and in particular from widespread
public concern about AIDS and (2) recent successes with synthetic analogs of
marine natural products. The search for anti-cancer (cytotoxic) agents has met
with some successes in extracts from marine plants and lower animals from the
Caribbean. The proposed research will extend these lines of investigation to the
vast and largely untapped resource of biological and biochemical diversity
provided by the marine and terrestrial environments of the Philippines. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists
and engineers and their counterparts in developing countries through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. In addition, the project will
improve Philippine scientific infrastructure through the establishment of a
mammalian cell culture capability at Los Ba~os. The U.S. and Philippine
collaborators are highly respected scientists with extensive research experience
and productive publication records in the field of the proposal.