* 8712084
* Theoretical Studies of the Structure and Dynamics of Cloudy Interstellar Medium Spiral Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1991
* William Roberts, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 09/30/1991
* USD 103,367.00

Theoretical and computational studies on the important classic problem of the
dynamics of galactic gas flows and the roles played by the gas in the structure
and dynamics of galaxies will be carried out. Normal and barred spiral galaxies
will be a major focus of the research of the wealth of improved and detailed
observational data that has become available in recent years, now making
possible new definitive tests and comparisons with observations. Cloud-particle
galactic gas dynamics and continuum gas dynamics are essential in the
multipronged program of research. Detailed simulations of full galactic disks
and higher resolution simulations of selected local regions will be studied in
parallel to better understand the relationship between grand design and local
spiral arm morphologies. The effects of self gravitation among clouds, magnetic
field interactions, and star formation processes will also be primary areas of
focus. The local effective viscosity of the cloud is determined from the cloud-
particle simulations and used to produce a generalized continuum gas dynamical
description of galactic gas flows that properly simulates the average transport
properties of the cloudy interstellar medium (ISM). The utilization of
computational simulation in this work is a topic of great significance at the
present time and is a separate major thrust area. The high spatial resolution of
the simulations will be utilized to make definitive comparisons with
observations and provide careful tests for theoretical predictions based on
local stability analyses.