* 8712871
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Quantifying Indirect     Interactions Between Baltic Sea Benthic Invertebrates
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Peter Abrams, University of Minnesota Saint Paul
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 01/31/1990
* USD 2,906.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Peter Abrams,
University of Minnesota, and Dr. Ragnar Elmgren, Stockholm University. They will
study the effects of indirect interactions between pairs of species of bottom-
dwelling invertebrates of the Baltic sea. Indirect interactions occur through
the mutual effects of two interacting species on a third species. The studies
will involve laboratory experiments to measure short-term effects and
mathematical modelling to estimate long-term changes in population densities. It
is important to understand indirect effects to be able to predict responses to
changed conditions in natural species communities. The effects are potential
determiners of the abundance of species in a community. One practical benefit of
learning about indirect effects is being able to predict the consequences of
perturbations to a community, such as from oil spills. Experimental measurements
have lagged behind theory about the effects because of the complexity of
studying most natural communities. The relative simplicity of the Baltic
invertebrate community alleviates this problem and makes it possible to measure
the effects. The American and Swedish scientists have complementary skills to do
the research. Dr. Abrams is a theoretical ecologist who has worked extensively
on indirect effects, and Dr. Elmgren is an experimentalist with broad experience
studying interactions between Baltic invertebrates.