* 8712631
* INITIATION AND SUPPORT FOR AN UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH        PARTICIPATION SITE AT THE SPACE PHYSICS RESEARCH LABORATORY,UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1988
* Timothy Killeen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joelee Joyce
* 11/30/1988
* USD 63,900.00

This grant will fund the establishment of an Undergraduate Research
Participation Site at the Space Physics Research Laboratory of the University of
Michigan. The Space Physics Research Laboratory is a broad interdisciplinary
research organization which is part of the Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences
academic department of the University of Michigan. Research undertaken in the
laboratory spans several fields of engineering and geophysical sciences, with an
emphasis on the observation and understanding of the physical processes which
control the gaseous, plasma and liquid envelopes of the Earth and planetary
bodies. The annual research budget of the laboratory is ~$8M and major funding
comes from the National Science Foundation and NASA as well as other agencies.
Because of the strong ties to the academic environment at the University, and
its presence within a geosciences department in the College of Engineering, the
Space Physics Research Laboratory has always maintained an active interest in
providing significant undergraduate and graduate research opportunities,
particularly in the areas of Solar-Terrestrial research and Aeronomy. This grant
will expand to consolidate the undergraduate involvement by initiating support
for an REU (Research Experiences for Undergraduates) site within the Laboratory.
The REU site will involve the direct participation of 8 faculty members who have
all had previous experience with the training of undergraduate students in
research. Support will be provided for 16 students, of whom half will be from
institutions other than the University of Michigan. Because of its commitment of
high-quality undergraduate education, the University has agreed to waive this.
The rich variety and significance of the research carried out within the
Laboratory and the commitment of time on the part of the faculty participants
will provide the undergraduates of the program a significant opportunity to have
hands-on experience in active and exciting research areas. This REU program will
provide an important opportunity to attract and motivate talented individuals at
a critical time in their development. It is fully anticipated that some of the
undergraduate participants in the program will become sufficiently interested in
exciting areas of research in geoscience that they will go on to pursue graduate
studies, either at the University of Michigan itself, or at other universities.