* 8712227
* Continuing Studies of Airborne Thermometry
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Alfred Rodi, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 01/31/1991
* USD 166,548.00

The measurement of temperature within cloudy air is of fundamental importance
to atmospheric scientists. Unfortunately, in-cloud air temperature can not be
properly measured if the sensor used to measure the temperature becomes wet.
Many different housings have been developed for the purpose of shielding
temperature sensors from hydrometeors while allowing adequate sampling of
ambient air. To date, however, all housings still allow some sensor wetting
under various conditions. The extent of this problem has been difficult to
ascertain, however, because no standard existed against which immersion sensors
could be tested. Recently, a fundamentally different instrument which does not
suffer from this wetting problem has been developed. Unfortunately, this
instrument, known as a radiometric thermometer, is expensive, large and heavy
which makes widespread use in research aircraft unlikely in the near future. The
Principal Investigators will use this radiometric thermometer to study the
wetting characteristics of the most commonly used immersion probes. New
knowledge will be gained on the magnitude of the problem and the conditions
under which wetting occurs. This will allow post calibrations to be applied to
previously collected data, thus improving its quality. The knowledge gained from
this study also will allow the Principal Investigators to pursue developing an
improved housing for a light weight and less expensive immersion sensor.