* 8712236
* INVESTIGATION OF MICROSCOPIC AND MACROSCOPIC PLASMA         PROPERTIES WITH APPLICATION TO SPACE PLASMA
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1990
* Christoph Goertz, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth H. Schatten
* 06/30/1990
* USD 125,000.00

Research in S/T relations has two major thrusts. The first involves the study
of the interactive, nonlinear processes that govern the behavior of plasma
within the magnetospheres and ionospheres of the earth, other planets, and in
the interplanetary medium. Special emphasis today is on the development of
quantitative models with the aim of understanding and eventually predicting the
influence of solar variations - both short and long term - on the earth's
magnetosphere, ionosphere, and atmosphere. This includes detailed studies of
microscopic processes which affect the transport of energy, momentum, and mass
through the solar wind-magnetosphere-ionosphere (SMI) system as well as the
global modeling of this system. The second thrust uses the geo-plasma
environment as a laboratory for furthering our knowledge of fundamental plasma
processes which may duplicate natural processes under controlled conditions
(e.g. artificial aurora) or which occur under plasma conditions difficult to
achieve in ground laboratories (e.g., collisionless shocks). This will help to
better understand the complex interactions of the plasma environment with man-
made objects (shuttle, space station, satellites) such as wake effects,
differential charging, and perturbations due to gas releases and particle-beam
injections, for example. This grant supports the study of plasma waves, small-
scale structures and their dynamics, and turbulence which have considerable
impact on the global dynamics of the large-scale SMI system. Regions in which
processes of this kind occur are to be found throughout the earth's
magnetosphere and ionosphere. Because of the lack of multi-point observations,
the true temporal and three-dimensional spatial structures on spatial scales of
several 100 to several 1000km are not well known. Such measurements will,
however, become available in the future. Small-scale structures, turbulent
motions, and microscopic wave-particle interactions can also be studied without
detailed knowledge of the overall state of the system, whereas the reverse is
not true. Global studies require knowledge of boundary conditions and transport
coefficients which only local studies can provide. Thus the microscopic plasma
phenomena developed under this grant are needed prior to the task of developing
global models.