* 8712090
* U.S.-Western Europe Regional Seminar on Environmental       Cognition and Assessment, Umea, Sweden, June 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,02/28/1989
* Gary Evans, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1989
* USD 11,950.00

This award will support the travel costs for 9 invited American scientists to
attend a joint seminar on environmental cognition and assessment with scientists
from Italy, Sweden, The Netherlands, and the United Kingdom. The seminar,
organized by Dr. Gary W. Evans, University of California, Irvine, and Dr. Tommy
Garling, University of Umea, Sweden, will be held in Umea from June 29 to July
2, 1988. The purpose of the seminar is to advance understanding of how humans
comprehend and evaluate their physical environments. Three major topic areas of
the seminar will be: (1) how aspects of the physical environment affect and
interact with impressions, beliefs, and decisions about the environment, (2) how
various models of psychological processes fit perception and cognition of
environments, and (3) how people change their perceptions and cognitions of the
environment in response to experience and aging. The seminar will also examine
how people's goals and objectives for an environment affect their judgments
about it. The seminar will provide a useful forum for interchanging ideas and
will most likely lead to additional collaborative research between the American
and foreign scientists. The participants are outstanding researchers who were
chosen because they represent diverse areas in environmental psychology that use
different models and approaches. Besides resolving scientific issues, the
seminar will lead to knowledge with relevance to policy-making, planning, and
design of human environments. The organizers plan to publish a book based on the
seminar papers.