* 8712179
* Publication of the Proceedings for the Summer School of the U. S. Particle Accelerator School; Batavia, Illinois;       July 20 - August l4, l987 (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/1987,09/30/1988
* Leon Lederman, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* David Berley
* 09/30/1988
* USD 30,000.00

The 1987 Summer School of the U.S. Particle Accelerator School is being
organized in association with Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab)
and the University of Chicago and will be held at Fermilab July 20 - August 14,
1987. It will be the sixth in a series of national summer schools: the first and
fourth being held at Fermilab in 1981 and 1984, the second and fifth at SLAC in
1982 and 1985, and the third in 1983 at BNL/SUNY. This year the School will
initiate a four-week format. The purpose of the School is to attract scientists
and students to work in accelerator physics. The first two weeks, Session I,
will have a university style format and consist of three parallel courses on
accelerator physics. By agreement with the University of Chicago, students may
earn university credit (1 semester equivalent per course) by successfully
completing up to two of these courses. The last two weeks, Session II, will have
lectures, seminars and tutorials in a symposium format, and will include an
intensive series of courses on the physics and technology of particle
accelerators. Approximately 300 participants are expected to attend. This action
will provide funds for the preparation and publication of the proceedings.