* 8712777
* Interparticle Monomer Transport in Miniemulsion             Copolymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1989
* Cesar Silebi, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/1989
* USD 65,000.00

Narrative: The proposed research project is the continuation of an experimental
as well as theoretical attempt to elucidate the fundamental physical
relationships in miniemulsion copolymerization. Miniemulsion polymerization is
done in a heterogenous system consisting of oily droplets suspended in a larger
aqueous phase. The oily phase contains the monomer and final polymer product and
is held together by both a surfactant (such as sodium dodecyl sulfate) and a
cosurfactant (such as hexadecone or cetyl alcohol). Miniemulsion polymerization
falls between two well known heterogeneous polymerization processes: suspension
polymerization and emulsion polymerization. In both cases there are two phases
present, an aqueous solution phase and an oily phase in which the polymerization
occurs, the difference being that in suspension polymerization the initiator is
soluble in the oily phase while in emulsion polymerization it is soluble in the
aqueous phase. The process is considered miniemulsion polymerizaton if the
monomer droplets are very small (0.1 to 10 microns) and both water soluble and
oil soluble initiators produce similar results. In miniemulsion
copolymerization, the morphology of the droplets can vary from the copolymer
composition being uniform throughout the cross section of the particle to the
core being rich in one polymer and the shell rich in other. This particle
morphology is determined by the comonomer composition and concentration at the
site of polymerization as a function of the polymerzation time and the
reactivity ratios and water solubilities of the two monomers. This work is aimed
at studying the mechanism and the rate of interparticle monomer transport
between miniemulsion droplets and its effect on particle morphology. The results
could ultimately be used to predict the conditions (additive concentration and
droplet size) under which the transport of one monomer or the other to the site
of the polymerization becomes limiting and thus develop a novel method for
regulating the particle morphology and therefore the microstructure of the final
copolymer. The PIs have completed research that showed the role and effect of
the cosurfactant on the particle generation mechanism and the comonomer
distribution during the miniemulsion copolymerization. During this final phase
they plan to determine the role and effect of the cosurfactant on the transport
of monomer to the different phases.