* 8712390
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Geochemistry): U-disequili-bria in Northeast Asian Alkali Basalts.
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1990
* James Gill, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1990
* USD 26,356.00

The objective of this two-year cooperative research project between James Gill,
University of California, Santa Cruz and Liang Zhoucheng, Chinese Academy of
Sciences' Institute of Geochemistry is to perform U Th disequilibrium studies of
Northeast Asian alkali basalts. The investigators will concentrate on "young"
basalts from volcanic eruptions in Northern China 265 years ago. Through
radioactive isotopic studies the investigators will determine the source of the
Chinese basalts, study chemical fractionation during basalt genesis and date the
age of the samples. U Th disequilbrium studies are useful tools for studying the
origins of volcanic rocks, composition of the earth's mantle and the processes
causing mantle heterogeneities. The U.S.-China collaboration is significant in
several respects. U Th disequilbrium studies require "young" rocks and the
investigators will have access to a unique source in China. Analysis will be
performed in both U.S. and Chinese laboratories thereby enabling inter-
laboratory calibration of samples. Research results will advance understanding
of the nature of recent volcanic eruptions in northeast Asia (Japan, Korea and
China) and its coupling to tectonic activities in this region. The combined
efforts, complementary facilities of the Chinese and U.S. laboratories fulfill
the principal objective of the U.S.-China program; which is, to advance
scientific knowledge through international collaboration.