* 8712747
* International Conference on Physics and Astrophysics of     Quark-Gluon Plasma, Bombay, India, February 8-12, 1988,     Group Travel Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1987,11/30/1988
* Gaurang Yodh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1988
* USD 40,800.00

Description: This project is to support U.S. participation in the International
Conference on Physics and Astrophysics of Quark-Gluon Plasma, Bombay, India,
February 8-12, 1988. The coverage of topics will be broad, and current research
in the fields of heavy ion collisions at high energy, cosmic ray research,
theory of quark gluon plasma physics will be discussed. It is planned that 15
U.S. scientists will be covered by this grant. Scope: The conference is the
second international meeting dealing with an important topic of much recent
theoretical and experimental work in this area of fundamental research in
physics aiming at better understanding of the states of matter. Considerable
theoretical work is being carried in India in the field of Quark-Gluon Plasma at
the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research and at MATSCIENCE in Madras and in
Calcutta at the Saha Institute. Experimental work is carried out at TIFR, and at
the High Altitude Research Laboratory of Srinagar. India served well as host for
several physics conferences in recent years. This project can lead to strong
interaction between the participating U.S. scientists, their Indian hosts and
the international physics community. It is likely that these interactions will
lead to further collaborative research in this area of physics.