* 8712254
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:      Chaos and Quantum Chaos in Micromasers (Physics)
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Pierre Meystre, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1991
* USD 7,920.00

This award will support a three-year cooperative research project in physics
between Professor Pierre Meystre, Optical Sciences Center, The University of
Arizona, and Professor Herbert Walther, Director, Max Planck Institute for
Quantum Optics, Garching, Federal Republic of Germany. The scientists will study
selected aspects of the dynamics of one or a few atoms located in optical
cavities with dimensions approximating the wavelength of light radiated by that
atom. Because of quantum effects, the radiative properties of atoms in such
systems differ significantly from those of the same atoms in free space. A major
effort will be directed toward the study of the microscopic maser. An important
feature of this device is that its operating regime can be varied from truly
classical to truly quantum mechanical, thus allowing one to monitor, for
example, how classical instabilities and chaos are modified as the system
approaches the quantum regime. In another important aspect of this work, the
collaborating scientists will study the conditions under which radiation with
intensity fluctuations below those of conventional lasers (subpoissonian light)
can be produced. This cooperative study in cavity quantum electrodynamics is
aimed at understanding, at a fundamental level, what causes the radiation of
coherent light (laser light). Professor Meystre and his research group are
theoretically oriented in this area, and Professor Walther and his colleagues in
Garching have the only existing experimental facilities capable of testing the
theoretical predictions of the Meystre group. The German laboratory also has a
Cray-XMP supercomputer which will be available to Professor Meystre for these
studies. The work is expected to present new clues toward the understanding of
the correspondence between quantum and classical phenomena in so-called
dissipative systems, that is, systems in which energy is not conserved.