* 8712386
* The Role of Surface Temperatures in Tribopolymerization as aMechanism of Boundary Lubrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1990
* C. Kajdas, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 03/31/1990
* USD 218,558.00

The primary objective of this research is to obtain a better understanding of
tribopolymerization--the planned or intentional formation of polymeric films
directly on rubbing surfaces--as a mechanism of boundary lubrication, with
special emphasis on the role of surface temperatures on the process. The
behavior of selected monomers capable of forming surface polymers under
tribological contact by polycondensation as well as addition reactions will be
investigated in a research program which couples the following experimental
systems or techniques: (a) an advanced rotating sapphire disk/infrared
microscope device to determine surface temperatures produced by friction; (b)
surface analytical techniques- -including Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectroscopy--to study the characteristics of thin polymer surface films formed;
and (c) other methods which couple thermal effects with surface reactions and
polymerization. The significance of this research is that it represents a
rational and innovative approach to the design of chemical structures to act as
boundary lubricants to reduce wear and surface damage in tribological processes.
Unlike conventional antiwear additives which chemically react with the solid
surface (e.g., iron) to from a protective layer, this approach involves the
deposition of a surface film which acts to reduce adhesion, wear, and damage.
The principal investigators believe that a better understanding of the
tribopolymerization process-- including the role of surface temperature,
catalysis, and electron emission in tribological contact--will open the door to
new, extremely effective, and unconventional approaches to minimizing wear in a
wide variety of systems. This should make it possible to design specific
antiwear additives for given tribological systems.