* 8712749
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: The Effect of Water-      saturated Deformable Basal Till on Glacier Dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Roger Hooke, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1990
* USD 25,300.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professor Roger L. Hooke,
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, and Professor Wibjorn Karlen, University of
Stockholm. This research will contribute to an on-going investigation of
processes that occur at the interface of glaciers and their underlying layer.
The variations in time and space of the coupling between the glacier and this
layer, particularly as reflected in water pressure effects on sliding velocity,
will be studied on the Storglacier in northern Sweden. Prof. Hooke and his
Swedish collaborators have been involved with studies of the Storglacier for the
past six years. This work will extend previous measurements of surface
velocities, winter snow accumulation, ablation, and borehole deformation, by
adding measurements of surface tilt and strain, water pressure variations in
boreholes, internal drainage, and sediment and water discharge at the glacier
terminus. Correlation of all of these studies will lead to an enhanced
understanding of the dynamics of glacial flow. The University of Stockholm's
Tarfala Research Station, the base for these studies, is located near the
glacier, and provides excellent facilities for the recording and analysis of the
data to be obtained. The proposed cooperation presents the U.S. investigator
with an opportunity to use highly specialized facilities, immediately adjacent
to the subject of his experiments. Studies of glacier dynamics are of increasing
importance, as land utilization extends closer to valley glaciers in mid-
latitude regions. These studies are also necessary to understand the effect of
future expected sea-level rises on glaciers.