* 8712213
* Conference on Gravitation and Cosmology, December 1987, Goa, India, Group Travel Award in Indian Currency
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1988
* James Hartle, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1988
* USD 37,500.00

Project Description: This project provides support for 15 U.S. scientists to
participate in an international conference on gravitation and cosmology to be
held in Goa, India, 14-19 December 1987. The meeting is sponsored by the Indian
Association for General Relativity and Gravitation, in cooperation with the
International Centre for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, and with major scientific
institutions in India engaged in research in this area. Topics to be covered
include spacetime structure, exact solutions, relativistic astrophysics,
gravitational experiments, gravitational radiation, cosmology, the early
universe, quantum fields in curved spacetimes, quantum gravity and new
directions in gravitation theory. Project Significance: The conference deals
with an area of science where major developments have taken place recently.
These developments have made interactions with Indian scientists important since
India has a distinguished tradition in the area of general relativity and there
are a number of first rate scientists in this area working there now. The
speakers are very distinguished scientists from the U.S. and from India on the
subjects of general relativity, cosmology, particle physics and astrophysics.
The exchange of information is timely and useful for the U.S. and Indian
participants and could lead to cooperation in research.