* 8712007
* US-Sweden Cooperative Science: Oligonucleotide Synthesis on Minerals
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1987,11/30/1992
* James Ferris, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 11/30/1992
* USD 9,250.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professor James P.
Ferris, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, and Dr. Nils G. Holm, University of
Stockholm, in studies aimed at understanding the beginnings of life on earth. In
particular, the role of various minerals serving as catalysts for the formation
of RNA-like polymers under conditions approximating those that may have existed
on the primitive earth will be investigated. Iron-containing minerals were
likely catalysts for the formation of such polymers on the primitive earth, and
this research will study how effectively such minerals catalyze the formation of
the phosphate ester bond. Dr. Holm's earlier work has been as a geological
chemist; he will prepare the minerals and confirm their structure. Prof. Ferris,
a chemist, will investigate their catalytic properties. This project brings
together the chemical and geological disciplines; Prof. Ferris, an expert in
pre-biological organic reactions and in the types of organic structures that
would have been important in the first living systems, will work with an expert
in geological environments and the possible reaction conditions in those
environments. This research should result in the identification of a set of
minerals which may have been important catalysts for the formation of structures
essential to the origin of life on the primitive earth.