* 8712334
* Mathematical Sciences: Statistics and Environmental Factors in Health (SEFH): Statistical Problems in Environmental Measurement and Regulation
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1991
* Donald Thomsen, Societal Institute of the Mathematical Sciences (SIMS)
* Continuing grant
* Alan Izenman
* 05/31/1991
* USD 141,209.00

This research will focus on five areas of environmetrics: the partitioning of
spatial variability, confidence bands for interpolated random functions,
quantile estimates for integrated processes, using covariate information for
quantile estimation, and environmental indicies for trend estimation. In the
first area, the effects of modeling the regression structure in the spatial
covariance function will be assessed. In the second area, the problem is to
calculate the probability that the entire field is below a specified level,
conditional on the observations. The feasibility of approximating this
probability with a series expansion of the conditional covariance field that is
amenable to the application of Hotelling's inequality will be determined. In the
third area, distributional modelling will be used to relate tail probabilities
of a monthly integrated concentration process, allowing for the non-exhaustive
nature of historical data. In the fourth area, extensions of Pareto tail
estimators for the case of jointly distributed vector random variables will be
sought. In the fifth area, methods to account for the spatial autocorrelation of
separate monitoring station data will be developed. This research is in the
general area of spatial statistics and is motivated by statistical problems in
environmental measurement and regulation. There is increasing attention in
statistics being directed at these problems involving interesting and variable
dependencies among the observations. Results in this area are needed for
informative policy development and sound regulation practices.