* 8712283
* Mathematical Sciences: REU: Research Experiences for        Undergraduates: Nonlinear Phenomena and Parallel Processing
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1988
* James Curry, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bernard McDonald
* 11/30/1988
* USD 32,000.00

This grant provides a research experienc for eight undergraduates for an eight
week period during the summer. Throughout this period the students will attend a
seminar given by various experts in the field. They will also participate in a
computer laboratory. Toward the end of the program they will be required to give
reports on the work that they have done. One of the goals of the program is to
have each student write a short manuscript suitable for publication. They will
have access to the considerable computing power at the University of Colorado to
carry out their projects. The focus of this grant is on developing parallel
algorithms for problems in nonlinear dynamics. These are two rapidly growing,
highly exciting fields of applied mathematics which are quite accessible to
undergraduates. One of the areas of research will be in polynomial root finding.
The other area comes from the theory of odinary differential equations which
exhibit strange attractors and chaotic dynamics. These both are areas for which
parallel processing has a nice potential to increase the efficiency of the
algorithms and for which there is a great deal left to be explored. This program
will bring the students into an interesting area of mathematics and computation.
With the close association of the various faculty members the experience should
be a very valuable one for the students. This proposal is being funded through
the Research Experiences for Undergraduate program (REU) and represents a good
example of the goals of the program.