* 8712232
* Vernacular Language Use and Social Networking in an EastsideDetroit Neighborhood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1990
* Walter Edwards, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 08/31/1990
* USD 59,225.00

Abstract Narrative Sociolinguistic research of the past two decades has
established, in a rigorous quantitative way, numerous patterns of socially
conditioned linguistic variation among individual speakers, and between
identifiable dialect communities. Still open to question, however, is a
comprehensive theoretical explanation of this phenomenon. The aim of the project
proposed here is to move in the direction of such an explanation, in the context
of a study of Black English Vernacular (BEV) in an urban setting (Detroit).
Social Network Theory (SNT) is the framework which will be used. This theory
seeks causal social variables not in the standard social categorizations such as
age, education, and socioeconomic level, but rather in the depth and breadth of
individuals' attachments to and involvement in their local communities. These
are explored by tracing out the networks of their relationships with others. SNT
will be supplemented in the present project by the development of a Vernacular
Culture Index, which assesses the individual attitudes toward the community. The
investigator will examine a number of linguistic variables known to be salient
as markers of BEV as a distinct dialect of English, and correlate the incidence
of them with the speakers' profiles according to the SNT. Some pilot work has
indicated that SNT scores are highly predictive of the incidence of these
variables. If the full study bears this out, it will be a significant
contribution to our understanding of the dynamics of linguistic variation and
change. The Principal Investigator is an experienced and accom- plished
sociolinguist. As a member of the minority community himself, he has a
particular advantage in gaining access to the BEV speakers who will participate
in the project. The pilot work he has already carried out helps assure
confidence that the project can and will lead to successful results.