* 8712570
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:      Synthesis of Olivomycin A
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Richard Franck, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1991
* USD 7,433.00

This award will support a two-year cooperative research project in organic
chemistry between Professor Richard W. Franck, Department of Chemistry, Hunter
College of the City University of New York, and Professor Joachim Thiem, Organic
Chemistry Institute, University of Muenster, Federal Republic of Germany. The
objective of the research is to complete a synthesis of Olivomycin A, an
antibiotic composed of a so-called aglycone central unit linked to two different
sugar side-chains. Professor Franck and his students have developed an efficient
and stereoselective synthesis of the aglycone. Professor Thiem and his group
have prepared the two sugar side-chains. The completion of the synthesis
requires the improvement of known methodology or the development of a new method
to link the sugars to the aglycone, and that is the goal of this cooperation.
Professors Franck and Thiem have complementary expertise in synthetic organic
chemistry. By combining their respective strengths, they expect to make much
more rapid progress toward their common objective than would otherwise be
possible. Synthesis of Olivomycin A would be a significant achievement in
natural product chemistry. The methods developed here for joining sensitive and
complex saccharides and aglycones could also be applicable to the synthesis of
other members of this family of antibiotics and related compounds, and could
contribute to a better understanding of their mechanism of action.