* 8713391
* High Resolution Study of Major Middle-Late Cenozoic Paleoceanographic Changes in the South and Equatorial Pacific
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* James Kennett, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 12/31/1989
* USD 182,079.00

During much of the earth's history the climate was warm and relatively uniform.
The change to the present glacial and interglacial periods did not proceed
uniformly. These were marked by discrete and sudden coolings which are linked
with changes in oceanic circulation. There was a prominent change about 38
million years ago, followed by subsequent coolings 14 million years ago, 6
million years ago, and 3 million years ago. These intervals are separated by
times of much higher stability although fluctuations have been defined. Since
the last proposal was submitted three years ago, a number of high quality
hydraulic piston cored sedimentary sequences of late Oligocene through Neogene
age from the Pacific have become available for detailed analysis, some of these
sites were drilled during DSDP-IPOD Legs 90 and 89; they form a latitudinal
transect of unprecedented quality extending from the equator to the subantarctic
in the South Pacific. These sediment sections are of great paleoceanographic
value. This project wants to further extend paleoceanographic studies of middle
and late Cenozoic sedimentary sequences in middle and low latitudes and to
correlate with events found elsewhere; the major objectives are: to continue
time-series analysis of paleoceanographic history; to examine events during the
terminal Miocene, the middle and late Pliocene; to define the main quantitative
changes as they are preserved in planktonic/benthonic foraminifera.