* 8713375
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:      Developmental Transitions and Adolescent Problem Behavior
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1989
* Iris Litt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1989
* USD 5,071.00

This award will enable Professor Anne C. Petersen, Department of Individual and
Family Studies, The Pennsylvania State University, to collaborate with Professor
Rainer K. Silbereisen, University of Giessen, Federal Republic of Germany. They
will study the role of challenges in developmental transitions for producing
problem behavior among some adolescents. Some challenges that have been
implicated are early pubertal maturation, a school change in early adolescence,
and expectations of limited schooling and adult work opportunities. Professor
Petersen has carried out longitudinal studies on two samples of adolescents in
the United States, one of middle to upper middle class adolescents, the other of
lower to lower middle class adolescents. Professor Silbereisen has been doing
similar research, using larger German and Polish samples. By combining their
efforts the researchers will be able to examine a broader range of information
on their variables of interest, and they will be able to test causal models of
the processes by which some young people develop problems. Because of
differences in the societies included in the collaborative research, such
variables as schooling schedules, times and structures for entering the
workforce, and expectations about when to start a family can be examined and
included in the hypotheses.