* 8713957
* Studies of Numerical Weather Prediction Related to Monsoons,Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* R. Ramachandran, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
* Continuing Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 12/31/1989
* USD 126,635.00

Objectives and Relevancy; This project supports cooperative research between
Dr.Gyan Mohan of the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpor, India, and Dr. T.N.
Krishnamurti of Florida State University. The research would continue work
started in 1983 on numerical weather prediction , and observational and
theoretical studies for understanding the basic physics of the monsoon dynamics.
The project will continue work on simple and multi-level grid point models, as
well as the global spectral model. It will include examination of the results of
the observational analyses, and how they agree with existing theoretical work in
the field on the phenomena of monsoon depressions, atmospheric waves, orographic
effects. The U.S.-India program supports cooperative projects in areas where
capabilities complement each other and where the research topic is of interest
to both countries. This project meets these criteria. Merit: The U.S. and Indian
scientists are capable researchers who have produced significant publications
under their previous grants. They have accomplished significant scientific
results in helping Indian scientists better model weather conditions on the
national scale and for contribution to the global weather understanding. This
project is clearly of interest to the Government of India as well as to U.S.
atmospheric scientists. Funding: This project is being funded under two grants:
Indian Inst. of Tech. Kanpur, INT-8713957: FY87: $81,250 FY88: $46,094 Florida
State University, INT-8713958 FY87: $29,688 FY88: $29,687 All funds are in
Indian currency.