* 8713052
* U.S.-Western Europe Regional Comparative Study of           Elementary School Science Programs.
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Philip DiStefano, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/29/1992
* USD 13,710.00

This award will enable Dr. Ronald D. Anderson, University of Colorado, Boulder,
and three other U.S. educational researchers to collaborate with Dr. Uwe
Hameyer, Institute for Science Education, University of Kiel, Federal Republic
of Germany, and three other researchers from the Netherlands, Sweden, and
Switzerland. They will compare the implementation of elementary school science
programs in the five home countries of the researchers. The project is being
coordinated from the Institute for Science Education in Kiel. The goal of the
research is to study the process of putting quality elementary school science
programs into practice and to identify the conditions that foster or restrict
their successful implementation. The study will be conducted in a variety of
settings where attempts have been made or are being made to implement and
institutionalize activity-based elementary school science programs. Each of
these countries has developed good curricular materials for science teaching,
but has had difficulty in consistently implementing or maintaining activity-
based elementary school science programs. An ethnographic approach will be used
in case studies in the five countries; this should provide information not
usually obtainable from surveys. Dr. Anderson and Dr. Hameyer have successfully
collaborated on previous research on science education. The other members of the
research group offer important skills and access to the diverse school
populations required for the project.