* 8713635
* Developmental Diversity in Communicative Capacities
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1988,06/30/1990
* Andrew King, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 06/30/1990
* USD 100,000.00

The complexity of bird song and the role of learning in its development make it
an important topic of inquiry for scientists formulating comparative principles
of learning and development. Drs. West and King have been studying
interrelationships among song structure, function, and development in brown-
headed cowbirds. Focusing on the social mediation of vocal development, their
important discoveries include (1) the important influence of social stimulation
from non-singing females on vocal development of males, (2) visual signals used
by males and females during song development that appear to communicate
information about song potency, and (3) differences among subspecies in the
development of vocal communication. The brown-headed cowbird is thus an
especially appropriate species for studying forms of learning not previously
explored in songbirds, particularly the integration of visual and vocal
stimulation during development. Drs. West and King have designed an experimental
protocol to measure the vocal capacities of males, the perceptual capacities of
females, and the nature of social interactions between the sexes that link vocal
perception and production. Different populations will be compared to investigate
the extent to which developmental programs vary within the same species and
subspecies. This project is exploring new areas of inquiry on the basis of
proven methods and past findings that revealed previously unknown aspects of
adaptive modification of behavior. The research therefore has the potential to
introduce new concepts of vocal learning of special significance for our
understanding of how animals, including humans, transmit complex modes of
communication to the next generation.