* 8713078
* Root Cultures for the Production of Biologically Active     Plant Secondary Metabolites
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1991
* Nikolaus Fischer, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/1991
* USD 680,827.00

Secondary metabolites (products) from plant roots are under- utilized and under-
explored sources of pharmaceuticals and agrichemicals. Roots of the Asteraceae
(Sunflower family) accumulate a wide range of valuable natural products
including fungicidal, anti-bacterial, antiviral and nematicidal polyacetylenes.
The mechanisms of synthesis and accumulation for most of these compounds are
poorly understood. The PIs have recently developed fast-growing root cultures
from various Solanceae and Asteraceae species which have been transformed into
"hairy roots" following infection with the bacterium Agrobacterium rhizogenes.
These "hairy root" cultures grow at rates faster than normal roots and
comparable to those of undifferentiated cell suspensions; at the same time, they
continue producing the secondary metabolites characteristic of roots. The PIs
suggest that this experimental system is well suited for development into a
large-scale production process. Large bioreactors will be built for the growth
of root clones in batch, semi-continuous or continuous culture. This grant
application is an excellent example of the type of crossdisciplinary proposal we
wish to see in the Engineering Directorate's Biotechnology Program. It was rated
excellent by the crossdisciplinary Panel reviewing this proposal and the
Principal Investigators are considered well qualified to carry out the proposed
research. I recommend funding of this proposal for three years in accordance
with the revised budget.