* 8713465
* NSF Supercomputing Summer Institute:  Vector Methods in     Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1988
* Patrick Burns, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Irene D. Lombardo
* 08/31/1988
* USD 70,000.00

In response to a Project Solicitation, Colorado State University submitted a
proposal to conduct a Supercomputer Summer Institute in 1987. This proposal and
eight others were reviewed by five reviewers at a panel meeting. CSU proposes a
two week Institute for 25 students. Instructors will come primarily from the
community of researchers at CSU who have been using the Cyber 205 supercomputer
on campus for several years. In addition to covering the "nuts and bolts" of
effective supercomputer usage, there will be two special emphasis sessions; half
of the class will attend each session, which will be conducted in parallel. One
session will cover numerical methods, while the other will emphasize modelling
in the biological and quantum physics areas. Of the three proposals which
offered training on a Cyber 205 supercomputer, the panel felt the CSU proposal
was the strongest. This Institute offered adequate honds-on experience with a
good balance of intellecual material. A variety of advanced computing
architectures will be covered. The panelists were impressed with CSU's plans in
the networking area, including access to other supercomputers over the NSFNET.
Negotiation has reduced the budget to $63,000, a very reasonable price. In
addition, CSU has proposed to include some undergraduates in the Institute under
the Research Experience for Undergraduates program, at a cost of $7000. CSU will
contribute Cyber 205 resources valued at $50,0000. This is a strong proposal
which can be expected to result in a valuable educational experience for the
attendees. An award in the amount of $70,000 is recommended.