* 8713074
* Heavy Atom Isotope Effect Studies of Organic Reaction       Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Arthur Fry, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin F. Plummer
* 12/31/1990
* USD 243,500.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the
research of Professor Authur Fry, which aims at studying reaction pathways
through the use of isotopes. When a particular element like hydrogen or carbon
is replaced by a heavier isotope of that element then a difference in the rate
of the reaction may be noted if the isotope itself is directly involved in the
slow step of the reaction. This is an elegant method of abstracting mechanistic
information from chemical reactions. Chemical compounds which differ only in
isotopic composition sometimes react at slightly different rates (kinetic
isotope effects). By relating the structures of the reacting compounds to
whether or not isotope effects are observed (and, if so, to the size of the
isotope effects) much information can be deduced about the details of the paths
by which these molecules react. Correlation of experimentally measured and
theoretically calculated isotope effects is believed to be one of the best
methods for determining details of transition state structure, motion through
the transition state, and the timing of bonding changes in chemical reactions.
The method is most powerful when used with compounds successively labeled at all
positions suspected of undergoing bonding changes, and especially when
substituted phenyl groups are located near the reaction centers. This research
utilizes these techniques in determining mechanistic details for a wide variety
of additions, elimination, rearrangement, substitution and oxidation/reduction
reactions. Current research is focused on carbon-14 isotope effect measurements
in elimination, addition and substitution reactions. Specific systems being
studied include additions of bromine and arylsulfenyl chlorides to substituted
styrenes and cinnamic acid derivatives; elimination reactions of DDT-related
compounds and other 2-phenylethyl systems (Elcb-like mechanisms); and solvolyses
of highly deactivated (by triflouromethyl groups, etc.) 1-phenylethyl systems
(El/SN1 mechanisms).