* 8713183
* RUI:  A Program to Determine the Galactic Gravitational     Force Law Using Faint Main-Sequence F-Stars
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1991
* Arthur Upgren, Western Connecticut State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 05/31/1991
* USD 118,260.00

Dr. Lu at Western Connecticut State University will determine the gravitational
potential force of our Galaxy as a function of height from the galactic plane.
The most important and unique aspect of this study is that it will produce data
on a set of uniformly selected faint F type stars which are centered at both the
North and South Galactic Poles. These data are required for an investigation of
the velocity distribution of the stars, for evidence of a thick disk for the
Galaxy, and for the dynamical study of missing mass of the Galaxy. Determination
of the gravitational force law as a function of height from the Galactic plane
is of fundamental importance to understanding the structure of our Galaxy. Much
more observational work is needed to better define the force law and its
consequences for the densities of the thin disk, the thick disk, and the halo
populations of stars in the Galaxy. A number of efforts are underway, but the
results are, as yet, inconclusive. Since an optimum observational method is not
clear, it is important to address the problem through observations using several
different types of stellar samples. Dr. Lu's research concentrates on a sample
of F type stars while other astronomers are focussing on other types of stars.