* 8713423
* Remote Sensing for Geological/Geographical and Agricultural Characterization of Turkey
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1988,02/28/1990
* M. Nafi Toksoz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/1990
* USD 13,030.00

Description: This project supports the collaboration of Dr. Nafi Toksoz of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, with Dr. Yarman- Vural of
Bosphorous University, Istanbul, Turkey. Their study is aimed at enhancing the
interpretation of satellite remote sensing data, with applications to
geological, environmental, and agricultural problems. The scientific objective
is the development of image analysis algorithms especially suitable to specific
applications of geological, environmental and resource evaluation problems.
Scientists from the Image Processing Center of Drexel University, Philadelphia,
and from the Middle East Technical University in Ankara, Turkey, will also
participate in the study. This project provides funding for the travel and per
diem costs for two visits between the U.S. and Turkish institutions, and for the
cost of LANDSAT data (Land MSS, Thematic Mapper, SPOT), and for computer time.
Scope: The project is likely to benefit the U.S. scientists who are currently
conducting research on geological problems at MIT Earth Resources Laboratory as
well as the Turkish scientists working on agricultural and natural resources
problems in that country. It is expected that the development of algorithms for
analyzing remote sensing data will greatly enhance the aquisition of information
on the earth environment, as well as to specific areas by determinig food
production, surface features related to mineral deposits, petroleum, geothermal
sources as well as helping in land use planning and mapping of geological
features.