* 8713236
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research: High Frequency Dynamics  of Charge Density Waves (Materials Research)
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1990
* George Gruner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1990
* USD 8,644.00

This award will support a two-year cooperative research project in solid state
physics between Professor George Gruner, Department of Physics, University of
California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and Professor Karlheinz Seeger, Institute for
Solid State Physics, University of Vienna, Austria, and the Ludwig Boltzmann
Institute for Solid State Physics, also in Vienna. The scientists and members of
their research groups will study electrical conductivity properties of certain
inorganic materials which show so-called charge density wave transport
phenomena. Microwave harmonic mixing and microwave rectification experiments
will be performed at various frequency values and over a broad range of
temperatures and electric field values. One aim is to distinguish between
phenomena which can be understood on the basis of classical descriptions and
those for which a quantum approach is necessary. The model compounds to be
studied in this research will be prepared by Professor Gruner and his research
group at UCLA. The microwave measurements will be performed in Vienna, where
Professor Seeger's group pioneered the technique of microwave harmonic mixing.
These results, when combined with those from related measurements made at UCLA,
should contribute significantly to a better understanding of the charge density
wave transport phenomenon. The fundamental studies to be carried out in this
cooperative effort are expected to add importantly to our understanding of
electron interactions in solids. This in turn could lead eventually to the
design of new electronic materials and devices. The Austrian microwave
techniques to be employed in this research will also be applied by Professor
Gruner and his group to other research problems under investigation in their
laboratory.