* 8713941
* The History of Scientific Practice
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Russell McCormmach, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 02/28/1989
* USD 30,000.00

Scientific theory has traditionally been the center of attention in the history,
philosophy and sociology of science. It is, after all, these grand theoretical
breakthroughs which have so radically reoriented our understanding of our world
and which bring about scientific "revolutions." Indeed, philosophers argue that,
logically speaking anyway, even unexpected and contradictory observations and
experimental results can be accommodated with certain alterations to the
accepted theory. Having said this, however, everyone recognizes that it is the
practice of science--what scientists do from day to day in their active testing
of nature--which really needs study. It is in practice, for example, that one
gain understand how traditions are preserved or national "styles" developed. But
it is this "practice" which is most hidden from view. Students are taught it,
but not in text books. Scientific papers present results, not practice.
Professor McCormmach's project, working with Dr. Christa Jungnickel, will
investigate this most important yet least understood aspect of science in the
context of a critical period in science's development, the period just before
the development of scientific disciplines. His research will center on the work
of the members of the Royal Society in the 18th century and will be made
possible by the society's own extensive archival records and rich collections of
manuscripts of its members. Because the study uses broadly defined categories of
scientific practice as its tool of analysis, the work draws extensively on the
working lives of scientists, which are accessible to us through these
manuscripts and correspondences. This study has the purpose of placing
scientific practice and its results within the context of London, of British
intellectual, social and economic life. By doing so, it exposes connections and
parallels between 18th century British science and its context that were
important for the development of British science.