* 8713940
* Dissertation Research:  Rearing Condition and Immune        Responses of Primate Infants
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1990
* Walter Leutenegger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 03/31/1990
* USD 39,692.00

The project is designed to assess the importance of the early rearing
environment in the development of the immune system. It will examine the
development of immune function in two groups of differentially-reared rhesus
monkeys, and how that development might be affected by the interaction of
psychosocial and physiological factors. Physical development, behavioral
maturation, and psychological status of the monkeys will be assessed and related
to "in vitro" immune measures, which will provide information on the development
of the immune system, especially the "T cells." A series of vaccinations will
provide an actual "in vivo" measure of the significance of the "in vitro" tests.
This study has relevance to both animals and humans. Current research in this
new field suggests that the stresses, both physiological and psychological,
associated with the differential rearing may result in an increased
susceptibility to disease, and perhaps a long-term alteration in immune state.
In humans, there is evidence of a higher incidence of disease among children who
have experienced a traumatic loss or separation. The role of the early rearing
environment in disease susceptibility is especially important because infants
are increasingly being cared for in day-care centers for long periods of time.
The results of this important research will provide information on how to
optimize the care and health of children. In addition, the information obtained
can be used to instruct zoos and research centers on how to provide the best
rearing environments for their animals.