* 8713642
* Antigen Production and Trout Immunization Against           Infectious Hematopoietic Necrosis Virus (HNV)
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Blake Grant, Rangen Aquaculture Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 11/30/1990
* USD 180,300.00

Pilot studies (Phase I, 1986 SBIR solicitation) showed that the infectious
hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHNV) was reversibly adsorbed onto affinity media.
This important first step of concentrating waterborne viral antigen allowed
vaccines to be made and tested. Some conferred good protection against disease
challenge. Only short-term protection was tested - results are encouraging and
should translate into detailed specifications for affinity adsorbents used to
make cost-effective vaccines against viral diseases such as IHNV in salmonids.
This project will attempt to develop a vaccine for the IHNV disease of salmon.
The research will examine bonding properties (core polymers to co-sorbents to
virus) and antigen adsorption/desorption under controlled ionic strength, pH,
solute quality, etc. This information will be used to optimize antigen
concentration, treatment, and transfer to trout. Acceptable affinity media will
be reasonably specific, have bond energies of the right order, and be
economical. In addition, responses to antigen challenges to include large
populations in natural epizootics and compare them with other virus models.
Infectivity is to be screened and titered by standard cell culture methods,
antigen...quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, and
protection...estimated by vaccinated animals better survival over controls after
pathogen challenge. Correlations among these results will dictate further
development and commercialization of a vaccine for IHNV disease of trout. The
vaccine's composition, form, and prescribed delivery must permit trout to take
up antigen and stimulate protection against natural infection over sufficiently
a long term. And it must be practical.