* 8713772
* Supercomputer Summer Intitutes for PANCOMP Consortium       University of Georgia, Athens, GA; December 6-11, 1987 &amp;    March,20-25, 1988
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1989
* Walter McRae, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 02/28/1989
* USD 121,141.00

The Advanced Computational Methods Center at The University of Georgia will
conduct two one-week Supercomputer Summer Institutes for members of the PANCOMP
consortium, a consortium established to provide education and access to high
performance computers for historically black colleges and universities. The
first Institute on vector programming is designed to introduce experienced
FORTRAN programmers to supercomputers, in particular the CYBER 205. Topics
covered will include an overview of current supercomputer architectures, access
methods, vector programming, timing and optimization techniques, debugging aids,
and the use of application libraries and utilities. The second Institute on
advanced vector programming is designed to be a follow-on to both the NSF-
sponsored Supercomputer Summer Institute for PANCOMP conducted by the ACMC last
summer and the proposed introductory Institute. The success of the initial
Institute generated a request for additional training from the participants.
This course will begin with a review of basic CYBER 205 concepts and vector
programming and include topics such as machine language formats, global
optimization techniques, scalar and vector optimization methods, and networking
and data communications. This Institute is designed to train the participants to
a depth that will enable them to return to their home institutions and
disseminate information about supercomputers and assist their users in the use
of the CYBER 205.