* 8713643
* On-Site Research to Improve the Government-Generated Social Science Data Base
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/1987,05/31/1992
* Barbara Bailar, American Statistical Association
* Continuing Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 05/31/1992
* USD 2,094,934.00

Support is being renewed for a landmark program of on-site research and
visiting research fellowships operated by the American Statistical Association
in cooperation with the U.S. Bureau of the Census and the National Science
Foundation. The program has been successful in bringing highly expert, well-
established statisticians and social scientists on the faculties of major
universities to the Census Bureau, the nation's front- line data collection
agency, where they engage in research aimed at improving the adequacy of
governmentally produced and disseminated socioeconomic information. Visiting
fellows work with Census staff to tackle especially difficult problems in the
handling and analysis of data. The results of these efforts are cumulating into
more efficient and effective agency procedures, more reliable and interpretable
data products, and the introduction of more real-worldliness into the basic
research and teaching agenda of visiting scientists once they return to their
home institutions. A special arrangement allowing fellows to compete for
continued support of research begun at the Bureau represents a further
innovation created under this program. Among other benefits, the freer flow of
expertise and knowledge between governmental data producers and academic
researchers is breaking down obstructions to the policy usefulness of
quantitative data and, by increasing their scientific research potential,
helping to amortize the huge annual investment this nation makes in their
collection.