* 8713367
* Role of Phosphodiesterase and G-Protein in the Response     System of Phycomyces
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Robert Cohen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 12/31/1991
* USD 152,497.00

One of the leading problems in the study of vision, and of sensory systems in
particular, is to discover the mechanism(s) by which environmental stimuli cause
the receptor cells to discharge action potentials (nerve impulses). It is these
impulses which are eventually interpreted by the brain as the basis for
sensations. The conversion of information in the environment (for example, light
energy) into nerve impulses in receptor cells is known as transduction. Although
fungi do not have nerves, and therefore do not have sensory systems in the
strict interpretation of the term, some fungi do respond to light. It is widely
believed that the mechanism by which light elicits responses in these organisms
is similar to that by which light elicits responses in visual receptor cells.
Since fungi are amenable to genetic and biochemical manipulations that are
impossible or extremely difficult in true visual receptors the elucidation of
transduction in these organisms can be done far more easily than in visual
receptor cells. Testing visual receptors for the mechanisms shown to occur in
fungi can be accomplished fairly readily once the pathways are known in the
fungi. In this project the investigator will explore the roles of various
enzymes and proteins involved in metabolism of compounds called cyclic
nucleotides in the responses of fungi to light. There are already reasons for
suspecting that these compounds are common constituents of sensory transducing
cells, and one of the enzymes that metabolizes them in the fungus under study is
known to be sensitive to light.