* 8713728
* Travel to Attend the Second International Conference on     Chemical Engineering Education in Cambridge, England,       April 14-16, 1987
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1987,10/31/1987
* Robert Kabel, Travel Award
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/1987
* USD 860.00

PROJECT DESCRIPTION This project is an International Travel grant for an
individual. The principal investigator plans to attend the upcoming Second
International Conference on Chemical Engineering Education in Cambridge, England
on April 14-16, 1987. He has been invited by the Institution of Chemical
Engineers (on behalf of the European Federation of the Chemical Engineering
Working Party on Chemical Engineering Education) to present a plenary lecture in
the session on "Initiatives in Engineering Education." His lecture is entitled
"Scaleup and Safety--Linked Initiatives." The PI has been active in research and
educational activities relative to this meeting. On this trip, he is also
planning to visit the University College of University of London, University of
Cambridge, and Imperial College of University of London. A report will be
prepared by the PI of the major findings at the Conference and University site
visits. JUSTIFICATION Attendance at this Conference will be beneficial to the
United States. A record of recent initiatives in Engineering Education in Europe
and Asia will be made available by the PI; the information will subsequently be
distributed to USA engineering schools. Dr. Kabel was invited to attend by the
top management of the American Institute of Chemical Engineering, as well as the
European hosts. RECOMMENDATION Support for airfare on a USA carrier is
recommended at the level of $860.00.