* 8713261
* U.S.-Western Europe Regional Cooperative Research:  Tests ofPrinciples for Dynamic Ecosystem Behavior and Physical      Resource Theory
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Robert Herendeen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1989
* USD 6,963.00

This award will help Dr. Robert A. Herendeen, Illinois Natural History Survey,
to collaborate with Dr. Sven E. Jorgensen, Royal Danish School of Pharmacy,
Copenhagen, Denmark; Drs. AnnMari and Bengt-Owe Jansson, University of
Stockholm, Sweden; and Dr. Karl-Erik Eriksson, Chalmers University of
Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. They will study coupled ecological-economic
systems. One goal of the research is to examine the viability of several
principles for predicting dynamic ecosystem behavior under changing energy
availability and cropping. The researchers will test the degree to which
physically-based and ecologically-based analyses provide practical inputs into
economic analysis and planning. The research will bring together scientists who
hold differing views of physical resource theory, and enable them to develop a
mutually acceptable framework for applying the theory and identifying data and
experiments for testing it. Several ecosystem principles leading to different
predictions will be tested. The principles refer to the maximizations of (1)
energy, (2) ascendancy, (3) power, and (4) net system output weighted by energy
intensities. Dr. Herendeen has done research on principle (4). Dr. Jorgensen is
the author of the maximization of energy principle and he and his group are
experienced researchers on perturbed ecological systems. The Janssons have
extensively investigated the Baltic ecosystem. Dr. Ericksson's specialty is
modeling physical ecological systems. The proposed research will lead to further
interpretation of the system principles and to a coherent statement of their
applicable temporal, spatial, and organizational scales.