* 8713496
* BIOSPAR: Development of a BIOacoustic Sensing Platform and  Relay System for Time Series Studies of Biologically        Produced Acoustic Backscattering
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1988,02/28/1991
* Peter Wiebe, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 02/28/1991
* USD 539,327.00

This project seeks to design and construct a BIOacoustic Sensing Platform And
Relay system (BIOSPAR). This is an autonomous dual beam acoustic profiler that
will automatically measure and telemeter biologically produced acoustic
backscattering and target strength data from remote oceanic locations to shore
based laboratories. The down-looking system, with 420 and 120 kHz dual- beam
echo sounders, will be packaged first for autonomous deployment in a spar buoy
and coupled to a satellite telemetry system. Profiles of acoustic backscattering
by range gating returns into 1 meter depth intervals in the upper 100 meters
will be obtained. All data will be stored on a mass storage unit in the buoy for
post processing. Partially processed data in the form of a target strength
histogram and integrated intensity for 10 depth intervals at each frequency will
be averaged over 2 hour intervals for daily transmission to shore. The system
will be tested at sea and used on a research cruise in 1990 to study variations
in the abundance and size-frequency distribution, and diel migration of plankton
and nekton in a Gulf Stream ring. The field tests will involve the use of a
towed net system to collect zooplankton and micronekton for comparion with
acoustic data. Designs for alternate deployment modes (bottom landers, deep-sea
moorings) will also be planned. This instrument offers the potential to
revolutionize our ability to obtain information about the distrubution and
interactions of important oceanic plankton and neckton over periods of time.
Such data is now extremely complex and costly to obtain.