* 8713370
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research: A Model for Plastid      Evolution--Cyanophora Cyanelle DNA (Molecular Biology)
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Hans Bohnert, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1990
* USD 8,590.00

This award will support a two-year cooperative research project between
Professor Hans J. Bohnert, Department of Biochemistry, University of Arizona,
and Dr. Wolfgang Loeffelhardt, Institute for General Biochemistry, University of
Vienna, Austria. The scientists and members of their research groups will study
the genome and gene structure of cyanelle DNA from Cyanophora paradoxa. They
will attempt to determine (1) the structure of several genes/operons on cyanelle
DNA which are differently organized in cyanelle and higher plant chloroplast DNA
and (2) the extent to which the cyanelle is dependent on import of proteins from
the surrounding cytoplasm and how this transport is achieved, either differently
from or identically to the transport in higher plants. The long-term goal of the
work is to understand, by monitoring differences between the well-studied higher
plant chloroplast characteristics and the cyanelle genome, which evolutionary
options were available to permit a photosynthetically active organelle to be
integrated into the metabolism of a eukaryotic cell. The cyanelle in Cyanophora
paradoxa is an example of a plastid, a membrane-enclosed component of a plant
cell. Chloroplasts in leaves are another, better-known example. In this study,
the cooperating scientists will carry out biochemical and molecular biological
studies aimed at demonstrating the degree of relatedness of cyanelle genes to
those in higher plant chloroplasts and to cyanobacterial genes. The work
involves sequencing several cyanelle chromosome regions selected for their
anticipated value in making these comparisons. In this way it may be possible to
gather evidence for the evolution of specific genes from simple bacteria through
Cyanophora paradoxa to still higher plants, such as trees. Professor Bohnert is
experienced in molecular biology and plant genetics. Professor Loeffelhardt is a
biochemist with experience in working with the proteins to be studied in these
experiments. Their expertise will be combined in a study which is expected to
shed light on the evolution of genes that are located in different cellular
compartments in an organism whose evolutionary history is not well understood.