* 8713724
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Polymers):  Mechanical-Vi- brational Spectroscopic Studies of Thermoplastic Elastomers
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1990
* Shaw Ling Hsu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1990
* USD 46,800.00

The overall objective of this two-year cooperative research project on
mechanical-vibrational studies of heterophase thermoplastic elastomers
(polyurethanes) between Shaw Ling Hsu of the University of Massachusetts and
Yingkang Wang, Beijing University, Fujei Lu, South China College of Tropical
Crops and Renyuan Qian, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, is
to study the phase separation and microscopic aspects of mechanical deformation
in model polyurethanes. Polyurethanes are thermoplastic materials such as rubber
or rubber synthetics which become soft and pliable when heated and harden when
cooled. Such materials are used in tough, resistent coatings and electrical
insulation. Further understanding of polyurethane materials during chemical
separation and disfigurement under mechanical conditions will serve as the basis
for the development of new and improved electrical materials and coatings. The
Chinese scientists will prepare the polyurethane samples, conduct morphological
studies using x-ray, light scattering techniques. The U.S. scientists will
conduct the spectroscopic analysis of the samples. The linkage of Chinese
expertise in sample preparation and U.S. expertise in spectroscopy promotes the
main objective of the U.S.-China Cooperative Science Program; which is, to
advance scientific knowledge through the combined efforts and abilities of
American and Chinese scientists and engineers.