* 8713230
* From the New Deal to the Great Society: The Role of the     South in Opposing the Welfare State
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,06/20/1988
* Lee Alston, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/20/1988
* USD 9,421.00

The government sector in the United States has grown significantly in the last
fifty years, with much of the growth coming in the area of social welfare
programs. In 1960, the government accounted for 30% of the goods and services
produced in the U.S., while in 1932, it accounted for only 21%. This growth has
been explained by theories based on the power of pressure groups, coalitions and
bureaucracies. But these theories account more for the forces promoting rapid
growth than the timing of that growth. The contribution of this project comes
from studying the way in which growth of government can be restrained by
powerful sectors of the economy that resist modernization. More specifically,
the project shows how welfare programs were delayed in the South in the 1930s by
Southern agricultural planters in order to keep labor costs low and how this
resistance to federal welfare programs declined after World War II due to the
mechanization of agriculture. Planters provided their agricultural workers with
a wide array of paternalistic benefits in lieu of some monetary compensation.
These benefits were used to elicit from workers both loyalty and a measure of
deference which kept the costs of agricultural labor low and maintained the
South's existing socio-economic system. Federal welfare programs made tying
workers to specific plantations more expensive. With mechanization, planters no
longer needed to tie workers to their plantation because of the dramatic
reduction in labor demand.