* 8713505
* Evolutionary Processes in Neogene Planktonic Foraminifera atHigh Resolution and Paleoceanography
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* James Kennett, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 12/31/1990
* USD 210,682.00

The P.I.'s previous studies have provided much new data towards an understanding
of evolutionary processes and have reaffirmed the belief in the high potential
of studies of the late Neogene planktonic foraminiferal Globoconella group for
evolutionary insights. Briefly, there are several principal factors that, in
combination, provide opportunities that may be exploited through this program:
1. Large numbers of well-preserved, measurable specimens in continuously cored
sedimentary sequences of late Neogene age (7 Ma to present) offer a high
potential for time resolution due to core quality resulting from use of the
hydraulic piston corer. 2. Clear evolutionary changes at all latitudes shown by
the species shape (biometric) investigations. 3. Sufficiently broad geographic
coverage of the sequences will reveal the role of migration and biotic
competition in the evolutionary process. 4. The location of sequences in
distinct surface water masses separated by oceanographic fronts acting as
partial barriers to planktonic foraminiferal species and which acted as partial
barriers to gene flow during the last several million years. 5. The existence of
paleoceanographic information from the same sites for which the evolutionary
investigations are being conducted. This includes oxygen and carbon isotopic
stratigraphy and abundance variations in planktonic foraminiferal assemblages.
6. A suite of easily recognized morphometric features that are now accurately
and rapidly measured using the well-developed methodology.