* 8713255
* The Pro Se Litigant: Self-Representation in Consequential   Civil Cases
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Susan McCoin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 01/31/1991
* USD 107,683.00

The contemporary American legal system is predicated on the expertise of
professionally trained lawyers. Despite the fact that modern society is highly
professionalized, it is noteworthy that some who seek access to the court system
eschew the services of lawyers. These pro se litigants--laypersons who present
their own case in an increasingly technical and procedurally complex legal
system--are an anomaly in the American court. On the one hand, the pro se
litigant symbolizes the democratic value of lay access to the court system. On
the other hand, in the twentieth century, the American judicial system has
become increasingly complex and technical in character, making it difficult for
the untrained amateur to represent effectively his or her legal interests. Yet,
while there is growing literature on courts, dispute processing, and litigation,
scientific study of the pro se litigant has been quite neglected in the existing
literature on courts, dispute processing, and litigation. Drs. Emerson and
McCoin are undertaking a study to examine litigants who represent themselves in
consequential middle range cases where parties are normally represented by
attorneys. Using data from daily and weekly court dockets of cases filed in the
California Superior Court, Los Angeles County, they will examine aggregate
patterns in the types of civil cases that are filed and the outcomes received by
pro se litigants. Central to the design is in-depth study of pro se cases over
time based on a sample of approximately twelve cases identified as noteworthy by
judges from the Superior Courts of Southern California. With this sample of
cases, systematic observations will be conducted on all proceedings and
hearings, and interviews are planned with judges, other court personnel,
lawyers, and litigants. The "noteworthy" cases will be compared to an
observational sample of "routine" cases. This extended case method should permit
(a) identifying the factors that lead persons to represent themselves in civil
actions, (b) assessing how this mode of representation affects the functioning
of regulars and insiders in the court system, and (c) analyzing the process of
how litigants represent themselves in a highly technical legal system. This
research, focusing on an infrequently encountered but theoretically significant
category of litigants, will fill a gap in research on dispute processing. The
analysis of issues such as cost-benefit models of litigation, use and avoidance
of lawyers, the dynamics of cultural and organizational outsiders, how legal
actors deal with unequal combatants, and the role of lawyers in the legal system
and in courthouse life has been based on a highly professionalized model. This
study should add to our understanding of these issues when those who mobilize
the law are untrained in formal procedure and not privy to the informal
understandings and relationships within courts.