* 8713654
* MARS:  The Design of a Main Memory Database                 (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1987,06/30/1989
* Margaret Dunham, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/1989
* USD 62,432.00

This research, sponsored through the Research Opportunities for Women (ROW)
initiative, investigates main memory database (MMDB) design. Declining memory
costs and demands for fast database access times have spurred great interest in
the development of MMDB's, where all or major portions of databases reside in
the computer's main memory. The Principal Investigator's previous research into
the factors which influence effective, recoverable MMDB design has been embodied
in the MARS database system prototype. The research conducted here will develop
further the requirements and characteristics of design support, including such
elements as the novel addressing scheme using a set associative access to the
stable memory. The overall objective of the MARS project is to actually
implement a prototype MMDB system based upon this initial design. While that
project will take several years, the purpose of this funded research is to
produce a much more detailed design of the system. The importance of this
research is that, by eliminating input/output bottlenecks, main memory databases
may greatly improve the performance of knowledge based computer systems. This
project represents one of the first efforts aimed specifically at designing,
implementing, and evaluating a MMDB prototype.