* 8713341
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research: Comparison of            Interferometric Measuring Methods (Physics and Materials    Research)
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Herbert Bernstein, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1992
* USD 7,950.00

This award will support a two-year collaborative project in neutron physics
under the U.S.-Austria Cooperative Science Program. The U.S. investigators are
Professor Herbert J. Bernstein, Hampshire College; Professor Michael A. Horne,
Stonehill College; and Professor Clifford G. Shull, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and Hampshire College. Their Austrian collaborators are Professor Dr.
Helmut Rauch and Professor Dr. Anton Zeilinger, both of the Atomic Institute of
the Austrian Universities, Vienna. The cooperative project will focus on very
cold neutron (VCN) experiments and on the development of neutron Fresnel lenses.
Previous neutron optics experimentation has made use of neutrons in two energy
regions, so-called thermal neutrons and ultra-cold neutrons. A source of
intermediate-energy neutrons, referred to as very cold neutrons, will soon be
available at the Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL) High Flux Reactor in Grenoble,
France, where much of the work of the Austrian researchers in this project is
carried out. The availability of neutrons in this energy range, corresponding to
neutron wavelengths of 80 to 100 Angstroms, will allow the cooperating
scientists to perform various fundamental experiments and to extend their
previous research to this interesting new wavelength region. Professors
Bernstein and Horne will provide theoretical support of these VCN experiments.
The second project involves a cooperative study of neutron Fresnel lenses, with
a view toward achieving workable lenses for focusing a neutron beam. The U.S.
and Austrian groups have carried out complementary research and design
activities directed toward the development of such lenses. By combining their
respective efforts, the scientists expect to hasten the attainment of this goal.
These experiments and their associated theoretical investigations are expected
to increase our understanding of the basic properties of neutrons and their
interaction with matter. The neutron is the most massive particle yet used to
routinely demonstrate wave-like properties. This makes neutron interferometry
one of the most sensitive probes of matter, and it is thus an extremely useful
tool for studying fundamental quantum physics.