* 8713344
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Transdisciplinary              Agroecological Research:  Model Improvement
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1989
* Edward Elliott, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1989
* USD 7,802.00

This award will provide partial support for a cooperative research project in
agroecosystem modeling between Dr. Edward T. Elliott, Natural Resource Ecology
Laboratory, Colorado State University (CSU), and other CSU scientists; Professor
David C. Coleman, University of Georgia; Dr. Lijbert Brussaard, Institute for
Soil Fertility, Haren, The Netherlands; and other Dutch colleagues. The U.S.
scientists have developed two agroecosystem simulation models, one that
simulates detailed site-level information on a time scale of a year, and the
other that simulates large-scale and long-term changes in soil organic matter,
nutrient availability, and primary production as affected by ecosystem
management. The Dutch investigators in this project are actively pursuing
experimental research and modeling that is similar, yet complementary, to that
being carried out by the U.S. researchers. Both groups believe that comparison
of model structures, outputs, and conceptual bases for development of the U.S.
and Dutch work will be mutually beneficial. Reciprocal visits to each other's
research facilities are planned. Additional travel support for members of the
U.S. group is being provided by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The
simulation models described here are useful tools in synthesizing and
integrating knowledge of agroecosystems. They are so designed that new
agricultural practices can be superimposed on the model structure and the
consequences evaluated. Cooperation with the scientists in The Netherlands will
help improve and validate the U.S. models, and in addition is expected to lead
to the design of specific new experiments that may be carried out on a
collaborative basis.