* 8713567
* Predictability of Monthly and Seasonal Average Circulation  of the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Jagadish Shukla, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 06/30/1991
* USD 1,512,647.00

One of the very exciting frontiers of research in atmospheric sciences is
understanding and extending the limits of dynamic predictibility on monthly and
seasonal time scales. The potential societal impact of successful extended range
forecasting is enormous. The main objective of this proposal is to carry out
numerical modeling and diagnostic studies to investigate the predictibility of
the monthly and seasonally averaged circulation of the atmosphere. The longer
term goal of the research is to investigate the predictibility of the coupled
land-ocean-atmosphere system. The focus of the work is practical, seeking to put
together a numerical model, adapted from the operational version used by the
National Meteorological Center(NMC), that should be able to produce extended
range forecasts, and to put such a model to test. To accomplish this, the
strategy is to utilize realistic models of individual components (atmosphere,
ocean, and land surface processes) and to carry out sensitivity and
predictibility studies, first to examine the predictibility of each component
separately, and ultimately to examine the predictibility of the fully coupled
interactive system. This is important because it will not only provide a crucial
interface between the university research community and the NMC, but also allow
development of better data sets as well as improve NMC's forecast capabilities
beyond the current limit of around two weeks.