* 8713949
* Pressurized Fluidized Bed Combustion of Low - Grade Coal,   Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1991
* V. M. Krishna Sastri, Indian Institute of Technology Madras
* Continuing Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 05/31/1991
* USD 290,266.00

Objectives and Relevancey: In a joint project, Dr. Victor Zakkay of New York
Univ. and Dr. V. Krishna Sastri of the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras,
India, plan to conduct tests on the feasibility of fluidized bed combustion in a
1 ft diameter test facility to be constructed at IIT, Madras, and in a 30 inch
diameter facility already in existence at NYU. The work will 1. test few
selected U.S. and Indian low grade coals; 2. identify optimal design for heat
exchanger; 3. evaluate air versus water cooled heat exchanger tubes; 4. test
particle attrition and hardness; and 5. freeboard heat transfer with and without
fins - over a wide range of parameters including bed pressure, temperature,
particle size and bed height. The U.S.-India Program supports joint research
where capabilities complement each other, and where the research is in an area
of interest to the two countries. This project meets these criteria. Merit: The
research is of interest to those countries that possess significant deposits of
low-grade coal including India, the U.S., as well as several developing
countries. The collaboration is likely to accelerate the generation of PFBC data
base on low grade fuel utilization and combustor scale up, both in India and the
U.S. The project is considered of high priority by the Government of India, and
it is expected to enhance the scientific collaboration between the two
countries. Funding: The project is being funded under two grants over a three
year period as follows: U.S. $ Ind.Cur. $ INT86-16664 to NYU, Zakkay FY87 39,039
7,344 FY88 37,948 7,344 FY89 37,785 7,344 INT87-13949 to IIT, Madras, Sastri
FY87 --- 222,438 FY88 --- 35,719 FY89 --- 35,719 INT and CBTE are equally
sharing in the U.S. dollars funding.