* 8713068
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:      Nonlinear Optical Properties of Microstructures and         Femtosecond Phenomena in Semiconductors
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Nasser Peyghambarian, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/29/1992
* USD 7,630.00

This award will enable Dr. Nasser Peyghambarian and Dr. Stephen W. Koch.
University of Arizona, to collaborate with Dr. Hartmut Haug, University of
Frankfurt, Federal Republic of Germany. They are carrying out experimental and
theoretical studies of quantum confinement effects and short pulse phenomena in
semiconductor micro-structures. Experimental work will include a study of the
dynamics of highly excited semiconductors and semiconductor micro-structures
using femtosecond laser excitation. They will induce gaps in semiconductor bands
with light, and they will measure the evolution of the spectral hole and carrier
thermalization process. They will also investigate nonlinear optical properties
of semiconductor quantum-dots using semiconductor micro-crystallite doped
glasses and etched micro-structures. The researchers' theoretical studies will
examine the linear and nonlinear optical properties of semiconductor micro-
structures and analyze quantum confinement effects. They will also study
coherent processes and high-field effects in semiconductors with non-equilibrium
Green functions and quantum-mechanical rate theories. They will investigate ac-
Stark splitting of semiconductor bands caused by a strong external field and
they will compute the dynamics of the nonequilibrium carrier distribution. A
semiconductor under strong optical excitation is an ideal system to study
nonlinear and non equilibrium processes of high current interest in solid state
physics. The purpose of the research is to study the basic phenomena associated
with nonlinear interactions between light waves and a variety of materials, most
notably semiconductors with reduced space dimensions. Dr. Peyghambarian has done
many of the experimental studies relevant to this research using a state of the
art femtosecond laser system in his laboratory. Dr. Koch and Dr. Haug provide
strong complementary theoretical expertise for the collaboration. The research
is important for understanding fundamental physical phenomena which have
potential applications in optical signal processing.