* 8713950
* International Symposium on Fiber Reinforced Concrete,       Madras, India, 16-19 Dec. 87, Group Travel Award in Indian  and U.S. Currencies
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Venkataswamy Ramakrishnan, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1988
* USD 16,450.00

Objectives and Relevancy: This project supports U.S. participation in the
International Symposium on Fibre Reinforced Concrete planned for December 16-19,
1987 in Madras, India. The symposium is attracting contributed papers from
various European countries, the U.S., Canada, Australia, and Japan as well as
from developing countries, in addition to invited papers on the state-of-the-art
by eminent speakers. Specific topics to be included are: failure mechanisms and
mechanical properties; steel, glass, organic and vegetable fibers; methods of
fabrication and cast-in-place construction; applications; durability and long
term performance; and design and economic considerations. This project fits the
objectives of the U.S.-India program which include supporting U.S. scientists at
major international meetings in India where there are likely to be scientific
benefits to the two countries. Merit: The topic is of considerable importance to
scientists and engineers in the U.S. and in India. Fiber reinforced concrete is
offering the construction industry many advantages because it makes possible the
variation of concrete properties to meet specific needs, such as earthquake
damage resistance . These advantages have stimulated the increase in usage of
these materials. Indian and U.S. scientists as well as those from many developed
countries have pursued research in this area over the last two decades, and are
likely to benefit from the exchange of information in this meeting. Funding:
None other than this action.