* 8713796
* Theoretical Studies of Etching and Growth Dynamics at       Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/1987,04/30/1989
* Barbara Garrison, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1989
* USD 72,000.00

With support from this grant in the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
program, Dr. Garrison will investigate, via molecular dynamics simulations, the
reactions of gases with solid surfaces in order to gain a microscopic and
fundamental understanding of the atomic motions involved. Emphasis will be
placed on reactions that involve either the growth or destruction (etching) of
the solid itself. A fundamental understanding of this process is needed for the
interpretation of experimental data ranging from the energy and angular
distributions used in determining surface structures to the fragmentation
patterns observed in the ejection process when large biomolecules are bombarded.
To realistically model these processes, however, it will first be necessary to
unify the description of the many-body interaction potentials or force fields
for these systems. Hence, Dr. Garrison and her students will work on this
problem by studing specific rhodium surfaces. The relationship between the
microscopic motion of atoms during chemical reactions at crystal surfaces and
macroscopic observables such as reaction rates has been sought by
experimentalists and theoreticians alike for the last several decades. The
development of such a relationship has been difficult for each research
community. Techniques for performing well-defined experiments at surfaces are
only recently being perfected. Theoretical methods for examining detailed
reaction mechanisms are dependent upon the availability of reliable manybody
interaction potentials. Ab initio methods which can be successfully applied to
define and the interaction between small numbers of atoms become cumbersome and
computationally prohibitive for large ensembles of atoms. Dr. Garrison expects
to develop new theoretical approaches which may be applied to describing
chemical reactions which occur at solid surfaces with an emphasis on those
processes that involve either the growth or destruction of the solid itself.