* 8713959
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Physiological          Ecology of Acid Brine Shrimp
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Frank Conte, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 06/30/1989
* USD 8,000.00

This award will enable Professor Frank P. Conte of Oregon State University to
collaborate with Dr. Michael C. Geddes at the University of Adelaide, Australia.
These investigators will make physiological and biochemical comparisons on the
halotolerant brine shrimp that inhabit alkaline and acidic saline lakes in
Western Australia. The enzyme complements responsible for cross-membrane
transport of ions in the two environmental types of organisms will be isolated,
purified and characterized in order to determine whether there has been genetic
modification of the sodium pump. The validity of a proposed carbon dioxide-
dependent pathway for the production of auxiliary energy needed in
osmoregulation will be tested by determining whether or not brine shrimp from
acidic environments have a particular enzyme critical to the pathway.
Additionally, ecological studies will be conducted to determine the food
resources and feeding behavior of the brine shrimp in the acid and alkaline
lakes. The purpose of this research is to gain insight into the molecular
evolution occurring in cellular ion transport mechanisms. Such adaptations are
essential to the survival of organisms in hypersaline environments. Dr. Conte is
an expert on the physiology of halotolerance. Dr. Geddes has had extensive
experience with saline lakes and the physiology of the Australian brine shrimp,
and was one of the original discoverers of the acid brine shrimp locations. The
presence of similar species in contrasting environments within close proximity
provides an excellent opportunity for this comparative study.