* 8713632
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Science:  Atomic Structure &        Collisions Research at Synchrotron and Tandem Accelerator   Facilities
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Stuart Elston, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1991
* USD 19,930.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professor Ivan A. Sellin,
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, and Professor Sven Huldt of the University
of Lund, Dr. Anders Barany of the Atomfysik Institut in Stockholm, Sweden, and
others at these institutions. These physicists will investigate the generation
and use of very low-energy ions, including their use in the laboratory
simulation of astrophysical phenomena. In addition, theoretical investigations
will be made of the capture of electrons by low-energy ions, and of the
interaction of such ions with metal surfaces. Earlier collaborative work of Dr.
Sellin and his Swedish colleagues showed how low-energy ions could be produced
by x-ray impact; these ions are useful in the modeling of astrophysical
phenomena and can also be used in intense ion sources. This research will focus
on determining additional properties of the low-energy ions formed by x-ray
impact; on developing additional methods of producing such ions; and on
developing experimental techniques for their use. The U.S. and Swedish
collaborators share common elements of apparatus and techniques in this field,
and one of the Swedish physicists is the developer of the time-of-flight
analyzer used to explore production rates and temperatures of the low-energy
ions produced by x-rays. The Swedish investigators will benefit from the use of
x-ray sources unavailable in their country, and the U.S. investigators will
benefit from Swedish expertise in instrumentation. Results of this work may have
important long-range benefits by enabling us to increase our understanding of
astrophysical phenomena through laboratory experiments, and also by facilitating
the production of ion beams suitable for microfabrication and other experimental
purposes.