* 8713485
* Worker Behavior and Its Effects on Product Quality,         Productivity and Costs
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,09/30/1989
* John Norsworthy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 09/30/1989
* USD 84,747.00

The purpose of this research is to analyze the relationship between worker
attitudes and labor productivity. This is an interdisciplinary study which
involves integrating industrial sociology with neoclassical production theory. A
production model will be constructed incorporating worker-attitude formation
which will be tested using data from the U.S. Postal Service. This research is
important because it will provide a more fundamental understanding of the
interaction between worker attitudes and productivity. The decline in the growth
rate of productivity in the U.S. has been partly attributed to worker attitudes,
and this study will shed light on the validity of this assertion. The model to
be developed will combine the formation of worker attitudes, based on labor
policies, with the technology of production. This model will be estimated using
a large cross-section data base containing input and output measures for the
Postal Service for 1984. A significant part of the project is the development of
this data base which will be made available to other researchers. The research
team combines the skills of highly qualified sociologist, Dr. Zabala, with those
of highly qualified economist, Dr. Norsworthy. The investigators have
collaborated successfully before, and there is every reason to believe that they
will do so on this project.