* 8713479
* Study of Restriction Endonucleases, SFC Award in Pakistani  Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Sheikh Riazuddin, Punjab University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1990
* USD 22,925.00

Objective and Relevancy: This action supports collaborative research between Dr.
Richard J. Roberts of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in Long Island, NY and Dr.
Sheikh Riazuddin of the Center of Advanced Molecular Biology at the University
of Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan. The research will involve production of a wide
variety of new restriction enzymes with new specificities for use in genetic
engineering. Attention will be paid to methods that allow the discovery of
enzymes with recognition sequences longer than 6 nucleotides, since such enzymes
which cleave DNA infrequently are of great value for mapping large genomes such
as human genomes. The U.S.-Pakistan program supports cooperative research
involving scientists from the two countries where capabilities complement each
other. This project meets that criterion well. Merit: The two scientists are
among the most highly regarded in the field of molecular biology in their
respective countries. They have collaborated on scientific research in the past
with results published as joint articles in international journals. This project
is likely to produce publishable results which would benefit others working in
the field. Funding: The project is being funded under two grants; University of
Punjab, grant INT-8713479: FY87: SFC$22,925 (Pakistani Currency) Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory, grant INT-8713519: FY87: U.S.$20,925 plus SFC$5,000 FY88:
U.S.$22,181