* 8713856
* U.S.-FRG Joint Seminar on Novel Iron and Steelmaking        Processes; Duesseldorf, FRG   June 20-24, 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,03/31/1989
* H. Fine, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1989
* USD 10,650.00

This award provides partial support for the participation of nine U.S. engineers
in a seminar with counterparts from the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) that
is designed to identify generic research needs that impede the full development
of important new iron and steel making processes. The seminar co-organizers are
Professor H. Alan Fine, Department of Metallurgical Engineering and Materials
Science, University of Kentucky, and Professor Hans-Juergen Engell, Director of
the Max Planck Institute for Iron Research, Duesseldorf. The U.S. delegation
will consist of senior academic engineers, a few younger faculty members and two
engineers from industry. Representatives from the Department of Energy have also
been invited. The agenda for the meeting places particular emphasis on (1) the
kinetics of fine particle reaction in fluid media, (2) containment of slags rich
in FeO, (3) refining of Cu and other tramp elements from steel, and (4) heat and
mass transfer considerations associated with novel processing. Participants
nominated for the workshop are well qualified to discuss developments in their
fields and to identify useful future research directions and technological
opportunities. The U.S. iron and steel industries are being challenged to
develop new processes in order to become more competitive in the world market.
In particular, they must make use of available raw materials and resources in
the most economical manner. Alternatives to the use of coke in ironmaking, new
processes that take advantage of fine-grained feed materials produced from
processing low-grade ores, more efficient use of scrap metals, and effective and
economical methods for the removal of impurities found in scrap and in low-grade
coals are examples of areas where more research is needed. The U.S. and the FRG
are actively involved in the production of iron and steel and are making
significant research efforts aimed at developing new technologies. The proposed
seminar will bring together eminent workers in this field from the two countries
for a mutually beneficial exchange of information to chart areas of new research
and possible cooperation.