* 8713836
* U.S.-Indonesia Cooperative Volcanologic-Petrologic Research in the East Sunda and Banda Arcs, Indonesia
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1990
* Johan Varekamp, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1990
* USD 19,982.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Johan C. Varekamp, Department of
Earth and Environmental Sciences, Wesleyan University, to pursue with Dr. Adjat
Sudradjat and staff members, Volcanological Survey of Indonesia, for a period of
24 months, a program of research on the geophysics and geology of the East Sunda
and Banda Arcs, strings of small, active volcanoes, north and east of Timor in
Indonesia. By combining field studies of volcanic stratigraphy with petrography,
mineral and glass analyses, volcanic gas geochemistry, and bulk rock element and
isotope geochemistry, the collaborators will obtain new insights into the origin
and development of the enigmatic potassic arc volcanoes in this region. They
also will trace the genetic relations between these volcanoes and neighboring
calcalkaline volcanoes. Studies of the volcanic gases and hydrothermal fluids
will provide an assessment of geothermal potential of these arcs. The
collaborators are highly respected scientists with a record of successful
research collaboration in the region to be studied. This project is relevant to
the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and
their counterparts in developing countries through the exchange of scientific
information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems
of mutual benefit.