* 8713192
* Collaborative Research in Corporatism, Pluralism and Market Competition
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Adam Przeworski, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1989
* USD 25,077.00

In recent years extensive research in Western Europe has focused on corporatist
systems of industrial relations in which collective bargaining is centralized on
a national scale and organizations representing workers and employers are
routinely consulted on major policy initiatives. There is by now a large
literature detailing the impact of corporatist arrangements on a wide variety of
social and economic outcomes. Nations with corporatist systems experience little
industrial conflict and slow growth of nominal and real wages. Corporatism is
frequently claimed to be a prerequisite for success with income policies. Real
wage moderation leads, in turn, to superior economic performance (lower levels
of unemployment and more rapid growth). At the same time, corporatism is
associated with a relatively rapid growth of welfare expenditures, leading many
scholars to see in corporatism a political bargain whereby unions receive
extensive welfare programs in exchange for moderation in private wage
negotiations. This widespread consensus about the empirical pattern does not
extend, however, to a theoretical understanding. Three issues are particularly
controversial or unclear: 1) the relationship between corporatist structures and
union politics, 2) the impact of the structure of interest representation on the
effects of government economic policy, and 3) who benefits and who loses from
corporatist arrangements. On the first issue, one view holds that corporatism
was imposed on workers against their will. One variant sees corporatism as
representing the successful cooptation of the union movement to serve the needs
of the capitalistic social order. Another variant views corporatism as the
result of non-democratic collusion between labor, employers, and government.
According to the opposing view, corporatist arrangements are supported by union
leaders because their members benefit. With regard to the second issue, little
is known about the impact of corporatism on economic policy other than demand
management and incomes policies. Yet there is good reason to think there are
significant differences between corporatist and pluralist systems in their
responses to a variety of other economic policies, especially policies
concerning investment and growth. The third issue is perhaps the most
contentious in terms of resolving the question of who gains and who loses from
corporatist arrangements. Four possibilities exist: workers gain and employers
lose, employers gain and workers lose, both gain, both lose. All four positions
have found advocates in the scholarly debate. The goal of this investigation is
to develop a formal theory of corporatism, as compared with pluralism and market
competition. Such a theory would specify the critical difference between
centralized and decentralized bargaining, explain the empirical findings,
provide tentative answers regarding the effects of policies concerning growth
and investment in different institutional environments, and clarify the
advantages or disadvantages accruing to groups and individuals. In addition, the
investigators will generate a number of different consequences that must be true
if the theory is true, thus suggesting new directions for future empirical
research.