* 8713093
* Mechanisms of Photochemical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Jack Saltiel, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 11/30/1990
* USD 262,800.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program will support
research by Prof. Jack Saltiel, which is concerned with determining the
mechanisms, or step-by-step details, of selected chemical reactions caused by
the absorption of light. A detailed understanding of such relatively simple
reactions is an essential step toward the elucidation of complex light-initiated
processes such as the vision sequence or the in vivo chemistry of Vitamin D.
This work continues research heretofore supported by Foundation grant
CHE-8400706. Specific research projects in Dr. Saltiel's program are divided
into two areas. The first topic of study concerns alkene photoisomerization, and
the second concerns electrocyclic reactions of arenes. Within the former are
included investigations of (a) ground-state conformational control of the
photophysics and photochemistry of arylethenes, including the analysis of
conformationally rigid analogues; (b) the photochemical formation of trans-
cyclohexenes and their chemistry; and (c) the mechanism of nonvertical triplet
and singlet energy transfer, and the shape of stilbene's lowest triplet and
lowest singlet potential energy surfaces. The interest in ground-state
conformational control has been heightened by successful application of
principal component analysis to the resolution of complex experimental spectra
into the contributions from individual conformers. The second area of study has
as its major theme the role of triplet-triplet annihilation as a pathway to
arene photochemistry. Spectroscopic observations on transient intermediates will
provide rate constants for the interpretation of steady-state data.