* 8713827
* Molecular Models Applied to the Heterogeneous Nucleation of Ice: Ice Formation on Surfaces
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1988,02/13/1992
* Barbara Hale, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 02/13/1992
* USD 115,000.00

Professor Barbara Hale will apply computer models of water/ice systems and a
scaled nucleation rate formalism to the study of heterogeneous ice nucleation.
The goals are to characterize ice nucleating features of natural atmospheric and
artificial ice nuclei in terms of microscopic substrate properties and develop
analytic the which provide microscopic substrate properties and develop analytic
the which provide convenient estimates of threshold temperatures and
heterogeneous nucleation rates. Specifically, threshold temperatures for ice
formation in adsorbed water layers on model substrates (such as a model silver
iodide basal face and a model hydroxylated silica surface) and on substrates
with modified water.substrate interactions will be examined for effects of: (1)
substrate lattice structure, (2) water.substrate binding energy, (3) substrate
ledge defects, (4) external electric field and pressure pulse perturbations, and
(5) thickness of the condensed water layers. The computer simulations use
effective water.water and water.substrate atomic pair potentials and Monte Carlo
techniques to generate canonical ensemble averages of thermodynamic quantities
for the adsorbed water/ice systems. This work is important because it provides
quantitative descriptions of the heterogeneous phase change mechanism, in
particular, the ice phase formation.