* 8713483
* Study of the Causes and Consequences of the International-  ization of U.S. Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1990
* Kerstin Pollack, National Research Council
* Continuing Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 03/31/1990
* USD 175,000.00

This proposal is for the Manufacturing Studies Board of the National Academy of
Sciences to establish a committee to conduct a study to examine the causes and
consequences of the strategic responses by manufacturing firms to increasing
international competition. Such strategies include foreign direct investment,
outsourcing, joint ventures with foreign firms, licensing agreements, direct
investment by foreign companies in the United States, and cooperative R&amp;D
agreements. The committee will comprise approximately 25 members who have
expertise in general manufacturing, international operations, marketing, labor
relations, engineering, research, and finance. This study should provide a
comprehensive evaluation of the motivations for and consequences of the
strategies used by U.S. manufacturers to remain competitive in the international
marketplace. The committee plans to identify trends in the international
manufacturing environment in terms of factors such as comparative labor and
capital costs, R&amp;D expenditures, and the state, availability, and
utilization of advanced manufacturing technologies. The study should determine
why corporate managers are choosing different responses to international
competition, identify the effects of government policies on their decisions,
examine how such decisions may affect the long-term ability of U.S.
manufacturers to conduct advanced R&amp;D to innovate and compete effectively,
and assess the long-term repercussions of these various strategies on continued
U.S. economic, technical, and military strength. Phase I will develop and test
the methodology in the domestic arena (involves 3-4 companies and a couple of
industries). Phase II will expand the investigation to include additional firms
and industries in the domestic arena (involves up to 20 companies and 5- 6
industries). Phase III will be conducted if additional funds become available
from other sources. Phase III, if conducted, would compare the pressures and
responses of domestic manufacturers to selected foreign counterparts (would
involve up to 20 domestic companies, 5-6 domestic industries; up to 20 foreign
companies and 5-6 foreign industries; Japan and Europe).