* 8713693
* Theoretical Studies of Photochemistry, Energetics and       Dynamics of the Thermosphere in Support of the CEDAR        Program
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Douglas Torr, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Valarie Klaas
* 02/28/1991
* USD 303,000.00

The Sun is a source of energy. A portion of this energy is in the form of light
(photons) which extends from the ultraviolet to the infrared. When the photons
strike the Earth's high atmosphere they expend their energy in breaking up
(dissociating), stripping electrons from (ionizing), and giving energy to
(exciting) the atoms and molecules of the atmospheric gas. These processes give
rise to heating of the atmosphere which drives the circulation patterns (winds).
The relative composition of the atmosphere changes because of this which is a
feedback on the energy absorption process. Understanding this coupling feedback
system is an objective of Solar Terrestrial research. The atoms and molecules
excited in this process emit radiation which is characteristic of the chemistry
as well as a measure of the concentration of the species. The emissions can be
an effective signature of the effects of the solar radiation on the atmosphere.
The objective of the research here is to measure the composition and temperature
of the atmosphere. This will be done by using high resolution instruments to
monitor the emitted radiation from the ground as the shadow height of the
setting sun moves up in altitude. The PI is an excellent scientist with
extensive skills in analyzing optical data. He has made extensive contributions
to the field of Upper Atmospheric Science. He is qualified to do this
investigation.