* 8713555
* New Computational Approaches to the Quantum Dynamics        of Chemical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/1987,09/30/1990
* Robert Wyatt, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Harry F. King
* 09/30/1990
* USD 82,000.00

This grant is being made jointly by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
Program in the Chemistry Division and the New Technologies Program in the
Division for Advanced Scientific Computing. The purpose of the work is to
develop new methods for computing the outcomes of collisions between molecules,
suitable for modern supercomputer architectures. The work involves
interdisciplinary collaboration between Professor Wyatt, a computational
chemist, and Dr. David Scott, a computer scientist at Intel Corporation.
Discretization of the coupled integral equations for molecular collisions leads
to a very large system of linear algebraic equations. The multilevel adaptive
technique (MLAT), now widely used in computational fluid mechanics, will be
combined with recursive and iterative techniques. First, a multichannel solution
is obtained on a low level (coarse) grid. The basis (or grid) is then adapted to
this solution and the coarse solution is projected or interpolated onto the new
(adapted) basis. The scattering amplitudes on the fine grid are then developed
through use of either the recursion method or the iterative technique.
Applications to very large systems are possible because it is not necessary to
store or invert a large matrix. The potential of these methods for parallel
processing with be explored, and applications of the methods to several
interesting chemical reactions will be undertaken.