* 8713203
* U.S.-China Symposium on Advanced Ceramic Materials,         Washington, D.C., September 1987
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1987,07/31/1988
* Leslie Cross, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 07/31/1988
* USD 10,460.00

Objectives and Relevance to Program Objectives: This joint seminar in the field
of advanced ceramic materials will bring together top U.S. and Chinese
scientists to explore new developments in ceramic materials and to define areas
of common interest for future cooperative research. Organized by Eric Cross,
Penn State University at University Park, and Van Donsheng, Chemistry Division,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, this joint symposium will support the objectives of
the U.S. China Program in Cooperative Science by promoting opportunities for
cooperation in basic science between scientists of China and the U.S. on
projects of mutual interest and benefit to both countries. Merit of Proposal:
This symposium will bring together leading experts in the field of cermics and
will focus on topics at the forefront of research in ceramic materials. As
scientists in both China and the U.S. achieve breakthroughs in oxide ceramic
materials with dramatic improvements in high temperature superconductivity, and
in recognition of China's leading efforts in oxide growth, it is timely and
important to bring together scientists in these two countries to define joint
projects which reflect activity at the cutting edge of ceramics research.
Funding: This is a new eight-month award under the terms of the cooperative
program. The U.S. will be responsible for per diem costs of the Chinese
participants while in the U.S. All costs incurred in China will be the
responsibility of the Chinese side.