* 8713453
* US-Sweden Cooperative Science: Protein-Nucleic Acid Interactions and Dynamics
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1987,05/31/1989
* Thomas Nordlund, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 05/31/1989
* USD 5,347.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professor Thomas M.
Nordlund of the University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dr. Rudolf Rigler
of the Karolinska Institute, Stockholm in the field of molecular dynamics. In
particular, the influence of molecular motions on the binding and dissolution of
DNA by the Eco R1 protein will be studied, both through direct experimentation
and using computer simulation. The experiments will use an extremely fast
photomultiplier to count the photons emitted by the fluorescence of a molecule
adjacent to that whose motions are being studied; this fluorescence occurs
during binding or disintegration. Molecular excitation will be performed by both
laser and synchrotron radiation; the latter has the advantage of continuous
tunability and facilities for measuring the time dependence of the fluorescence
emission. The computer simulations will involve calculating correlations among
energy functions for the various protein-DNA reactions which arise in the
binding and dissolution process. The availability of both laser and synchrotron
experimental apparatus and expert staff for the computer simulations makes the
Karolinska Institute an ideal location for this collaborative research. This
work will provide the U.S. investigator with an opportunity to use equipment and
techniques to which he does not ordinarily have access, and to learn specialized
techniques for subsequent application at his own institution. In addition, the
project will increase our understanding of how DNA is modified by interactions
with various proteins, which may lead to numerous practical applications.