* 8713051
* Fatty Acid Metabolism of Yeast (S. Cerevisiae): Fatty Acid  Synthase and Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Salih Wakil, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1991
* USD 101,250.00

Fatty acid metabolism, especially the biosynthesis of long chain fatty acids in
eukaryotic cells, is the focus of our research. In this project we plan to study
the mechanism of action and structure-function relationship of the fatty acid
synthase and acetyl-CoA carboxylase of the yeast Saccharmyces cerevisiae. For
the synthase, the entry of the substrates, acetyl and malonyl groups, and the
role of the transacylases in the process of chai elongation will be
investigated. in these studies we plan to establish the order and kinetics of
transfer of the B-ketoacyl derivative. Synthase from yeast mutansts defective in
acetylk transcyclase activity or lacks 4'-phospopantetheine will be used in
these studies. Foir the carbozylase we will determine thr organization of the
partial activities on the subunit protein as well as the site of biotim
attachment. Also, we plan to continue our studies of the structure ans
properties of the synthase abd carbioxylase genes. The avcailability of these
genes will make it possible for functional studies of the protins altered by
site-directed mutagenesis. The genes or DNA fragments derived therefrom will be
inserted inframe in special vectors, expressed in appropriate hosts and thge
proteins produced will be characterized and usled in reconstitution studies.
Cloning will be an exceptionlly poerful oapproach to understanding the
physiological revelance and structure- function relationships of these complex
multifunctional proteins.