* 8713319
* Innovative Methods for Processing of Thermoplastic-Matrix   Fiber Composite Materials to Final Net Shapes
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/1987,11/30/1991
* Alan Miller, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* George F. Keyser
* 11/30/1991
* USD 478,552.00

This project addresses the need for economical methods of processing, to final
complex shapes, composite structural materials having high- temperature
thermoplastic polymer matrices. The research includes development of the die-
less forming process, a very innovative approach to the forming of materials
containing continuous reinforcing fibers. Potential advantages of the die-less
forming process include a great reduction in equipment size for large
components, elimination of the cost and lead time for dies, and flexibility and
automation in processing. The research also includes basic investigation of the
phenomena and physical mechanisms governing the processing of thermoplastic
composites to final complex shapes (especially those unique to thermoplastics),
and the development of quantitative models to predict those phenomena during
processing. This research encompasses infiltration and in-plane deformation
behavior within individual plies, ply autohesion/delamination response (to be
investigated in situ using fluorescence techniques, and including the possible
accelerating effect on autohesion of concurrent deformation). The research will
be conducted by an interdisciplinary team of researchers in collaboration with
industry which should significantly advance the processing science and ensure
technology transfer.