* 8713980
* COHMAP -- Cooperative Holocene Mapping Project
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1991
* Patrick Bartlein, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/1991
* USD 185,593.00

One method to evaluate our understanding of the climate system is to compare
model simulations of past climate with reconstructions of the climate from the
data available for those time periods. This is the approach of the COHMAP
project (Cooperative Holocene Mapping Project), a multi-institutional (Brown,
Columbia, Minnesota, Oregon and Wisconsin) effort focused on examination of the
climate of the last 18,000 years. This time interval encompasses the last
glacial maximum, the termination of the glaciation, and the present Holocene
interglacial. The investigators are reconstructing climate from pollen, lake
levels, and marine plankton. The global data sets are organized in 3,000 year
intervals and include ice-sheet height area, distributions of fossil plankton,
pollen and plant microfossils, and status of lake levels. The project includes a
parallel effort to simulate the global patterns of climate with the Community
Climate model of the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The simulation
experiments are "snapshots" of the climate at 3,000 year intervals spanning the
same 18,000 year period and incorporating the effects of changes in earth's
orbital parameters and slowly changing boundary conditions such as ice- sheet
height and area. Proposed work over the next several years includes (1)
completion of global analysis of the observed paleoclimate and comparison with
recent numerical simulation experiments, (2) initiation of new work with ocean
models and comparison of simulations with fossil plankton distributions, (3)
test the sensitivity of the model simulations to variations in atmospheric
carbon dioxide and aerosol that have accompanied climate changes over the past
18,000 years, (4) intrepretation of data from North America, North Atlantic, and
Europe for quantitative reconstructions of past climates. This work should lead
to an improved understanding and theory of the dynamics of glacial/interglacial
(i.e., large scale) climatic change, to an appreciation of the strengths and
weaknesses of climate models, and to new insights about the nature of the
relationships between the biosphere and climate.