* 8713720
* Study of Reactive Intermediates Using Photoacoustic         Calorimetry (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1987,10/31/1990
* Joshua Goodman, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 10/31/1990
* USD 184,900.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports research
by Prof. Joshua Goodman, which is aimed at the development of an experimental
technique known as pulsed time-resolved photoacoustic calorimetry (PAC) and
applying it to the solution of several important problems in organic chemistry
and photochemistry. This work is important because the PAC technique is capable
of simultaneously measuring both dynamics and energies of light-induced
reactions in solution. Photochemical reactions are processes of both fundamental
and practical interest, so understanding the step-by-step structural and
energetic changes involved in these reactions is an important goal. Dr.
Goodman's work has three principal objectives: (1) to continue development of
the PAC technique by extension to non- homogeneous media and by improvement of
time resolution to the 50-nanosecond regime; (2) to employ PAC techniques to
measure bond dissociation energies in important chemical systems such as
1,4-biradicals, captodative radicals, and cation radicals; and (3) to determine
the reactivity and energetics of non- spectroscopic reactive intermediates in
cyclopropane isomerizations. These novel measurements are possible because the
photoacoustic technique can time-resolve the non-radiative decay processes of
reactive intermediates such as those occurring in photochemical reactions.