* 8713385
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research:  Translational Regu- lation of B-glucuronidase
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1990
* Kenneth Paigen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1990
* USD 6,932.00

This award will enable Dr. Kenneth Paigen and one of his colleagues, both from
the University of California, Berkeley, to collaborate with Drs. Kurt Pfister
and Richard Gitzelmann, University Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
They will study the genetic regulatory system of the B-glucuronidase gene in
mice. Three classes of regulatory mutations involving the gene have been
described: (1) systemic mutations that change enzyme levels in all cells, (2)
temporal mutations that change the appearance of the enzyme during development
of certain tissues, and (3) hormone- response mutations that change the ability
of the B-glucuronidase gene to be activated by androgens. The proposed research
will be concerned with the effects of the mutations in cell culture systems. The
research is expected to lead to further knowledge of the regulation of
B-glucuronidase gene expression and of the mechanisms of gene expression in
general. It may also ultimately contribute to a better understanding of a
particular genetic disorder associated with the lack of this gene's expression.
Of more general interest are the expected benefits to be derived from the
definition and better understanding of the regulatory steps and mechanisms from
mRNA translation to final protein localization and action. The research will
benefit from the international collaboration because Dr. Paigen's laboratory is
expert in dealing with the genetics and molecular biology of the B-glucuronidase
system, and the Swiss laboratory is experienced in applying techniques of cell
culture and protein biochemistry to questions of B-glucuronidase regulation. The
two laboratories have a successful history of collaboration, and this award will
support the international travel necessary for the U.S. group to continue its
part of the joint effort.