* 8713322
* Cortical Representational Dynamics in Behaving Adults
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1990
* William Jenkins, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1990
* USD 19,463.00

This award supports cooperative research between Prof. Wm. M. Jenkins of UCal-
SF Medical School and Prof. Eliana Guic, University of Chile, Santiago on
cortical representational dynamics in behaving adult animals. They will attempt
to demonstrate the changes in functional organization of the cerebral cortex of
rats following surgical manipulations to the vibrissae-cortical system. A
reorganization of the cortex barrel field after cauterization of the vibrissae
follicles, lesioning and clipping of certain vibrissae (whiskers), will
demonstrate brain plasticity subsequent to behavioral training. The study will
benefit from the considerable animal training experience of Dr. Guic and
colleagues while the responsibility for the design and construction of the
behavioral testing apparatus with a computer program base will rest with Dr.
Jenkins. Therefore the visits to Chile are essential and this work will
facilitate traing young colleagues in a developing country. In addition, it will
add to the understanding of restorative medicine through knowledge of brain
plasticity. It will establish research methods in Dr. Guic's laboratory which
will permit further research. The investment is small but will promote research
in this field and in Chile where resources are limited.