* 8713386
* U.S.-Denmark Cooperative Research:  High Spin States in     Light Platinum Nuclei
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Leo Riedinger, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1989
* USD 10,700.00

This award will enable Dr. Leo L. Riedinger, University of Tennessee, Knoxville,
and one of his postdoctoral fellows to collaborate with Dr. Jerry D. Garrett, of
the Niels Bohr Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark. They will study high-spin nuclear
states in neutron-deficient platinum nuclei. The heavy ion accelerator at the
Niels Bohr Institute will be used for the measurements. Sulfur projectiles will
initiate the reactions, and the new array of 20 Compton-suppressed Ge counters
(the NORDBALL) will be used to detect the weak gamma rays from the high-spin
states. The purpose of the proposed experiments is through ion-beam spectroscopy
to learn about the effect of high-j quasiparticle alignment on the soft nuclear
shapes in certain light isotopes of platinum. A new booster is being added to
the accelerator in Denmark and will provide particles of appropriate energies.
The Knoxville and Copenhagen research groups are each active in investigating
high-spin angular momentum properties of nuclei produced in heavy-ion induced
interactions. Scientists at the Niels Bohr Institute are among the world's
leaders in research on high-spin properties of nuclei. This award will allow the
U.S. and Danish researchers to continue their collaboration and to learn more
about the shape of nuclei as a function of quasiparticle excitation and
rotational frequency.