* 8713952
* Passive and Active Control of Structural Stability:         (Research Initiation)
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1987,04/30/1990
* Gulay Askar, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 04/30/1990
* USD 118,696.00

This research addresses the problem of stability or safety of structures which
is one of the most important design considerations, particularly for those which
are vulnerable to high winds or earthquake excitations. One primary stability
factor is the P- effect produced by an overturning moment dependent on the floor
gravity load and the floor rotation. One possible approach to this problem is to
make use of the concept of structural control in preventing undesirable,
excessive P- stresses induced by external excitations. The research aims at
investigating the feasibility of such a stability control concept and
establishing a theoretical base for control systems. Both passive and active
control systems, including mass damper systems and tendon systems will be
studied. A state vector approach will be used to provide the mathematical
framework of the analysis which will incorporate the treatment of P- effects
using a plastic hinge idealization and a model which allows for a gradual
development of yielding in highly stressed regions of structural members. This
study will contribute to the practical implementation of control systems in the
safe construction of the engineering facility. This is a research initiation
grant under the Research Opportunity for Women program supported by the
Engineering Directorate.