* 8713516
* U.S.-Philippines Cooperative Research:  Controlling         Biological Deterioration of Philippines Woods Species by    Application of Volatile Fungicides
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Jeffrey Morrell, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 06/30/1992
* USD 18,050.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Jeffrey J. Morrell, Department of
Forest Products, Oregon State University, to pursue with Ms. Magdalena Y. Giron,
Science Research Specialist, Forest Products Research and Development Institute,
Republic of the Philippines, for a period of 24 months, a program of research to
determine the feasibility of using wood fumigants to prolong the service life of
Philippine wood species. These collaborators will evaluate the ability of
fumigants to migrate through and eliminate decay fungi in Philippine wood
species under controlled laboratory conditions, determine the effectiveness of
fumigants for controlling fungal and insect infestations of wood products in
service, and evaluate the ability of fumigants to prevent marine borer attack of
Philippine wood species. Wood, as a material, has several advantages over steel,
concrete, and plastic, among which are its high strength per unit weight,
ability to withstand heavy loads without complete failure, pleasing appearance,
and low energy requirement for finishing. Unfortunately, wood is susceptible to
deterioration by a variety of biological agents such as fungi, insects, and
marine borers when used in adverse environments. Annual losses in the United
States on the order of $2 billion have been estimated. Although an estimate of
annual losses in the Philippines is not available, deterioration of wood in
tropical areas generally proceeds at a faster rate than in temperate regions.
Fumigant treatment would lead to prolonged wood service life, decreased pressure
to cut additional trees, and increased safety in wooden structures where decay
would otherwise continue to weaken the wood. Ms. Giron is presently engaged in
research in the field of the proposal in Dr. Morrell's laboratory where she is
expected to complete requirements for the Ph. D. degree by December 1987. They
have two publications in press on fumigant application to control decay in
Philippine woods. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing
countries through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.