* 8713730
* Feeding in Rhesus Monkeys on Cayo Santiago:  A Pilot Study
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Bernadette Marriott, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 02/28/1990
* USD 23,742.00

The theory of optimal foraging predicts that animals in nature will select a
diet that balances the energy consumed through feeding with energy expended in
such activities as self-maintenance, socializing, and obtaining food. Although
this theory is an excellent framework for studying the feeding patterns of
predators, optimal-foraging theory needs more careful evaluation when
considering the ready adaptability of some primates, such as the rhesus monkey
(Macaca mulatta), to extremely diverse habitats and food resources. Through
social learning, macaque monkeys of several species have developed unique
feeding adaptations. On Koshima Island in Japan, the monkeys (Macaca fuscata)
carefully monitor the tidal movements and have learned to remove and eat limpets
when these animals have relaxed their muscles under changing tidal pressure. On
Cayo Santiago, an island off the coast of Puerto Rico, preliminary observations
indicate that rhesus monkeys may also have developed specific feeding techniques
to harvest marine organisms. These monkeys are particularly suitable subjects
for assessing learned behavior patterns in relation to family relationships, as
the lineage of individual monkeys is known since the 1930s. Does optimal-
foraging theory account for these unique feeding adaptations? Drs. Marriott and
Tobach will carry out a pilot study that will provide basic information for the
development of two future long- term projects on the feeding behavior and
ecology of rhesus monkeys. The first is an initial study of the feeding ecology
of rhesus monkeys on Cayo Santiago across the yearly seasons. The second is a
preliminary descriptive study of feeding on marine organisms within the contex
of the overall feeding ecology. The objective of this project is to collect
quantitative information across the yearly vegetational seasons on 40
identifiable rhesus monkeys of both sexes. All food items will be sampled,
identified, and combusted to determine gross energy. Continuous behavioral
observations will include data on food-collection, -preparation, and social
aspects of feeding. Estimates of energy expenditure and input will be calculated
to develop a bioenergetic evaluation of feeding patterns. Thus, Drs. Marriott
and Tobach will describe marine feeding adaptations of the Cayo Santiago rhesus
monkeys and will evaluate these feeding adaptations in terms of optimal-foraging
theory and the social status and lineage of individual animals.