* 8713198
* Coal Liquefaction by Streptomyces
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1987,09/30/1988
* Donald Crawford, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 09/30/1988
* USD 20,576.00

This study proposes to investigate the potential use of streptomyces to
accomplish coal liquefaction, (streptomyces is a living microorgranism best
known for its ability to produce antibiotics). The research will attempt to
understand better the rate determining enzyme kinetics, transport steps and the
optimum environmental conditions for coal liquefaction utilizing a three phase
(solid, liquid, gas) sparged slurry reactor for the investigation. Finely ground
lignite coal will be fed to the reactor containing water and essential
nutrients. The reactor will be sterilized and then inoculated with an active and
dense culture of streptomyces species along with an excess air. The principal
manipulated variables will be pH, oxygen, and particle size. Mass spectroscopy
will be used to analyze for microbial biomass, product concentration and key
enzymes. Coal is one of the largest sources of energy. However, energy demand is
greatest for liquid fuels. Chemical and thermal processing for coal liquefaction
require extreme conditions of temperature, pressure and chemical environment.
Several species of fungi have been identified that are capable of growing on and
degrading coal. However, the process of coal solubilization is not understood
and the products have not been well characterized. This is a high risk/high
return project in which processes could be developed for the production of novel
aromatic chemicals or polymers or for the conversion of solid to liquid fuel.
Initial studies have already been carried out demonstrating complete
liquefaction of liqnite coal in shake flasks. The selection of streptomyces
enhances the probability of success of this project.