* 8713820
* Intrinsic Surface Electronic Properties and Dynamics        of Molecular Reactions on Solids Involving a Synchrotron    Radiation Beamline Development Project (Materials Research)
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1989
* Robert Merrill, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Yvette D. Jackson
* 07/31/1989
* USD 150,000.00

A program to carry out innovative research studies -- will use a state-of-the-
art extended range grasshopper (ERG) monochromator on port U-16 at the National
Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS), Brookhaven National Laboratory. The beamline
facility is being built and will be used by scientists and engineers from
Cornell University and Sandia National Laboratories with a primary interest in
the characterization and development of new materials. The design, construction
and installation of the beamline are partially completed. Supplementary support
is provided here to complete installation of the hardware and to optimize the
optical and vacuum instrumentation. This support will be used exclusively for
completion of the instrumentation with the objective of achieving new and
significant research objectives in the areas of high resolution photoemission
spectroscopy, fluorescence bulk and surface EXAFS and NEXAFS, normal emission
photoelectron diffraction and photon- stimulated desorption spectroscopy on
metallic, semiconductor and compound materials in the form of single crystals,
ultrathin films and supported dispersed solids. Acquisition of time- dependent
information on surfaces involving reaction and scattering, exploiting the high-
flux source and time-structure characteristics of the NSLS-VUV facility will be
of special interest.