* 8713369
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research: Design and Fabrication ofMagnetron Glow Discharge Systems for Plasma Polymerization
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1989
* Hirotsugu Yasuda, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1989
* USD 2,910.00

This award will support a one-year cooperative research project between
Professor Hirotsugu K. Yasuda, Graduate Center for Materials Research,
University of Missouri-Rolla, and Drs. Horst Ebel, Fethi Olcaytug, and Maciej
Gazicki, Technical University of Vienna, Austria. The collaborating scientists
are studying the process of polymerization which takes place in the plasma
region of an electric glow discharge of polymer-forming gases, a process called
plasma polymerization. A magnetron glow discharge system is typically used in
these studies, and the scientists want to investigate the influence of the
external magnetic field on the polymerization reaction and the ensuing
deposition of polymeric product. The researchers intend to collaborate in the
design and construction of an electromagnetic magnetron (electromagnetron) that
will permit the magnetic flux in these experiments to be modified easily, even
during the operation of the discharge. Professor Yasuda brings an expertise in
polymerization chemistry and chemical engineering to this study. His Austrian
colleagues are experienced in physics, electronics, and electrical engineering.
The cooperating researchers thus have complementary strengths, though share an
overlapping interest in the effects of magnetic fields on the formation and
behavior of chemical species in glow discharges. Plasma polymerization has
various current and potential industrial applications, including corrosion-
protection coating of metals, improved adhesion of paint to metals,
electroplating of dielectric materials, biomedical coatings, and improved
adhesion of polymer matrix to fibers in composite materials. The development of
new electromagnetron systems and the acquisition of the basic information being
sought in this project should ultimately enhance industrial utilization of
plasma polymerization technology.