* 8714634
* Ultrathin Film Amorphous and Nanocrystalline                Semiconductors - Structure, Stability and Electronic        Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Peter Persans, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Carol A. Savory-Heflin
* 01/31/1992
* USD 119,200.00

They will investigate structure, structural relaxation, atomic interdiffusion
and crystallization of ultrathin (1-20nm) amorphous silicon and germanium
semiconductor films by applying vibrational and optical spectroscopies to
amorphous superlattice structures. They will also investigate size and interface
effects in nanocrystalline (&lt;20nm crystallites) materials formed by annealing
or otherwise treating amorphous superlattice structures. Research efforts will
include: 1) Development and application of vibrational Raman scattering as a
probe of amorphous network strain (i.e. - bond distortions) and compositional
mixing at and near amorphous interfaces. 2) Application and analysis of optical
techniques including optical absorption, electromodulation (absorption,
reflection, luminescence) and Raman scattering to study the formation and growth
of crystallites in ultrathin films. 3) Application of Raman and optical
techniques to study atomic diffusion in amorphous and nanocrystalline solids. 4)
Development and application of optical and optical modulation techniques to
study quantum size effects, interface effects and the breakdown of crystal
momentum selection rules in nanocrystals with well defined dimensions from 2nm
to 20nm. Nanostructured thin film materials will have a direct impact on the
ability to develop amorphous thin films for large area applications such as
photo- electronic detectors and arrays, field-effect display drivers and
photovoltaic devices. Increased understanding of microscopic relaxation,
diffusion and crystallization processes will have implications for the
development of low temperature processing technologies for three-dimensional
integrated circuits, high temperature semiconductors and non-linear optical
components.