* 8714947
* U.S.-Venezuela Cooperative Research:  Percolation in        Two-Dimensional Superconductors
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Christopher Lobb, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/1990
* USD 7,077.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. Christopher Lobb
of Harvard University and Dr. Miguel Octavio of the Instituto Venezolano de
Investigaciones Cientificas (IVIC) in Caracas, Venezuela. The objective of the
research is to continue present work concerned with theoretical and experimental
aspects of percolation theory and superconductivity in random media. Percolation
theory serves to unite several seemingly diverse phenomena such as fluid flow in
porous media, the strength of composites and ceramics, dielectric breakdown in
granular materials, and the electrical properties of superconducting composite
wires. Recent theoretical advances have led to an increased understanding of
percolation in real materials with generally good agreement between theory and
simulations. Work remains to be done in comparing theoretical predictions to
measurements on real systems. The researchers intend to perform theoretical work
at Harvard, and computer simulations at IVIC. Two types of experiments are
currently undertaken and will be continued: at IVIC thin percolative films are
being grown and studied in situ, aiming at understanding thin film growth and
its effect on superconductivity. At Harvard, artificial random films are being
made using electron-beam lithography. Complementary facilities will allow a wide
range of experiments to be done. This research has the potential for broad
applicability from a fundamental science point of view--the study of transport
and breakdown processes in random media--to technological applications such as
the strength of composite materials.