* 8714077
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Photosynthesis of      Mangroves Under Natural Conditions
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1989
* John Cheeseman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 08/31/1989
* USD 9,000.00

This award will enable Dr. John M. Cheeseman and an assistant from the
University of Illinois to collaborate with Dr. Barry F. Clough of the Australian
Institute of Marine Science in Townsville, Queensland, Australia. During an
18-day field expedition, they will collect data on the photosynthetic
characteristics of three species of mangroves that differ in their strategies of
salinity tolerance. For each species, light saturation, quantum efficiency, leaf
water potential and salt status will be determined for sun leaves at the top of
the canopy and for shade leaves within the canopy on trees located along a
natural salinity gradient. The purpose of this research is to gain insight into
the photosynthetic characteristics and environmental responses which allow
mangroves to be the dominant plants in a highly stressful but highly productive
ecosystem. The project will benefit from the complementary backgrounds of and
instrumentation available to the investigators. Dr. Cheeseman's work has
involved laboratory-based studies on the physiology of salt tolerance in plants.
Dr. Clough is an expert on mangrove physiology with extensive field experience.
The Australian Institute of Marine Science maintains a permanent field site on
the Daintree River which is appropriately positioned for sampling across a
natural salinity gradient.