* 8714238
* Addition of Tandem Mass Spectrometry to the Middle Atlantic Mass Spectrometry Facility for the Analysis of Complex      Biomolecules
* BIO,BIO
* 09/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Robert Cotter, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/1990
* USD 1,286,700.00

This is a Biological Facilities Center request for the purchase and
developmental support of a tandem mass spectrometer, or MS/MS, to be used as a
shared instrumental facility and as part of the Middle Atlantic Mass
Spectrometry Facility. The instrument, to be located on the Baltimore County
campus of the University of Maryland, will supplement existing capabilities
available at the MAMS Facility at the Johns Hopkins University. Core and
collaborative research by the principal investigators and their staff will
include both instrument development and applications to the analysis of complex
biomolecules. Instrument development will focus on improving the yield of
fragment ion information for larger molecules using both collisions and laser
photodissociation in the field.free region between MSl and MS2. Multiple
collisions will be employed to induce fragmentation,neutralize molecular and
fragment ions and equilibrate ion kinetic and internal energy. Fragment ions
will then bereionized by chemical ionization and permit quadratic B scans in the
second mass spectrometer at higher resolution than the B/Escans normally
employed for high.energy collisions. MS/MS will be used to induce structural
fragmentation, improve the sample ion signal relative to matrix ions,
distinguish fragment ions formed from several molecular ion species, and
separate components of microheterogeneous and other mixtures not readily
separable by liquid chromatographic techniques. These advantages will be
exploited for the structural analyses ofglycopeptides, lipopolysaccharides,
chemically and post. translationally modified peptides, synthetic nucleotides,
etc. in ongoing collaborative projects at the facility.