* 8714035
* Facilities Center for NMR of Biological Solids.
* BIO,BIO
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1990
* Jacob Schaefer, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/28/1990
* USD 410,000.00

The combination of single- and double-cross polarization with magic-angle
spinning has resulted in high-resolution 13C and 15N NMR spectra of a variety of
biological solids. Recently developed versions of these experiments will be used
to identify cross-links in insect exoskeleton and plant cell walls, to establish
the mechanism of drug action on bacterial cell-wall metabolism, to identify
binding sites in immobilized enzymes, to measure the dynamics and conformational
flexibility within the active sites of enzymes, to measure the mobility of
multiple sites in lipid chains in the gel state without specific labeling of the
lipids, and to monitor the catabolism of drugs, herbicides, and pesticides in
mammalian tissue nondestructively. Many of these new applications will involve
NMR techniques that have been developed in this laboratory. The capabilities of
this laboratory will be expanded by building a new double-cross polarization
1H-13C-l5N solids spectrometer with operating characteristics specifically
tailored to the needs of the planned new applications. This spectrometer, along
with three existing solids spectrometers, will comprise a new NSF Biological
Facilities Center for the NMR analysis of biological solids. The combined
expertise represented in this Center is unique and multidisciplinary. Previously
the Principal Investigator has had good collaborative efforts, which are likely
to continue; and his laboratory is at the forefront of the develoment of this
sophisticated technology. He is firmly committed to wider applications among the
biological community. Potential applications range from instrument development,
to chemical physics, biology/medicine, and to biotechnology.