* 8714069
* Biological Facilities Center for Research and Development ofElectro-optical Microscopic Imaging Instrumentation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1990
* Watt Webb, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 02/28/1990
* USD 600,000.00

This proposal requests funds for a Biological Facilities Center for Research and
Development of Electro-Optical Microscopic Imaging Instrumentation. The
objective is to provide for the systematic invention and development of electro-
optical microscopic imaging quantitation technologies and to facilitate the
application of these new physical instrumentation capabilities through
collaborative research in molecular cell biology. The molecular dynamics of
vital processes in living cells can be revealed and measured with the help of
appropriate electro-optical microscopic image acquisition, photon counting
quantitation of weak molecular fluorescence, and computerized 3D digital image
processing and storage with spatial and temporal transform analysis.
Collaborative interdisciplinary research on cellular biophysical processes is to
be accommodated in the facilities both to provide for cell biology research and
to focus the instrumentation developments on practicable research techniques
that can be adapted by other laboratories. The goal is to generate developments
that optimize the trade off of sensitivity, speed, spatial resolution, and
quantitation needed to study best, at the molecular level, the dynamical
processes in living cells. The investigator has a proven record of
accomplishment in the development and application of biophysical methods.
Establishment of this imaging center will directly benefit a substantial user
community both at Cornell and within the wider community.