* 8714402
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Minor Planet Observation  and Dynamics to Provide HIPPARCOS with a Dynamical ReferenceFrame
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Paul Hemenway, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1991
* USD 14,050.00

This award will support collaborative research between Profs. Raynor L. Duncombe
and Paul D. Hemenway, of the University of Texas in Austin, and Dr. Jean
Kovalevsky, of the Centre d' Etudes et de Recherches Geodynamiques et
Astronomiques (C.E.R.G.A.), Grasse, France, in the area of astronomical
calibration. In particular, observations of minor planet positions and dynamics
are to be made, with the intent of uncovering systematic errors in the body of
knowledge of star positions and motions called the Fundamental System. These
measurements are to be undertaken in conjunction with the imminent launch of the
European Space Agency's High Precision Parallax Collecting Satellite, the
position and orientation of which cannot be established by measurements from the
satellite itself. The measurement program to be pursued represents an effective
coordination of an observational program of minor planet dynamics with
international efforts to form a universal reference coordinate system.
Observations of the minor planets will be made at C.E.R.G.A. and at Austin, with
the latter observations providing reference positions for the former
observations. The award will also provide support for travel to HIPPARCOS
working group meetings, to assure effective coordination with the project as a
whole.