* 8714923
* Thin Film Growth Via Photodissociation of Organometallic    Compounds:  Transport Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/1987,10/31/1990
* Stanley Middleman, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 10/31/1990
* USD 102,554.00

In this exploratory project, mathematical models of chemical vapor transport and
deposition from the photodissociation of organometallic compounds are developed;
they are applied to a set of experiments so as to yield the intrinsic rate
parameters for both gas phase and surface reactions. With these rate parameters,
a numerical model of a deposition reactor with significant interfacial
convective effects is carried out, and the predictions of film growth rate and
spatial uniformity will be compared to data. In a companion program,
photodissociation of a model organometallic compound is studied experimentally
over a range of pressure and compositions. Experimental conditions range from
those under which kinetic phenomena control, to conditions at the opposite
extreme, where reaction and deposition occur in a flowing system at sufficiently
high pressure that diffusive and convective effects dominate the observed
deposition rate of the metal film on a surface. This unique joint program will
produce an experimental protocol for obtaining kinetic data and mathematical
procedures for interpreting the data so as to produce intrinsic kinetic
parameters free of artifacts due to gas phase and interfacial transport
resistances. Studies of the kinetics of thin film growth are often carried out
under conditions such that the intrinsic kinetics are hidden by resistances to
gas phase and interface transport. This study is designed to permit accounting
for these transport effects so as to produce fundamental kinetic data. Further,
a model organometallic compound is selected in this initial study so as to
eliminate uncertainties that arise from the complexity of the reaction
mechanism.