* 8714552
* Viscoelastic Properties of Concentrated Polymer Solutions,  U.S.-Italy Program
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Karl Freed, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/1991
* USD 10,000.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professor Karl Freed of
the University of Chicago and Professor Angelo Perico of the Center for Chemical
Physics Research on Natural and Synthetic Macromolecules in Genova, Italy. This
research concerns the study of viscoelastic properties of solutions of flexible
polymers. Using renormalization group methods and statistical mechanics, the
investigators plan to extend the theory of concentration dependence of
hydrodynamic properties to incorporate various aspects of the dynamics of
polymers in concentrated solutions. This research is an international component
of currently supported work of Professors Freed and Perico. The aim is to
develop a complete theory of polymer properties that are dependent on
hydrodynamic and polymer solvent interactions. The collaborators have succeeded
in reformulating a hydrodynamic multiple scattering theory that has the
potential for solving many new dynamical problems related to polymer
concentration. Because of the inherent mathematical difficulties associated with
these problems even in the simplest limiting cases, the achievement of a
coherent theory should be a significant advance. Additionally, the proposed
problems are important and may have a significant impact on applications ranging
from biology to technology.