* 8714186
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research on Hydrodynamic Modelsof the Shaping of Planetary Nebulae
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1990
* Bruce Balick, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1990
* USD 8,860.00

This award will enable Professor Bruce Balick of the University of Washington to
collaborate with Professor Vincent Icke of the University of Leiden, The
Netherlands, in a study of planetary nebulae, which are hot, ionized clouds of
gas associated with the final stages of stellar life. Their collaboration will
involve obtaining improved observational descriptions of planetary nebulae and
developing improved models to explain the causes of the intricate and
symmetrical shapes of the nebulae. Professor Balick has an extensive
observational data base on planetary nebulae and he has experience in testing
model predictions by detailed observations. Professor Icke is an expert in
theoretical nebular hydrodynamics, and has developed a very sophisticated
computer simulation program that has been successfully adapted for modelling
other stellar objects such as supernovae remnants. Collaboration with Dr. Balick
will facilitate access to a U.S. supercomputer to run the complex programs
needed to model nebular dynamics. Planetary nebulae are gaseous shells ejected
by aging stars. The ejection is thought to occur in two stages, first as a
rather slow "wind" containing the outer layers of the star (over a period of
thousands of years), then a much faster expulsion of deeper layers in only a few
centuries. Theoretical models and recent observations suggest that the nebulae
acquire their shapes as this fast wind overtakes and interacts with the outer
layers ejected earlier. A recent survey of 50 planetary nebulae shows that the
concept of wind shaping is generally valid, but that the models developed to
explain the phenomenon are much too simplistic. The goal of this project is to
develop and test more complex models to explain the shapes and evolutions of
planetary nebulae. Three-dimensional hydrodynamic models require years to
develop and can only reasonably be tested with the aid of a supercomputer.
Development of the enhanced models needed to explain nebular shapes will be
greatly facilitated by the combination of Dr. Balick's observational data and
model testing skills with Dr. Icke's theoretical insights and ability to modify
the computer code he has already developed. Ultimately, their collaboration
should contribute to resolving some longstanding questions about the shapes and
evolution of planetary nebulae.