* 8714933
* Fourth International Workshop on the Physics of             Semiconductor Devices, Madras, India, December 10-15, 1987, Group Travel Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Joseph Loferski, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1988
* USD 35,500.00

Objectives and Relevancy: This project supports participation by U.S. scientists
in the Fourth International Workshop on the Physics of Semiconductor Devices, to
be held December 10-15, 1987 in Madras, India. The meeting is sponsored by
COSTED, the Committee on Science and Technology in Developing Countries,
(UNESCO), a committee of the International Council of Scientific Unions. The
past three workshops were held in India in 1981, 1983, 1985. The 1987 meeting is
to address the following areas: materials and their characterization;
microelectronics, VLSI and ULSI devices; gallium arsenide devices; infrared and
radiation detectors and solar cells; and radiation effects on semiconductor
devices. Invited and contributed papers will be presented, and proceedings will
be prepared for publication as was done with the previous workshops. This
project meets the U.S.-India program criteria for support of U.S. participation
in meetings that enhance the exchange of information and improve the potential
for cooperative research between the two countries. Merit: The area of this
workshop is one of the most important for industrial development, and is also
one where advances are taking place at a fast rate in the western world and also
in India. The P.I. is eminently qualified to organize the U.S. delegation for
maximum benefit to the participants and for enhancing the interaction between
the scientists of the two countries in this important field. The Indian
organizers are among that country's leading scientists. Funding: None other than
this action.