* 8714996
* Phosphogenesis in Near-Surface Santa Barbara Basin Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1987,10/31/1991
* Clare Reimers, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 10/31/1991
* USD 204,720.00

This research is focused on determining the phosphate sources, reactions and
time-scales involved in the precipita- tion and aging of authigenic phosphate in
sediments of Santa Barbara Basin, California. Preliminary data from the basin
indicate that authigenic phosphate is precipitating from pore waters within the
upper 25 cm of the sediment column. These data also suggest that high
concentrations of dissolved phosphate in the uppermost centimeter are coupled to
a mat of filamentous sulfur-oxidizing bacteria, Beggiatoa spp., which blankets
the sediment-water interface. The field portion of the program will include 1)
seasonal collections of the mat and underlying sediments for fine-scale biomass,
pore water and solid phase sampling, and 2) in situ measurements of millimeter
-scale gradients of pore water oxygen and pH. In the labora- tory,
investigations will be conducted of the petrology, mineralogy, chemistry, and
isotopic compositions of individual sediments lamina and separated phosphatic
phases. These latter efforts should provide definitive data for evaluating the
nature, stability, and accumulation rates of phases precursory to carbonate
fluorapatite. The contribution of Beggiatoa biomass to the total diagenetic
phosphate flux, as well as the influence of the chemical microenvironment of the
mat on other mechanisms of phosphate regeneration, such as iron-oxyhydroxide
shuttling, will also be determined. Overall, the results will contribute to our
understanding of the primary processes that remove phosphorus from the ocean to
the global sedimentary reservoir.