* 8714172
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:      Relativistic Nuclear Currents and Nucleon Electroproduction
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Alan Picklesimer, Los Alamos National Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1991
* USD 8,638.00

This award will enable Dr. Alan Picklesimer and Dr. Ruprecht Machleidt, Los
Alamos National Laboratory, to collaborate with Dr. Rolf Brockmann, University
of Mainz, Federal Republic of Germany. They will study polarized nucleon
electroproduction from nuclei at energies and momentum transfers appropriate to
the facilities at Mainz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (The Bates
Laboratory), and the Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility under
construction at Newport News, Virginia. A major goal of the program, of which
this project is a part, is the development of a consistent and complete
framework for exploring nuclear structure by looking for relativistic effects
and subhadronic degrees of freedom using (e,e'p) reactions initiated by
polarized electrons in which the momentum and polarization of the outgoing
proton are measured. The research will address a number of issues, including the
validity of current conservation in the presence of a nucleon-nucleon
interaction derived from meson exchange, the proper inclusion of relativistic
wave functions with non-negligible negative energy components, and the
consideration of many-body effects. The second part of the program will
investigate possible modifications of the Coulomb sum rule, for which
experimental evidence has prompted a number of explanations ranging from
relativistic effects to modifications of the size of the proton in a medium
(i.e. the nucleus). The collaboration will benefit from the expertise of the
researchers on nucleon-nucleon interactions, relativistic nuclear physics, and
nuclear scattering theory. The researchers have successfully collaborated in the
past and this award will allow them to continue their productive work.