* 8714076
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Systematics and        Biogeography of Indo-Australian Ants
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1990
* Philip Ward, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 06/30/1990
* USD 9,920.00

This award will allow collaborative studies between Dr. Philip S. Ward of the
University of California, Davis and Dr. Robert W. Taylor of the Australian
National Insect Collection, Canberra, Australia on the systematic relationships
of Indo-Australian ants. The principle objectives of the research are (1) to
clarify the species-level systematics of several important groups of Indo-
Australian ants, (2) to gather data which will facilitate the analysis of
phylogenetic relationships among these ants, and (3) to utilize information on
ant phylogeny and distribution to test biogeographic hypotheses about the
Australian continent. Field collections will be made in Australia and Melanesia.
Specimens will be analyzed using a combination of conventional morphological
examination, morphometric analysis, and scanning electron microscope studies of
microsculpture. Taxonomic assessments will be aided by a taxonomic database
management system and computer-assisted programs for phylogenetic inference.
Results from this research will provide much-needed taxonomic revisions of
several ant groups and will yield insight into the history of the Australian
biota. Dr. Ward has broad knowledge of the ant groups to be studied as well as a
background in current biochemical and analytical procedures. Dr. Taylor has more
than 20 years of experience on the Australian ant fauna in general, as well as
access to important collections and computer programs and equipment necessary
for analytical evaluation and processing.