* 8714768
* Fitting Information Technology to Organizational Structure  (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Barbara Gutek, Claremont Graduate University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 07/31/1990
* USD 158,214.00

This project tests structural contingency theory as it applies to information
technology in 72 white collar work groups. Strucxtural contingency theory states
that an organization or organizational subunit tries to "fit" its technology to
its existing structure and good fit between structure and technology increases
effectiveness. Although structural contingency theory is usually treated as a
static theory, it is implicitly dynamic: structure and technology continually
change and adapt to each other and effectiveness may lag behind achievement of a
good fit. Although widely used, structural contingency theory has not been
applied to the study of information technology. In this research, 72 work groups
will be studied twice, 8-10 months apart. Eighteeen computer-using work groups
will be selected from each of four types of white collar work groups. Interviews
of 60 to 75 minutes will be conducted with all members of the work groups,
including the supervisors. Questions are designed to elicit information about
structure, technology, fit, and effectiveness of the work group. A second set of
40 to 60 minute interviews 8 to 10 months later will provide information to test
dynamic aspects of the theory. Data will test eight different models--six static
and two dynamic--of structural contingency theory. The reseqrch is signifficant
because it adds to our knowledge on how information technology can increase the
efficiency of work and the quality of work life.