* 8714220
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Lower Cambrian         Environmental Stratigraphy and the Fossil Record of         the Metazoan Radiation Event
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Jeffrey Mount, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 08/31/1990
* USD 16,400.00

This award will enable Dr. Jeffrey F. Mount from the University of California,
Davis to collaborate with Dr. Chris C. von der Borch of Flinders University,
Australia over a period of two years. They will study rock and fossil records
from the base of the Cambrian System in the Adelaide region of South Australia.
The project will entail: (1) evaluation of unpublished literature and the
available fossil collections from the area; (2) field collection of rock and
fossil data from three localities within the Adelaide region; and (3) laboratory
analysis of stratigraphic sections. The purpose of analyzing the fossil/rock
associations in South Australia is to evaluate the paleoenvironmental context of
earliest Cambrian fauna and to determine how the history of shelf sedimentation
has controlled the fossil record of the unprecedented appearance and
diversification of organisms during that era. Stratigraphic analysis will be
expedited because of the substantial amount of basic descriptive work which has
already been carried out for the study sites. The respective expertise of Drs.
Mount and von der Borch on the paleogeography of the Lower Cambrian strata of
the southwestern Great Basin, U.S.A. and the Adelaide region of South Australia
will enable a valuable comparative analysis of equivalent faunal records from
these two continents.