* 8714862
* Convection and Critical Dynamics in Helium Three            Superfluid Helium Four Mixtures
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1987,04/30/1991
* Robert Behringer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/1991
* USD 237,288.00

The proposed measurements, to be carried out using superfluid helium mixtures,
will address a number of questions of considerable current interest. Using a
pioneering flow visualization technique exploiting the interaction of thermal
neutrons and helium three, they will obtain the first images of flows near the
onset of convection in liquid helium. Additional measurements will use the very
high temperature resolution obtainable at low temperatures and a variable
geometry technique developed in this laboratory to further characterize these
flows. Superfluid mixtures have a unique and very interesting parameter range in
which the hydrodynamic instabilities of steady convection will change character.
Using appropriate geometries, they will explore in detail these instabilities,
the way they lead to chaos, and the way they are affected by the steady
convection patterns. In a second set of measurements using the neutron imaging
technique, they will establish the helium three profiles which are caused by the
flow of heat in a superfluid mixture. By these measurements, they hope to
understand recent data which show a striking violation of current theories
describing the heat flow in these mixtures. The importance of the theories
involved--Two-fluid Hydrodynamics and Dynamic Renormalization Group Theory--
requires a careful examination of the heat flow problem in mixtures using a
direct, but non- perturbative technique such as the neutron probe.