* 8714003
* Industry/University Collaboration:  Mixtures of Polar and   Associating Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1990
* Keith Gubbins, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 03/31/1990
* USD 175,000.00

This project is aimed at developing a predictive theory for the thermodynamics
and phase equilibria of fluid mixtures in which molecular association, due to
H-bonding and complexing is important. A simple and successful theory has been
derived recently for such mixtures; this is developed for practical use in the
form of an equation of state. Fundamental aspects of the research include the
development of more realistic intermolecular force models and an extension to
multiple binding sites in a molecule. The proposed equation of state uses a
reference term that includes the effects of association as well as those of the
repulsive forces. Extensive comparisons with experimental data and with existing
equations of state are presented. In parallel, the investigators carry out both
molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo computer simulations of such fluids, in order
to test both the theory and the force models. Included in the investigations is
a study of adsorption and surface tension at fluid-fluid interfaces for such
fluids. This work is an Industry-University Collaboration between Cornell and
the Exxon Research and Engineering Company. Existing equations of state are,
almost without exception, based on the idea of a reference fluid of hard
molecules (usually hard spheres) that exhibit repulsive forces only. Such an
equation cannot describe substances in which molecular association occurs due to
strongly attractive off-center sites. Such association occurs in a wide variety
of industrially important substances. The current method of dealing with this
problem is to use the existing equations of state with the addition of the
"chemical" approximation, in which chemical reactions are postulated to account
for the association. This introduces temperature dependent equilibrium constants
into the equations. In practice, these may not be available from independent
experiments and must be fitted to thermodynamic data. This results in a method
of little predictive value, particularly for multicomponent solutions. The
proposed work is aimed at replacing such methods by a physical approach that is
soundly based in statistical mechanics and has greater predictive value.