* 8714846
* Third U.S.-Pakistan Binational Workshop on Advances in      Natural Products Chemistry, Karachi, Pakistan, January 1988
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Philip Le Quesne, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1988
* USD 25,000.00

Objectives and Relevancy: This action provides support for participation of U.S.
scientists in the third U.S.-Pakistan Binational Workshop on Advances in Natural
Products Chemistry. The Pakistani organizer of the workshop is Dr. Atta-Ur-
Rahman, codirector of the HEJ Postgraduate Institute of Chemistry at the
University of Karachi. The meeting will build on the accomplishments of the
previous workshops held in 1984 and 1986, including the significant interaction
between scientists of the two countries, and the internationally published
proceedings. Specific topics to be discussed include physiologically active
compounds from Pakistani natural sources and traditional medicinal preparations,
new methods of isolation and separation of secondary metabolites and their
natural functional role in pakistani plants, advances in the methodology of
structure determination, and synthons for new medicinal agents from Pakistani
natural products. The U.S.-Pakistan program supports workshops between
scientists of the two countries in areas where there is active research in both
countries and when collaboration can be enhanced. The project meets these
criteria. Merit: The U.S. P.I. is a well regarded scientist in his field, and
the Pakistani organizer of the workshop is internationally known and respected
for his extensive research accomplishments. The meeting is likely to bring
together the best of Pakistan's scientists in natural product chemistry and many
active scientists from the U.S., as well as some experts from Europe. It is
expected that the proceedings will be published worldwide and contribute to the
dissemination of new knowledge in this field. Funding: In addition to this
action, the workshop is expected to receive financial support from the
Governments of Pakistan and of the Federal Republic of Germany.