* 8714135
* Participation in the Ninth Inter-American Conference on     Materials Technology; Santiago, Chile; October 4-9, 1987
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1989
* Russell Drew, Science and Technology Consultants
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 03/31/1989
* USD 17,500.00

This award will help to support two workshops, one on composite materials and
another on advanced ceramic materials, to be held in conjunction with the Ninth
Inter-American Conference on Materials Technology in Santiago, Chile. The
workshops will focus on new research developments in these fields with
particular emphasis on applied research activities that are appropriate to the
Latin American setting, including the utilization of locally produced materials
as constituents of advanced composites and ceramic materials. The workshops will
also address the need for appropriate curricula that would enable more Latin
American countries to produce research and engineering personnel qualified to
work in these areas. This Ninth Inter-American Conference on Materials
Technology is the latest in a series of conferences which began in San Antonio,
Texas in 1968, as a mechanism for bringing together representatives of the
Inter-American materials research and applications communities to establish a
dialogue ranging from exchange of state-of-the-art research to field
applications of technology. In each of these conferences, there has been
substantial involvement from Latin American sources as well as strong
participation from the United States, Canada, and to a limited extent, from
other nations outside the Western Hemisphere. The workshop organizer, Dr.
Russell Drew of Science and Technology Consultants in Virginia, and the
Organization of American States, which is contributing major support to the
conference, have assembled a distinguished group of scientists from academia,
industry, and government to participate in the conferences. This grant will
partially support the participation of seven U.S. scientists and seven Latin
American scientists in the two workshops and by so doing fulfills the objectives
of the Science in Developing Countries Program to promote meetings and
communication between scientists from the developing and developed world.***