* 8714473
* IUC:  Molecular Optical Spectroscopy and Reaction Kinetics  in Plasma and Radiation-Enhanced Processing of Micro-       electronics Materials (PUI)
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1987,04/30/1990
* Masako Suto, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 04/30/1990
* USD 196,000.00

Spectroscopic data and reaction kinetics of molecules important in the plasma
and radiation-enhanced chemical processing of microelectronics materials are
investigated in this research program. Intense light sources, such as
synchrotron radiation, excimer laser, Nd-YAG laser, dye lasers, and condensed-
discharge lamps, will be used to study the optical characteristics of halogen
and metal compounds in detail. Optical emissions from excited photofragments
will be dispersed and used to identify the emitting species. The resultant data
will be used to develop new optical techniques to detect chemical species in
etching and deposition reactors. Laser or VUV induced deposition of
photofragments on surfaces will also be studied. Experimental observations will
be compared with a collaborative modeling effort performed at another
university. Optical emissions from laser excitation of molecules adsorbed on
surfaces will also be investigated in this research program. The emissions will
then be used to monitor molecules in situ on surfaces and applied to the study
of chemical reactions on surfaces. This is a joint research program involving
San Diego State University (SDSU), IBM and University of California, San Diego
(UCSD). Dr. Suto and Dr. Lee at SDSU are specialists in quantitative
spectroscopy and reaction kinetics. They have used various light sources to
measure absolute photoexcitation cross sections for many molecules and radicals
and to observe optical emissions from photoexcitation of molecules adsorbed on
surfaces. Dr. Chuang at IBM, San Jose is a specialist in the area of laser-
induced chemical etching of semiconductor materials and photon-surface-molecule
interaction dynamics. He will provide guidance for the research project at SDSU
so that the obtained data are useful for the understanding of plasma and
radiation-enhanced processes in chemical processing of microelectronics
materials. Dr. Middleman (UCSD) has made several modeling calculations of
transport phenomena occurring in etching and deposition reactors and is working
on a separate but related project. The expertise of these investigators is
unique for successfully carrying out the research program.