* 8714720
* New High Oxidation State Inorganic Complexes of Later       Transition Metals. Reaction Chemistry and Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1991
* Terrence Collins, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 05/31/1991
* USD 270,023.00

The focus of this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry Program is the chemistry of high and unusual oxidation states of
transition metals, such as copper(III), cobalt(IV) and cobalt(V). The project is
expected to result in the discovery of useful and powerful new oxidizing agents,
as well as providing biomimetic models of certain metalloenzymes which have
recently been found to contain metals in high oxidation states, such as
galactose oxidase, which contains copper(III). Square planar cobalt(III)
complexes and their anionic precursors will be studied and employed as
precursors to highly oxidized organometallic species. These complexes utilize
oxidation-resistant polyanionic chelating (PAC) ligands. Oxygen atom transfers
catalyzed by these species will be pursued especially by a search for terminal
cobalt(IV)-oxo complexes. The recently discovered copper(III) complexes which
oxidize alcohols will be studied as biomimetic models of galactose oxidase and
related enzymes and will also be used in a general exploration of the role of
copper(III) complexes in oxidation processes. Evidence will be sought for
intermediates in the oxidation of phosphine to phosphine oxide by molecular
oxygen catalyzed by osmium(VI)/(IV) systems. Ruthenium complexes of PAC ligands
will be investigated as possible catalysts for alkene oxidations by molecular
oxygen. "Thermodynamic ladders" will be developed to interrelate the formal
reduction potentials and isomerization equilibria of diastereomeric complexes of
the first thermodynamically stable nonplanar amides, and these amides will be
compared to their planar analogues. The electrochemistry in liquid sulfur
dioxide of new complexes of the highly protected PAC ligands will be explored in
a search for solution stable one-electron oxidants with formal reduction
potentials greater than 2.5 V vs. NHE. Attempts will be made also to extend the
electrochemical measurements to other solvents offering a wide anodic range.