* 8714124
* US-Ireland Cooperative Science: The Formation and           Development of Peatlands in Ireland
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Paul Glaser, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1990
* USD 16,450.00

Objective: In maritime regions at the southern edge of the Arctic, blanket bogs
have grown over large areas of sloping terrain that once supported forests. The
classic locality for blanket bogs are the highlands of the British Isles,
especially the western coastal region of Ireland, where blanket peats cover a
diversity of substrates. The numerous roads that have been built through these
blanket bogs provide a unique cross-sectional profile of the peat and underlying
mineral soil along toposequences covering many kilometers. The study of such
sequences will allow the determination of whether the blanket peat originated
simultaneously over the entire slope or progressively upslope by drainage
impedance near the base of the slope. Field work in Ireland will be conducted in
close cooperation with faculty from Trinity College, who have extensive
experience with Irish peatlands. The effect of Holocene climatic changes on the
formation, development, and stability of these peatlands will be examined along
toposequences where the local effects of changing slope, soil, and hydrology may
be distinguished from the more regional influence of climate. In particular the
relation of peat growth to prehistoric forest clearance will be studied, as well
as the relationship of peat erosion to human disturbance over time. The U.S.
investigators Dr. Paul H. Glaser and Dr. Herbert E. Wright will collaborate in
this research with Dr. W.A. Watts and Dr. Paul Dowding of Trinity College,
Dublin. Relevance: It is the objective of the U.S.-Ireland Cooperative Science
Program to promote mutually beneficial research cooperation and to enable U.S.
scientists to take advantage of special research opportunities. This award
fulfills that objective by enabling Dr. Glaser and Dr. Wright to spend two years
in collaboration with Irish scientists with complementary expertise. Merit:
There is an excellent prospect that the proposed research will result in a
significant contribution to scientific knowledge. The principal investigators
are respected, productive scientists, who will be working with other
international experts in this field. The work plan is sound and the budget is
reasonable. Funding: This award will not duplicate other funding.