* 8714009
* Internships in Parallel Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Jack Dongarra, Argonne National Laboratory
* Contract
* Robert G. Voigt
* 12/31/1989
* USD 116,500.00

A pilot internship program in parallel computing is proposed for university
faculty and post-doctoral researchers. The objective is to have a one-year
postdoctoral participant and a five month senior participant in the pilot
program. These researchers would have the opportunity to master techniques and
to conduct research in parallel computing. Both participants would be encouraged
to work closely with Argonne computer scientists who are experts in parallel
computing. The participants will learn about various debugging tools and
performance measurement techniques available for parallel programs, study
languages used to program multiprocessors, and work on the design of algorithms
to exploit parallelism. We would expect the senior person to have a well defined
research project in mind with the expectation of completing computational
results on some of the parallel machines in the Advanced Computing Research
Facility at Argonne. We would expect the postdoctoral participant to review the
wide range of applications being carried out on multiprocessors, and to propose
and work on his or her own new applications. Of course, the participants will
have hands-on experience with a variety of differnet advanced-computer
architectures. The proposed internships will provide an excellent opportunity
for university members to acquire knowledge and experience in the area of
parallel computing and to conduct research on state of the art equipment. We are
helpful that the internship program will attract faculty members who wish to
kkep abreast of new technologies, both for their own research and for the
benefit of their students.
---------------------------------------------------------------- The revised
budget for the proposal reduces the requested amount by eliminating ANL staff
costs, by decreasing the number of participants and by reducing the direction of
the project from three years to one year. In its present form the proposal
represents a pilot internship program for one senior and one junior researcher.
If this program is successful, it would be expanded to include new participants.