* 8714075
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Mechanisms of          Evolutionary  Change in Development
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1990
* Rudolf Raff, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 06/30/1990
* USD 10,000.00

This award will enable Professor Rudolph A. Raff from Indiana University to
collaborate with Professor Donald T. Anderson at the University of Sydney,
Australia. During two six-week visits by Dr. Raff to Sydney over a two-year
period, various aspects of the early life history of two congeneric species of
sea urchins having different pathways of development (with and without larval
stage) will be examined. Studies will entail: (1) establishment of cell lineages
by injection of fluorescent cell markers; (2) manipulations of isolated
blastomeres in order to investigate cell committment and to determine the
effects of nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio on cell cleavage dynamics; (3) preparation
of cDNA libraries and monoclonal antibody probes; (4) examination of
developmental variation in morphologically distinct populations of single
species; and (5) comparative embryological descriptions of several species of
directly developing sea urchins. The purpose of this research is to investigate
the mechanisms for evolutionary change in early developmental processes using
two congeneric species of sea urchins having different pathways of development
as a model system. The research will benefit from the rather different, but
complementary backgrounds of the U.S. and Australian investigators. Dr. Raff
provides expertise on molecular and developmental aspects, while Dr. Anderson's
background is in invertebrate evolution and development. The study organisms are
unique to Australia and the resources at the University of Sydney allow for easy
collection and culturing of the sea urchins.