* 8714182
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Permian Paleoclimate,  Glacial Regime and Sea Level Fluctuations on the            Ice-Dominated, Australian-Gondwana Shelf
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Ross Powell, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 06/30/1989
* USD 10,795.00

This award will enable Dr. Ross D. Powell and an assistant from Northern
Illinois University to collaborate with Dr. Maxwell R. Banks of the University
of Tasmania, Australia and Dr. Victor A. Gostin of the University of Adelaide,
Australia during four months of field work in Australia. The project will focus
on describing the glacial marine sedimentary deposits of Tasmania and the Sydney
Basin in the Tasman Fold Belt of eastern Australia and on interpreting these
sediments in terms of their different depositional environments. Standard
sedimentological and glacial` geological techniques will be used for collecting
data at outcrops during field research and for subsequent laboratory analysis.
Results of this research will further our understanding of the glacial
conditions and fluctuations, climatic regimes, and major sea level fluctuations
during the Carboniferous-Permian glaciation of Gondwana. This will allow
reevaluation of a classic model of ice shelf sedimentation. The work will
benefit from the complementary skills of the U.S. and Australian researchers.
Dr. Powell's background in modern glacial marine settings, when coupled with the
geological field experience of Drs. Banks and Gostin, provides the kind of
expertise needed to properly interpret the complex glacimarine sedimentary
record of the region.