* 8714960
* Dissertation Research: Metabolic Correlates of Hylid        Locomotor Performance and Acoustic Response
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Martin Feder, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 06/30/1989
* USD 4,797.00

A current hypothesis in ecological physiology states that differences among
animal species in the physiology of exercise arose in response to natural
selection on the capacity to sustain behavior. Animals that typically undergo
high levels of sustained behavior are expected to have high capacities for
aerobic energy production, whereas animals with low aerobic capacities are
expected to sustain only low intensity behaviors and must rely on anaerobic
metabolism to fuel higher levels of activity, which are not sustainable. For
example, species differences in activity metabolism among anuran amphibians have
been related to differences in locomotor, foraging, predator avoidance, and
calling behavior. Previous studies did not distinguish among adaptive hypotheses
(i.e. recent selection on behavior and physiology) and alternative hypotheses
for differences in physiology, such as differences in body size, correlation of
physiology with some unexamined trait, or constraints imposed by phylogeny. The
proposed research will test for physiology-behavior correlations in a group of
closely related species, the North American treefrogs. The adaptive significance
of variation in physiology will be assessed by determining the fraction of
variation due to phylogeny and body size and the fraction attributable to
variation in several variables that have demonstrated or adduced effects on
survival and reproduction (e.g., locomotor performance and calling behavior).
Correlations that persist after removing the effects of body size and phylogeny
will be deemed to represent the results of recent selection.