* 8714494
* Upgrading the Computational Instrumentation of the Inter-   University Consortium for Political and Social Research
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/1987,11/30/1991
* Jerome Clubb, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 11/30/1991
* USD 646,458.00

Funds are being furnished for the purpose of upgrading the computational
instrumentation of the Inter.university Consortium for Political and Social
Research. The goals are to improve the functional capacity of the consortium as
a facility for research and instruction in the social sciences; to improve its
capacity to provide services in a more effective fashion; and to prepare it to
capitalize on advances in computer and information technology as such advances
occur and are deemed applicable. Through this effort, inflationary and other
pressures to increase membership fees will be eased, and consequently the number
of colleges and universities able to subscribe to the consortium will continue
to include the less well.to.do and more geographically remote along with the
large, more centrally positioned institutions. The overall effect will be to
maintain and perhaps even increase the number of social scientists with access
to the consortium, and to open new windows of opportunity for exploitation of
the consortium's vast data holdings .. thus serving to expand and sharpen our
understanding of societal processes. The consortium is an organization with over
320 college and university affiliates. It acts as a repository for and
distributor of computer.readable data amenable to social scientific analysis.
Such data include, but are not limited to, data collected under NSF grants that
are deemed useful for secondary analysis (the consortium is the preferred
repository under the Division of Social and Economic Science's new archiving
policy), and public use data files placed under consortium distributorship by
federal statistical agencies. Data from a great many other sources also form
part of the consortium's multifaceted archives. Through the work of the
consortium, technical and economic obstacles to data use and data sharing are
substantially reduced, the use of data is effectively democratized, the utility
of costly data collections is increased, and greater research and instructional
"payoff" is gained. Perhaps even greater benefits accrue from the value of the
consortium as a resource for scientific verification and replication, and from
its intrinsic character as a provider of quantitative information on social
phenomena from more than one perspective. The recommended award will furnish the
funds needed to replace obsolete computer equipment and capitalize upon emerging
technologies in such areas as optical scanning, optical storage, and data
transmission. Other approaches to storing, transmitting, and otherwise accessing
archived data (CD ROM and LAN, for example) will be explored and utilized in
accordance with the judgment of experts.