* 8714495
* The Impact of Lawsuits Against Public Participation
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/1987,11/30/1991
* Penelope Canan, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 11/30/1991
* USD 179,000.00

While there is a sizable and growing literature in the social sciences on
litigation and the transformation of disputes, it has largely focused on the
pressing of claims between individuals or organizations. In instances when
research has focused on the government as an actor, typically the emphasis has
been on its reactive role as a defendant. In contrast, little is known about the
role and impact of government when it decides to pursue civil damage lawsuits
against private parties. This area of litigation is particularly valuable for
scientific study not only because it is an important piece of the landscape of
disputing but also because subsequent litigation by parties may be affected by
their understanding and perception of government's decision to sue. Drs. Canan
and Pring examine the use of lawsuits by government in a particularly important
sphere of activity at the intersection of law and politics: when civil damage
lawsuits are filed against citizens who have asserted their views on public
policy issues. These disputes are instances of transformation from the political
to the legal arenas. By focusing on the dynamics influencing their initiation,
processing, and outcomes, these investigators are able to assess the potential
chilling effects of these lawsuits on future citizen participation (of these
defendants and others). Their work is guided by the hypothesis that such
lawsuits are more than instances of simple dispute transformation insofar as
they function to reprivatize conflicts made public by virtue of citizens' public
grievance. Specifically, Drs. Canan and Pring undertake a two-phase project: The
first phase involves ten case studies using systematic open-ended interviews.
This phase explores within- party social characteristics, between-party social
dynamics, and extra-legal outcomes that occur as the dispute moves from private
to public attention and from political to judicial arenas. The second phase, a
comparative survey, seeks to measure quantitatively the dynamics of disputing
and to test the chilling effects of such suits on the local polity. The sampling
design calls for defendants from 100 lawsuits, 100 persons involved but not
named in those suits, and 100 persons engaged in comparable activities but with
no knowledge of such litigation. Rigorously meshing qualitative and quantitative
data, the work of Drs. Canan and Pring should add to our scientific
understanding of the uses and consequences of legal action in an area which to
date has only been sporadically and anecdotally addressed.