* 8714451
* Reactivity and Lone Pairs:  Proton Transfer and             Stereoelectronic Effects
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Charles Perrin, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas C. Farrar
* 06/30/1991
* USD 351,640.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is in the
subfield of organic reaction dynamics, and supports research of Dr. Charles
Perrin, University of California at San Diego, into the effects of non-bonding
electron pairs and their spatial orientation on basic aspects of chemical
reactivity such as proton transfer rates and stereoelectronic effects. It is
important to understand these effects and the rates of ultrafast mechanistic
processes, since it is their cumulative effect that is perceived in the
macroscopic world as slower chemical reactions. The availability of nitrogen or
oxygen lone pairs facilitates rapid proton transfer, occurring on a picosecond
time scale, along with other important processes such as diffusion, rotation
about single bonds, and solvent reorganization. According to current theories of
stereoelectronic control, reactivity is increased when a lone pair is
antiperiplanar to a leaving group or to an incoming nucleophile, but recent
experimental results raise questions about this generalization. The first
research area is a continuation of ongoing analyses of proton exchange processes
in amides and of rotation in ammonium ion, in order to probe the role of
hydrogen bonding in solvating ions. Extensive use is made of modern NMR
instrumentation, which permits measurement of proton exchange kinetics under
equilibrium conditions. A focal point here will be the phenomena of substrate
selectivity and positional selectivity in encounter-controlled proton transfer
from amidinium ions to hydroxide. Evidence will be sought for a heretofore
unreported concerted mechanism for amine-catalyzed proton exchange in water. In
a second research area, attempts will be made to determine the preferred
stereochemical relationship between lone pairs and reacting bonds. Experimental
systems will include kinetics for methoxy exchange in ortho esters and amide
acetals, and of dehydration in epimeric gamma-amino allylic alcohols. An
alternative approach will involve product studies in the hydrolysis of amidinium
ions and guanidines, and in the reactions of amidinium, imidatonium, and iminium
ions with nucleophiles. These experiments are designed to clarify the conditions
under which stereoelectronic control might be operative and how much it
contributes to increased reactivity.