* 8714504
* Workshop on "Women's Contributions to Future Directions of  Ecosystem Science"; May 23-25, 1988; Pingree Park, Co.
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1988,08/31/1989
* Kathleen Galvin, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 08/31/1989
* USD 41,466.00

A workshop will be conducted on future contributions of women to the field of
ecosystem science. It is anticipated that ever greater numbers of qualified
women will be required in political and intellectual leadership roles in
ecosystem science over the coming years, primarily because the task of
sustaining the world's natural resources is greater than the currently available
manpower. While the number of women entering the field of ecosystem science has
increased substantially over the past ten years, the number of women attaining
leadership positions does not reflect this increase. It is critically important
that women be cognizant of new directions in ecosystem sciences and that they be
prepared to assume a greater role in contributing to scientific leadership. The
goal of this workshop is to prepare women for these future leadership roles.
Specific objectives are (1) to present current research in the context of future
directions of ecosystem science, (2) to inform women about future research
directions and funding opportunities, and (3) to foster communication among
women ecologists. The organizers for this effort are excellent young scientists.
The facilities of Colorado State University are more than adequate and are
conducive to a useful workshop. Funding at the level requested can be
enthusiastically recommended.