* 8714799
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Theoretical and           Experimental Studies of Low Energy LMIS Focused Ion and     Droplet Beams
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Daniel Cutler, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1991
* USD 8,730.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. Paul H. Cutler,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, and Drs. Pierre Sudraud and Ben
Assayag of the Laboratoire de Microstructure et de Microelectronique - CNRS,
Bagneux, France. These researchers will study the application of low-energy
focused ion and droplet beams to microelectronics and microfabrication. While
focused ion beams have been studied for direct exposure or mask-making for the
fabrication of microelectronic devices at size ranges down to 0.1 micrometer,
charged droplet beams have not been so studied. These beams, which if produced
by an electrohydrodynamic liquid metal source can be as small as 1 nanometer in
diameter, may be useful for mask repair and microcircuit modification. This
study will address unanswered questions about droplet beam-surface interactions,
beam stability, and effects of source parameters on beam performance. Both
theoretical and experimental approaches will be used. The French laboratory has
excellent facilities for the experimental study of focused ion and droplet
beams. These include an ingenious double scanning electron microscope and ion
column synchronized for simultaneous operation and, therefore, real-time study
of the ion beam. Theoretical expertise will be brought to the project by the
U.S. investigator. The complementary expertise of the collaborators, as well as
the sophisticated equipment available for the study in France, will assure a
mutually productive effort. This work may have important implications for the
fabrication and repair of microelectronic components and integrated circuits.