* 8714352
* Genetic Engineering of Taqi Restriction Endonuclease
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1990
* Francis Barany, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/1990
* USD 100,000.00

This project will employ a new approach to understanding protein function and
design. Protein secondary structure elements fold into precise functional
regions (domains), which interact in a three dimensional array to provide
biological activity. Insertion of two amino acids into a protein causes a small
perturbation which has a certain radius of influence within the three
dimensional structure. By introducing two-amino acid insertions into the linear
sequence, one can scan the length of a protein and determine which regions might
comprise functional domains and which regions act as the hinges that connect the
domains. This proposal presents a general method for constructing such
insertions in proteins by operating at the level of the DNA sequence that codes
for the TagI restriction endonuclease. The aim is to understand the specificity
of DNA sequence recognition by TagI endonuclease, and to engineer mutants with
altered sequence recognition. Wild type endonuclease, a so called "allosteric
activation mutant", and a "canonical site nicking mutant" will be overproduced,
purified, and characterized in vitro with respect to sequence specific binding,
dissociation, facilitated diffusion, and cleavage, using a variety of DNA
substrates. Using a unique TagI endonuclease clone, additional two-codon
insertion mutations will be introduced into the enzyme, and characterized by
both in vitro and in vitro assays. These studies will help to define the
sequence specificity domains, and allow for further targeted saturation
mutagenesis of those domains. The new recognition sequence of these mutant
proteins will be determined using a uniquely labeled DNA substrate. In
collaboration with Dr. John Anderson, purified TagI will be co-crystalized with
its cognate oligonucleotide for determination of its three dimensional
structure.