* 8714244
* Single Cell Microinjection and Image Analysis in            Developmental Biology
* BIO,BIO
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1990
* Peter Bryant, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/1990
* USD 347,000.00

This proposal is for a Biological Facilities Center for Developmental Biology.
The University of California proposes to establish and/or upgrade its facilities
for single. cell microinjection, image analaysis, flow cytometry, and
high.pressure liquid chromatography. The single.cell micro injection facility
will be used to mark individual cells in order to follow their movements and
subsequent fates under various experimental conditions; to inject marker dyes to
investigate gap.junctional cell communication; to inject antisense RNA or
antibodies to interfere with the synthesis orfunction of specific proteins; and
to inject DNA for genetic transformation experiments. Two microscopy
workstations with image processing and analysis capabilities will be
established: one for fluorescence microscopy and one for differential
interference contrast microscopy. The fluorescence microscope will be fitted
with a confocal laser scanning device that allows the direct collection of
digitized fluorescence images with virtual elimination of out.of.focus noise as
well as greater contrast and resolution than conventional imaging techniques.
Both workstations will feed data to a Microvax facility for computerized
analysis of gels and autoradiograms using a video densitometer for overall
qualitative analysis and a soft laser scanning densitometer for detailed
quantitative studies. The flow cytometry facility will be upgraded by adding an
additional laser tube and a computerized data management system. A high.pressure
liquid chromatography system will also be established.