* 8714242
* Neurosciences Research Computing Network
* BIO,BIO
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1990
* Terrence Dolan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1990
* USD 363,000.00

This Biological Facilities Center proposal requests funds to support the
purchase of a distributed, networked-based computer system that will be used to
enhance the research efforts of l8 neuroscientists and to provide new
opportunities for collaboration among these investigators. The research programs
that will use the proposed distributed computer system can be subdivided into
three groups: anatomical and physiological investigations on the development of
the auditory and visual systems, psychophysical examination of perceptual
processes in humans, and the acoustic, physiological, and behavioral examination
of speech processes in humans. All the investigators in the three research
groups described above have a common interest in understanding basic
communication systems in humans. Although their methods vary in detail,
relatively few general approaches are represented, and many of the same
technical problems are being addressed. Although similar computing needs exist,
individuals are meeting these needs with a variety of strategies. The resulting
mixture of hardware and software makes substantive interaction difficult. The
proposed system, which will put common hardware and software components into
each laboratory, will link all the laboratories in a high-speed network. This
will significantly enhance substantive collaborative interactions among the
investigators by offering, use of identical stimuli and/or stimulus synthesis
software, comparative data analysis techniques, and shared data bases.