* 8714657
* The Electrochemical Preparation and Study of Strong         Carbon-, Nitrogen-, and Oxygen-Centered Bases
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1987,11/30/1991
* M. Hawley, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* robert miller
* 11/30/1991
* USD 126,950.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of organic electrochemistry. The thrust of this experimental
program is to investigate the electrochemical preparation of strong Bronsted
bases in solution and to study their electrochemical properties and their
reactions. Specifically, Professor Hawley and his students will (1) develop
electrochemical methods for the preparation of the conjugate bases of weak
Bronsted acids; (2) determine the redox potentials of these anions; (3) study
the reactions of these anions with electroinactive substrates; (4) determine the
regioselectivity of deprotonation of ambident Bronsted acids as well as the
kinetics of isomerization of the regioisomers; (5) examine the regioselectivity
associated with protonation of the ambident electrogenerated bases; and (6)
explore the preparation of electrogenerated bases that give rise to
hypercatalytic activity. These studies are important to our knowledge of the
thermodynamic properties and reaction kinetics of radical ions and related
species that lead to the development and refinement of general theories of
electron transfer. Additionally, Professor Hawley's studies should be of
importance to the continued development of organic chemistry and in increasing
our understanding of many reactions that are extremely useful in the synthesis
of new materials.