* 8714519
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Unified Theory and        Associated Computer Software to Estimate Parameters of      Animal Populations by Capture-Recapture
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1990
* David Anderson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1990
* USD 9,152.00

This award will support collaborative research between Profs. David Anderson,
Kenneth Burnham and Stephen Buckland of Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
and Dr. Jean-Dominique Lebreton of the Section of Ecological Systems Studies of
the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Montpellier, France, on the
statistics of animal population studies. The objectives of this work are to
produce a unified theory for studies of animal populations; to produce
generalized analysis software to allow parameters affecting animal populations
to be functionally related to each other, and to verify this work by analysis of
some large data sets. A unified approach will be brought to the statistical
methods underlying open-population capture-recapture studies, thus facilitating
comprehensive analysis of large sets of data. This approach is based upon the
viewing of population study methods as primarily studies of cohort survival
processes, and consequent focus on survival rate, rather than population size.
New approaches to experimental design and data analysis will be developed on
this basis. The French collaborators have acquired considerable important data
on animal populations in Europe, which will be correlated with similar data
available for the U.S. Comprehensive computer software will be developed by both
groups and applied to the available data sets. This research could have
important implications in the study and management of wild animal populations.