* 8714407
* REU Supplement: Beds of Particles Fluidized by Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1991
* Thomas Lundgren, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 03/31/1991
* USD 252,000.00

This project is for experiments and analysis of fluidized beds. The topics to
be studied are wakes and turning couples as fundamental mechanisms of
fluidization; determination of the most probable arrangements of fluidized
particles in a bed; experimental and numerical studies of stable cross-stream
arrays of spheres confined to move in two dimensions; development of an
empirically based theory of the effective density of a fluidized suspension and
the decompositions of the force on a particle into buoyancy plus drag;
experimental verification of the nonlinear theory of kinematic waves with
particular attention to smoothing and shocking of rarefaction and compression
waves as a function of the Richardson and Zaki exponent; and the analysis of
transitions to aggregative fluidization (formation of bubbles) based on
generalizations of recent work of Foscolo and Gibilaro, together with
experimental tests. The experiments are to be based on the construction and
instrumentation of several return flow fluidization columns. The columns shall
be constructed so that the gap size can be changed. The smallest gap will
confine the motion of particles to two dimensions. The instrumentation is to be
based on the Kodak Spin Physics high speed video and motion analysis system.
This video is different than others in that it is based on digital imaging and
there is a provision for interfacing with a computer. Hence, the data one might
want for the interpretation of images is actually available in a digitized form
suitiable for direct statistical analysis.