* 8714047
* U.S.-Finland Cooperative Research: Comparison of National   Versus Local Development Efforts in Small Towns in Finland  and the U.S.
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Harley Johansen, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1990
* USD 14,178.00

This award supports Dr. Harley Johansen and a graduate student from the
University of Idaho to collaborate with Dr. Arvo Naukkarinen of Oulu University,
Finland, in a comparative study of community development in Finland and the U.S.
The objective of their research is to understand better the process of business
growth in rural communities and how various development strategies can enhance
this process. Rural community development in Finland and the United States has
similar goals, but in each country development is pursued by significantly
different strategies. This collaborative research will examine how Finland's
centralized program of regional planning policy has worked to stimulate economic
development of rural communities, and how this kind of external assistance and
funding compares with the predominantly local development efforts found in
American small towns. Research will involve data collection in Finland to
replicate a study conducted in the U.S. among a national sample of 100 small
towns that were surveyed in 1981 and 1986. Economic development in rural
locations is an important goal among most countries today. A variety of
strategies for economic growth in peripheral regions has evolved along with a
greater understanding of the complexity of development problems. This research
will provide insights into how the process of mobilization and promotion of
growth in small towns works, how external help can create growth in less
developed areas which do not have local resources for development, and whether
external funding and assistance can create preconditions for sustained growth.