* 8714944
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research on Interacting Particle    Systems and Hydrodynamic Limits
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1988,03/31/1991
* Joel Lebowitz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 03/31/1991
* USD 13,330.00

This award supports cooperative research in the mathematical analysis of
interacting particle systems between a group of U.S. scientists headed by Joel
Lebowitz of Rutgers University and five Brazilian mathematicians: E.D. Andjel,
P.A. Ferrari, J.A. Galves and R.H. Schonmann of the Universidade de Sao Paulo
and M.A. Vares of the Instituto de Matematica Pura e Aplicada (IMPA) of CNPq in
Rio de Janeiro. The researchers will continue and strengthen a five year long
collaboration in the analysis of interacting particle systems and their
hydrodynamical limits, an active field of research in mathematics and physics.
These latter limits relate interacting particle systems to hydrodynamical
partial differential equations and are useful in understanding those equations.
This collaboration has been very fruitful, resulting in the publication of at
least eleven papers on interacting particle systems. The original motivation for
this field arose from stochastic mechanics where the objective was to use
probabilistic models in the study of the temporal evolution of systems with
classical equilibrium states. Such models appear naturally, for example, as
algorithms for making Monte Carlo simulations of Gibbs measures. It soon became
clear that the same techniques could also be applied to models from biology,
ecology, and the behavioral sciences. Future work by the researchers will center
on obtaining more information about interacting systems, including relating
microscopic and macroscopic fluctuations, extending previous results to the case
where large deviations with unusual scalings are expected, and applying these
results to more general settings, for example, particles moving under
deterministic dynamics and interacting Brownian motions or random walks.