* 8714442
* The Influence of DNA Sequences on Recombination in          Mammalian Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Peter Moore, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1990
* USD 100,000.00

Mammalian cells have the ability to carry out homologous recombination. The
frequency of recombination in chromosomal genes, however,is low and in gene
transfer experiments its detection is usually obscured by high levels of non-
homologous recombination. A variety of plasmid systems have now been developed
that allow quite detailed studies of homologous recombination in cells grown in
culture. The systems have been further developed assays for recombinational
activity in extracts prepared from nuclei of such cells can be done. We have
begun to purify an enzyme activity capable of strand exchange between homologous
DNA molecules. It is believed that the process of recombination is essentially
similar in all organisms. From studies on simpler organisms the general features
of recombination have been determined to be: an initiation event, possibly
involving preference for specific DNA sequences; strand exchange between
homologous molecules; mismatch correction ofthe resulting heteroduplex; and
finally resolution of the synapsed molecules. We propose to study the enzymology
and DNA sequence specificity of the first two stages of this process, initiation
and strand exchange. Two types of DNA sequences, Z DNA and the hypervariable
minisatellites, have been implicated in promoting recombination in eukaryotes.
We have designed a pair of plasmid/phage vectors that can be used to assay
recombination in the neo gene and allow specific sequences to be inserted at
homologous sites in each substrate to determine their effect on recombination. Z
DNA and mini-satellite core repeats will be inserted into these vectors and
their effects on recombination frequency determined by transfection into human
EJ cells. It is thought that the presence of such sequences may stimulate the
initiation and/or pairing events during recombination. The effects of these
sequences on recombination will also be examined in the in vitro assay catalyzed
by extracts prepared from EJ nuclei. The achievement of homologous recombination
in mammalian cells is of significant interest to geneticists who wish to
understand basic genetic mechanisms for what insights it would give. Also, the
ability to replace genes in their correct position in the mammalian genome would
have both fundamental and commercial importance.