* 8714550
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research: Biophysical Characterization of Type 3 Copper Sites
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1988,04/30/1993
* Jack Peisach, Yeshiva University, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/1993
* USD 14,000.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. Jack Peisach of
Yeshiva University and Dr. Benedetto Salvato of the University of Padova, Italy.
The objective of the researchers is to study, using various spectroscopic
techniques, the structure of copper proteins in the determination and control of
biological functions. Copper is one of the most widespread and versatile
transition metals with a functional role in living systems. Many metallo-
proteins related to a variety of biological functions such as oxygen transport,
electron transfer, hydroxylation and oxidative catalysis, involve copper in some
manner. Copper proteins share a general structural feature that allows them to
modify the polarity of active sites, control the hydration of substrates, and
play an important role during the course of catalysis. Yet, copper proteins vary
widely in complexity of molecular architecture as well as in their mechanism of
enzyme catalysis. However, copper sites may be classified into three broad
categories depending on their spectroscopic characteristics. The investigators
plan to study one of these categories (Type 3 copper sites) and the behavior of
these sites during the interactions with other copper centers in multi-copper
enzymes. The research program will involve the study of hemocyanin, laccase and
ceruloplasmin, which contain Type 3 copper units in different molecular
environments and have different enzymatic activities. The hemocyanin research
group in Padova is one of the leading centers for the comparative study of this
protein, having combined expertise in its physical, biological and biophysical
chemistry, whereas at Yeshiva University there is unique instrumentation and
expertise relevant to elucidation of structure from information obtainable by
spectroscopic methods.