* 8714628
* Advanced Computation Techniques in Finite Element Analysis  for Engineering Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Paul Wang, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* George K. Lea
* 02/29/1992
* USD 672,749.00

The computer is an indispensible tool for engineering analysis and design with
the finite element being a major computational method which is used in many
applications, e.g. structural analysis, heat transfer, electro-magnetic fields.
There are numerous packages available; NASTRAN, MARC, etc., which are analysis
codes using finite element techniques. Although these packages are written in a
modular form to accommodate program changes, extensive manual coding
implementations are still necessary for the incorporation of new analysis
features. Many of the manipulations encountered during code implementation can
be handled by symbolic computation which can deal with mathematical functions as
a whole aside from the arithmetic operations. The benefits are: reduced manual
tedium, increased reliability, and shorter response time to changes or addition
of new features for analysis. A group of researchers from civil and electrical
engineering join with computer scientists will address the incorporation of
symbolic computing into finite-element analysis. In particular, the following
will be carried out: 1) automatic equation derivation and code generation for
finite element analysis, 2) automatic finite element code generation for vector
and parallel processors, 3) application of such algorithms for structures, heat
transfer, electromagnetic field applications, 4) design and implementation of an
advanced user interface for engineers utilizing high resolution graphics.