* 8714603
* Centers for Prokaryotic Genome Analysis and Molecular       Phylogeny
* BIO,BIO
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1990
* Carl Woese, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1990
* USD 400,000.00

This proposal requests funds to support two distinct, yet highly interacting,
biological facility centers: the Center for Prokaryotic Genome Analysis (CPGA)
and the Center for Molecular Phylogeny (CMP). The CPGA is being created to
facilitate the acquisition and analysis of the DNA sequences determined for the
genomes of selected archaebacteria as well as an eubacterial photosynthetic
organism. The Center will be interdisciplinary, its scientists being drawn from
molecular biology, microbial physiology, computer science, information theory,
and engineering. The Center's activities will have a major impact on the
understanding of prokaryotic evolution, molecular biology, and physiology. The
Center will also be heavily involved in developing computer.based systems for
the handling of sequence data. The CMP is an interdisciplinary group whose
members share interests in evolutionary biology and use biochemical and
molecular biological methods to examine the phylogenies of diverse sets of
organisms. In addition to nucleic aid sequencing, core members have nationally
recognized epertise in other biochemical methods, especially electrophoresis and
immunology. The two groups have two areas of common interest..evolution and the
mechanics and methodology of sequence analysis. The focus of these facilities
will be on genome mapping, gene sequencing, and the determination of
phylogenies, and examination of the sequence evolution of ribosomal RNA genes.
The instrumentation requested will enable the University of Illinois to become a
center for excellence in molecular evolution.