* 8714761
* Regulation of Expression of the Nitrogen Fixation (nif)     Genes of K. Pneumoniae
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Sydney Kustu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 11/30/1991
* USD 208,600.00

A study will be made of the mechanisms that regulate expression of the nitrogen
fixation (nif) genes of the enteric bacterium K. pneumoniae. Emphasis will be
place on an in vitro study of the protein product of the nifA gene (designated
NIFA), which is required to activate transcription of the nif operons. The goal
will be to determine the mechanism by which NIFA activates transcription. An
assay for the activity of NIFA in crude preparations will be developed based on
its ability to stimulate expression from the nifHDK promoter (the promoter for
the structural operon encoding nitrogenase and nitrogenase reductase) in a
coupled in vitro transcription-translation system. This assay will be used to
purify the NIFA protein. NIFA activity will be characterized in a transcription
system and as a DNA- binding protein. Genetic evidence suggests that NIFA is
synthesized in an active form-that is, a form which stimulates expression of the
nif operons-but that it can be inactivated by the product of gene nifL (NIFL) in
response to the presence of fixed nitrogen or oxygen. Once purified, an attempt
will be made to demonstrate inactivation of NIFA by NIFL in vitro and to
determine the basis for this inactivation. Ammonia is the preferred source of
nitrogen for most microorganisms. When grown in the absence of ammonia or other
preferred sources, bacteria like K. pneumoniae develop the ability to obtain
utilize atmospheric nitrogen (nitrogen fixation). The enzymes that catalyze this
process are encoded by a cluster of genes known as the nif system. This project
will examine the mechanism by which the nif genes are activated. Emphasis will
be placed on characterizing the protein product of a gene within the nif cluster
(nifA) whose expression is essential for activation of the other nif genes. This
study will shed light on the critical regulatory events that allow bacteria to
convert atmospheric nitrogen into biologically useful forms.