* 8714911
* Mechanisms of Organometallic Mediated Additions,            Oligomerizations and Polymerizations of Unsaturated         Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1991
* John Eisch, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas C. Farrar
* 12/31/1991
* USD 186,340.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports research
of Dr. John Eisch, State University of New York at Binghamton, which is aimed at
elucidating the reaction mechanisms of chemical transformations of unsaturated
hydrocarbons mediated by the synergistic action of main-group and transition
metal organometallics. Though this work focuses on identifying the step-by-step
reaction sequences and their rates in such processes, the long-term goal of
research in this area of chemical dynamics is to understand how chemical
reactions can be directed to give maximum yields of useful products with a
minimum expenditure of energy and resources. Starting from an extensive
physical-organic study of organo- aluminum reactions, this project will probe
three fundamental and interrelated aspects of Ziegler-Natta-type metal-promoted
catalysis: (1) the kinetics and stereochemistry of the transition metal-
catalyzed hydrometallation of olefins and acetylenes, a process fundamental to
the synthesis of higher olefins from ethylene; (2) an analogous study of the
carbometallation of such unsaturated hydrocarbons, a process central to the
oligomerization and polymerization of olefin monomers; and (3) the metallation
of organic substrates by transition or main-group catalysts. This grant
continues research previously supported by Foundation grant CHE-8308251.