* 8714471
* U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research: Parallel          Scientific Computation
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1991
* David Kuck, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1991
* USD 21,394.00

This award will support ongoing collaborative research in parallel scientific
computation between two groups of U.S. and French scientists, based at the
University of Illinois Center for Supercomputing Research and Development (CSRD)
and at the French National Institute for Information Science and Automation
(INRIA). The U.S. group will be led by Drs. David Kuck and Ahmed Sameh; on the
French side the projects will be led by Professor J. Lenfant, (INRIA-IRISA) and
Professors A. Lichnewsky and W. Jalby, both at INRIA/Paris. The joint research
will focus on three topics: 1. Parallel algorithms -Dense Matrix computations
-Finite element and sparse matrix computations -Combinatorial optimization
methods 2. Architectures -Memory organizations and hierarchies -Pipeline
processors 3. Compile-time optimization -Parallel detection -Optimization for
memory hierarchies -Fine grain parallelism in architectures This research joins
two groups of outstanding U.S. and French researchers in scientific computation.
INRIA is widely recognized for its concentration of expertise in computer
research, automation, mathematics and scientific computing; it provides an
excellent combination of fundamental research with industrial collaboration in
these areas. This award will allow fruitful collaboration to continue in the
timely and important area of parallel computing.