* 8714095
* Investigation of Aerosol Formation and Heterogeneous        Chemistry on a Molecular Level: The Reactivity, Stability,  and Photochemistry of Small Clusters of Atmospheric Interest
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1991
* A. Castleman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 03/31/1991
* USD 620,875.00

The formation and chemical role of aerosols is an important aspect of
atmospheric chemistry that is still relatively poorly understood. Considerable
knowledge and insight into the formation of aerosols, their subsequent growth,
and the chemical transformations that occur within or that are catalyzed by
aerosols can be gained through an investigation of gas-phase molecular clusters.
Information on clusters is crucial for determining the stability of
prenucleation embryos and formulating theories of gas-to-particle conversion.
Clusters also provide a medium through which a detailed understanding of
heterogeneous reactions, including the role of metal ions and photochemical
processes on chemical conversions can be obtained on a molecular level. This
research project involves an experimental study in three main areas which will
serve to elucidate important aspects of the above mentioned processes. These
include investigations of: (1) the kinetics of association (clustering)
reactions and the subsequent reactions of clusters with atmospheric molecules;
(2) the thermochemical properties of clusters; and (3) photochemical reactions
within clusters, their photodissociation spectroscopy and the dissociation
dynamics of clusters. The first investigation is to be performed with a
temperature variable selected ion flow tube which includes an electric drift
field. The second is conducted with a high pressure ion source mass spectrometer
and the third employs a molecular beam- intracavity laser apparatus with ion
energy and mass analysis capabilities. Additionally, computational efforts
involving ab initio quantum mechanics, classical trajectories, RRKM models, and
phase-space theory are planned in order to augment the experimental phases of
the program.