* 8714032
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Species Recognition    and Fertilization in Corals of Australian Barrier Reefs
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Richard Miller, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 02/28/1991
* USD 16,000.00

This award will enable collaborative studies between Dr. Richard L. Miller of
Temple University and Dr. Russell Babcock, Mr. Peter Harrison and Ms. Bette
Willis of the James Cook University, Townsville, Australia related to the multi-
species, mass spawning of corals on the Great Barrier Reef. Eggs and sperm
collected during mass spawnings at several locations will be subjected to
laboratory observation and manipulation to determine (1) what prevents self-
fertilization in the sperm/egg bundles released by hermaphroditic corals and (2)
the mechanisms which prevent hybridization when large numbers of species spawn
simultaneously. The timing of egg maturation in relation to spawning will be
determined by direct observation. Sperm chemotaxis, and its species specificity,
will be evaluated by observing the behavior of sperm when exposed to single and
multiple species' egg extracts. The mass multi-species spawning of corals is an
important phenomenon in the ecology of the Great Barrier Reef. The Australian
investigators, as part of the Coral Reproduction Group at James Cook University,
provide the project with extensive working knowledge of the Great Barrier Reef
corals, as well as excellent laboratory and support facilities. Dr. Miller is a
seasoned developmental biologist and a leading specialist on sperm-egg
chemotaxis.