* 8714058
* U.S.-Western Europe Cooperative Research:  Cultural and     Legal Variables Affecting General Deterrence of Drunk       Driving
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1989
* John Snortum, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1989
* USD 11,535.00

This award will enable Dr. John R. Snortum, Claremont McKenna College, to
collaborate with: Drs. David Riley, The Home Office, London, England; Hans
Klette, University of Lund, Sweden; and Wolf Middendorff, Max Planck Institute
for Foreign and International Criminal Law, and Gunter Kroj, Federal Highway
Research Institute, Cologne, both from the Federal Republic of Germany. They
will attempt to test the validity of general deterrence theory in preventing
alcohol-impaired driving in three countries in Western Europe and the United
States. General deterrence itself cannot be measured directly, so indirect
methods will be used to assess its effects. Dr. Snortum has devised a method of
"contextual analysis" to measure the complex of cultural, legal, moral, and
social variables that impinge on drivers in drinking-driving situations. The
researchers will determine the relative influence of legal threat, moral
commitment, and respect for formal law in preventing deterrence in the study
countries. The research will also determine the legal origins and empirical
impact of laws concerning blood alcohol limits for drivers in the countries.
Each of the researchers has already contributed to understanding these issues
and this award will help bring them together for concerted scientific effort in
dealing with a serious social problem.