* 8714951
* Studies of the Synthesis and Properties of Group IVA        Element-Phosphorus Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/1987,10/31/1991
* Arlan Norman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 10/31/1991
* USD 251,499.00

This project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
will involve the synthesis and characterization of heterocyclic compounds
containing a variety of main-group elements such as P, Si, Ge, As, Al, and Se,
and especially compounds known as azanes which will contain nitrogen and P, As,
Al, S or Se. These compounds are of interest because they are expected to have
unusual conductivity and electronic and ferromagnetic properties. Some of the
compounds to be synthesized will contain cavities designed to bind selectively
such small molecules as carbon dioxide, carbon disulfide or oxygen. The
molecules to be studied will include linear and macrocyclic azanes of P, As, and
Al based on designed 1,4-functional units which will be synthesized
stereoselectively and with specific coordinating properties. Multiple donor site
cavity-containing (cavitand) cyclophosphazanes, uniquely capable of stabilizing
lambda4-E-lambda4 and lambda5-E-Lambda5 P-E-P bridge bonds (where E is a main-
group atom), as well as fractional P..P bonds, will be examined. Using the
trimethylsilylphosphine synthon and opposed-polarity functionality based
reactions, new group IV element (E=Si, Ge) cyclodienephosphines,
phosphabenzenes, and Group IV element cage molecules will be synthesized. These
will provide frameworks in which to study pi electron delocalization in
1,4-E,P-heteroatom rings, intramolecular transannular E-P interaction in cages,
and cage encapsulation and/or coordination of atoms or small molecules.