* 8714684
* Elementary Particle and Nuclear Theory (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1993
* Arthur Swift, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Boris J. Kayser
* 05/31/1993
* USD 962,514.00

This project continues work on a variety of topics in electroweak interaction
physics and theory and phenomenology of CP violations, with emphasis on
stimulating new experimental analyses. It also includes work on dynamical models
of the quark mass matrix within a given generation, as a first step
investigating various aspects of the strong-coupling standard model, such as the
effect of radiative corrections. An extensive theoretical analysis of various
hypernuclear transitions, now underway, will be compared with data on the A-
dependence of these processes. A program on studies of the strong interactions
will continue. An improved derivation of the effective Lagrangian starting from
the basic QCD theory of quarks and gluons is being attempted. Other studies
involving the so-called anomalous sector of the theory, and an effort to present
a unified phenomenology of all low energy processes are planned. An attempt to
compute bag mode amplitudes to higher order in the QCD coupling constant via a
mode-truncation approach has begun. Theoretical work in other areas will
continue. A calculation to determine the effects on the gravitational field due
to the presence of matter at nonzero temperature is nearing completion, and
future work will apply this procedure to the early universe. A model of quark
matter in a diquark phase is under investigation. Research continues on the
solar neutrino problem. Recent work on the source of baryon-number violating
interactions motivates a re-examination of past studies of baryogenesis.