* 8714954
* Workshop to Synthesize Recent Research on Nevada del Ruiz   Volcano; Manizales, Colombia; November 29 - December 4, 1987
* O/D,OISE
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1989
* Stanley Williams, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1989
* USD 4,639.00

This award partially supports several U.S. and Latin American participants in a
regional workshop about the Nevada del Ruiz Volcano, to be held in Manizales,
Colombia in November, 1987. The workshop is being organized by Dr. Stanley N.
Williams of Louisiana State University, with assistance from staff of the newly
established volcanological observatory in Manizales. Additional support is being
provided by COLCIENCIAS, the Colombian equivalent of NSF, and by other sources.
The aim of the workshop is to develop a comprehensive model of the Nevada del
Ruiz volcano by reviewing and integrating the various data accumulated by
geologists, geophysicists, and geochemists since the catastrophic 1985 eruption
of this still active volcano. The workshop should result in a scientifically
valuable synthesis which will improve our understanding of what is occurring
beneath the surface of this unusual volcano. Prior to its eruption, Nevada del
Ruiz was not classified as "high risk"; more than 18 months after erupting, it
is continuing to demonstrate an unusually high level of activity compared to
similar volcanoes which have erupted in the past few years. By holding the
workshop in the vicinity of the volcano itself, visiting scientists will benefit
directly from on-site observations and the opportunity to interact with local
scientists to develop mutually beneficial collaborative projects. Scientific
attention often diminishes soon after the spectacle of an eruption. Holding the
workshop now will help to maintain momentum in the research and the development
of long-term volcano monitoring strategies that should lead to increased
geophysical understanding of volcanic processes in general.