* 8714661
* Integration of Process Design and Control
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/1987,05/31/1991
* Thomas McAvoy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1991
* USD 155,784.00

The overall goal of the planned research projects is the integration of process
design and process control. Specifically, the development of economically viable
approaches to be used at the design stage of a process to analyze for
controllability/operability problems. The PI plans to look at three areas: (1)
the effect of process structure on process controllability/operability, (2)
correlation of transient performance with process parameters (available from
steady state data) and (3) the use of composition measurements to improve
distillation column control. Chemical plants can be viewed as being built up
from a small number of basic structures. Irrespective of the type of unit or
units involved, this structure affects overall process performance. A defining
set of basic structures might include series-parallel, recombining, and recycle
structures. The latter are widely used in the chemical industry for economic
reasons and can have a drastic effect on both the open loop and the closed loop
performance of a system. The goal of this research is to determine the effect
that recycle processing configurations have on process
operability/controllability and to correlate this effect with design parameters.
Two examples will be used to illustrate the control problem caused by recycle
structures: evaporator configurations and recycle systems involving distillation
towers, heat exchangers, and industrial reactors. Control system performance
will be related to key design variables such as throughput, holdup, heat
integration, and recycle ratio of mass and/or energy. The PI has developed a
method using a dimensionless number called the relative disturbance gain (RDG)
which when used in conjunction with the calculated relative gain (RGA) can be
employed to assess a process' transient behavior based on steady state
information. In essence what the RDG measures is whether the closure of other
loops in a multiloop system produces favorable or unfavorable interaction in
terms of transient performance of the loop under consideration. Ultimately the
PI plans to relate correlating parameters to key design variables and to
integrate RGA, RDG and measured peak properties into an expert system.