* 8714496
*  International Symposium on Tunnelling for Water Resources   and Power Projects, New Delhi, India, January 19-27, 1988   Group Travel Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Norman Lasca, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1988
* USD 41,250.00

Objectives and Relevancy: This project supports participation by 15 U.S.
scientists and engineers in an international symposium on tunneling for water
resources and power projects, to be held in New Delhi January 19-22, 1988. The
symposium will cover several topics, including engineering classification of
rock mass for tunnelling, studies of hydraulic tunnels in hard rock, weathered
and fractured rock and swelling rocks, geometric and hydraulic design of
tunnels, evacuation, support and reinforcement, tunnel lining for stability,
monitoring and back analysis of tunnels, and case histories. The U.S.-India
program supports participation by U.S. scientists and engineers in major
international meetings in areas of interest to the two countries. The project
meets this criterion. Merit: The topics of the conference are important to the
U.S. where new concepts of pumping and power generation result in changing
stress distribution in tunnels and lining, creating a need for improved
tunneling methods and designs of tunnels. The topics are also important to India
where major water and hydroelectric projects have been completed or are under
construction including the single largest tunnel ever built. The selection of
the U.S. participants will be done by the P.I., and by representatives of the
U.S. National Committee on Rock Mechanics. The symposium is likely to increase
cooperation between U.S. and Indian scientists and engineers in this field.
Funding: None other than this action