* 8714108
* Studies of the Optimal Use and Economic Value of Weather andClimate Information
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1991
* Allan Murphy, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/1991
* USD 355,247.00

The overall objective of this research is to investigate the optimal use and
economic value of weather and climate information. Static and dynamic models of
decision-making situations that are sensitive to weather and/or climate
information, together with appropriate economic, models, will be used to study
these use/value issues. The research focuses on the formulation, analysis, and
application of such models, and on the evaluation of the use and value of
various types of meteorological information - and the assessment of
quality/value relationships for such information - in particular decision-
making problems. Specific objectives of the research relates to important
extensions of previous work including: (a) formulation and application of
decision-making models in situations involving the simultaneous consideration of
short-term and long-term strategies and/or short-term and long-term strategies
and/or short range and long-range information; (b) the analysis of the effects
of decision makers' risk preferences on the use and value of meteorological
information; and (c) the development and application of methods of obtaining
market level estimates of the overall value of such information to producers and
consumers. Both prototype and real-world applications will be examined. This
project is important because it should provide more realistic models of
weather/climate sensitive decision-making situations, more credible results
concerning the use and value of meteorological information, and more reliable
characterizations of quality/value relationships for such information.