* 8714518
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Micro-Structure of        Solid Particle Aggregates
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1991
* USD 9,800.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professor Ponisseril
Somasundaran of the Henry Krumb School of Mines, Columbia University, New York,
and Dr. B. Cabane, Solid-State Physics Laboratory, University de Paris-Sud,
France, on the subject of mechanisms of colloid formation and dispersion. Small
angle neutron scattering (SANS) will be applied to the study of colloidal
aggregates at the sub-micron size level, with the intent of determining
dimensions and growth characteristics of aggregates, and on the thickness of
submicronic adsorbed layers. By improving our understanding of the mechanism of
colloidal dispersion, the development of a basic theory of colloidal aggregation
may be brought closer to realization. The expertise of the U.S. and French
groups is complementary. The U.S. group has considerable experience in the study
of aggregate formation in mineral oxides, and in the solution chemistry of this
and other systems; the French collaborator has considerable experience in SANS,
and its application to polymer/micelle interactions. Through previous visits,
the French collaborator is familiar with the equipment available in the U.S.
researcher's laboratory. The proposed cooperation provides the U.S. researcher
with an opportunity to use equipment and techniques for SANS not readily
available to him in the U.S. This work could have important applications in such
industrial processes as water treatment and mineral processing.