* 8714049
* U.S.-Australia Joint Seminar: Quaternary Extinctions /      Sydney, Australia / August 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1989
* Richard Klein, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 09/30/1989
* USD 21,250.00

This award will support a seminar, "Quaternary Extinctions," organized jointly
by Drs. Richard G. Klein of the University of Chicago, Richard Wright of the
University of Sydney, Australia and Atholl J. Anderson of the University of
Otago, New Zealand. Twelve participants from the U.S. will join 12 scientists
from Australia and three from New Zealand between 6 and 11 August 1988 at the
University of Sydney. The purpose of the seminar is to understand why massive
faunal extinctions occurred in both Australia and the Americas near the end of
the Pleistocene. Participants will discuss: (1) the chronology of extinctions,
as revealed by geomorphic or other proxy evidence and especially by radiocarbon
dating; and (2) the archeological, paleobiological, geochemical, and geomorphic
evidence for a coincidence between extinctions and climatic change or between
extinctions and important events in human prehistory, including the first
appearance of people in the Americas and Australia. A wave of bird extinctions
that swept the Pacific in late prehistoric times provides an interesting
potential analog for the late Pleistocene extinction events, and its pertinence
will be addressed particularly by New Zealand participants. This joint
U.S.-Australia-New Zealand seminar will enable the first in-depth comparison
between the American and Australian extinction events. To date, American and
Australian/New Zealand scholars working on this question have, for the most
part, worked in isolation from one another. Interregional comparisons will
undoubtedly provide new insights as to whether the extinction of large numbers
of animal species near the end of the Pleistocene resulted primarily from human
activity or from climatic change.