* 8714888
* Dissertation Research: A Field-Test of Damage-induced       Alkaloidal Defenses in Wild Tobacco
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1987,10/31/1989
* Ian Baldwin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 10/31/1989
* USD 13,653.00

Herbivore-induced defense in plants is well documented, but field evidence that
these induced changes protect plants is lacking. The damage-induced increases in
leaf alkaloid content in wild tobacco will be studied. Currently enough
mechanistic information on the workings of this induced defense system to
propose a field test of its ecological significance is available. With a
previously tested experimental design that involves artificially damaging two
groups of wild Nicotiana repanda plants growing in south-Texas, hormonally
supressing the alkaloidal respose in one group, measuring the amount of natural
herbivory sustained by induced and suppressed plants and their respective
alkaloid coantents, the following three questions will be addressed: 1) are
these damage-induced alkaloid levels functioning as an antiherbivore defense? 2)
is this induced- defense costly in terms of reproductive output? and 3) is there
variation in herbivory between different populations of wild tobacco, and is
this variation correlated with variation in the benefit (reduced herbivory) and
cost (reproductive costs) of this induced defense? This project is one of the
few field studies of induced plant resistance which simultaneously measures both
leaf chemistry and herbivore performance. Moreover, it is the first time the
efficacy of an induced defense has been studied by inhibiting the defense in
damaged plants, and the first project to measure the reproductive cost of
defense.