* 8714963
* A Symposium and Workshop, Entitled Federal Reserved Lands inNorthwest Alaska: Needs and Opportunities for Long-term     Research and Environmental Monitoring
* O/D,OPP
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1989
* David Hopkins, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tammy Butler
* 01/31/1989
* USD 30,000.00

The project plans to conduct a combined symposium-workshop as part of the annual
meeting of Arctic Division, American Association for the Advancement of Science,
Anchorage, Alaska, September 23-26, 1987. The subject of the symposium-workshop
relates to the needs and opportunities for long-term research and monitoring on
the federally reserved and managed lands in northwestern Alaska. The Alaska
National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980 (ANILCA, P.L. 96-487)
established extensive tracts of federally-reserved lands, large areas of which
are considered to be in the Arctic as defined by the Arctic Research and Policy
Act of 1984 (ARPA, P.L. 98-373). The existence of these federally administrated
lands offer the opportunity to collectively plan and conduct research related to
the assessment and understanding of global change and resource utilization and
conservation, and to provide educational and training opportunities for and
involvement of local residents. The meetings will involve invited participants
representing agencies, universities, residents, private and public interest
groups, and draw upon the participants at this AAAS Conference. Topics to be
discussed include the physical and biological environments, approaches to
environmental monitoring and views of research from local, public, and agencies
perspectives. A publication synthesizing the results of both the symposium
presentations and discussions and workshop analyses will result. This project is
directly related to the planning and implementation phases of the Arctic
Research and Policy Act, and particularly on questions of resource utilization
and development and the use of the Arctic as a natural laboratory.