* 8714511
* Chemical and Physical Studies of Hydrothermal Plumes at the Mid-Ocean Ridge Axis
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1990
* Richard Von Herzen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 06/30/1990
* USD 191,664.00

Hydrothermal venting along axes of seafloor spreading in the eastern Pacific
gives rise to bouyant plumes of warm water which rise and mix with ocean bottom
waters. These plumes are an important measure of hydrothermal output and
dispersal of both heat and chemicals, and an exploration guide for new vent
fields, yet little is known about their physical structure or the chemical
processes which occur within them. Drs. Mottl and Von Herzen have developed a
method for measuring and characterizing the hydrothermal flux of heat and
chemicals on the scale of an individual vent field, using a 50 m high moored
instrument array suspended above the submersible ALVIN via flotation. With this
device, which was tested successfully on the East Pacific Rise in 1984, they can
measure the three-dimensional temperature field of a plume and collect two-
dimensional profiles of flow velocity, conductivity, pressure, and particle
concentration via light transmittance, plus samples of water containing
suspended particles of black sulfide "smoke" from various heights above the
vents. They propose to apply this technique to a series of contiguous vent
fields along a 10 km segment of the Juan de Fuca Ridge, as part of an integrated
program of physical, chemical, and geologic observations their objectives are to
characterize the physical and chemical structure of the vent field plumes, to
compare these with plume theory, to estimate the chemical and heat fluxes from
the vent fields and along the total segment due to both localized hot spring and
diffuse warm spring venting, to identify chemical processes occurring within the
plumes, and to determine the importance of these processes for the fate of the
hydrothermal input. They will also compile a geologic map and description of the
vent field and associated massive sulfide deposits.