* 8714701
* International Conference on Telephone Survey Methodology:   Charlotte, NC, November 8-11, 1987
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1989
* Fred Leone, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Larry Whittaker
* 01/31/1989
* USD 17,500.00

Sample surveys are the dominant mode of collecting information about developed
societies. In addition, the methodology is one of the most frequently employed
techniques in the disciplines of sociology, political science, economics, and
psychology. Recent trends in survey-taking have led to an increase in the use of
the telephone as the means of contacting respondents: the increased cost of
face-to-face interviewing, the rapid development of computer-assisted telephone
methodology, the increased coverage of the household population by telephone,
and the development of statistical modeling techniques with social science data
requiring the collection of more information concerning errors of measurement,
in contrast to sampling errors. The locus of activity in telephone survey
methodology has spread from the commercial sector, where it began, to both
academic and governmental sectors. Geographically, attention has spread from the
United States to most Western European countries and Australia. Replications of
methodological experiments are now taking place in these different environments,
and country- level differences in results are sometimes appearing. Despite these
important social science developments throughout the world, there are few
opportunities for researchers in this area to interact, and their work is
scattered throughout scores of different journals, research reports, and office
memoranda. No conference devoted to the international scope of the problems
associated with telephone survey research has previously been held, and to
remedy that situation such a conference is now being organized under the joint
sponsorship of the American Association for Public Opinion Research, the
American Statistical Association, and the International Association of Survey
Statisticians. The conference is designed for a multidisciplinary audience, with
support from multiple sources: government agencies, commercial survey firms,
private foundations, and registration fees. The National Science Foundation is
one contributor to the total funding picture, along with the U.S. Bureau of the
Census, which has transferred funds to NSF for this purpose.