* 8714611
* A Conference Session on New Field Research Guidelines for Vertebrate Animals; Rockefeller University, NYC; October 8, 1987
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1988
* F. Barbara Orlans, Scientists Center for Animal Welfare
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/1988
* USD 14,227.00

Current national policy requires wildlife investigators to submit research
protocols that involve vertebrate animals to institutional Animal Care and Use
Committees (ACUCs) for review of animal welfare concerns. As of fall 1987,
criteria for this review will include research guidelines on mammals, birds,
amphibians and reptiles, and fish, under development by professional field
research societies. This conference session provides a unique opportunity for
representatives of the societies and ACUCs to meet to 1) make known new wildlife
guidelines to the people who will be using them, 2) help familiarize current
ACUC members (who are mainly laboratory animal investigators) with field
research needs, 3) address ethical comparisons of the study of wild and
laboratory animals, and 4) help educate field investigators to the institutional
committee review process. Conference participants will be ACUC members, field
and biomedical researchers, veterinarians, and ethicists. The conference is
organized by the Scientists Center for Animal Welfare in cooperation with
Rockefeller University. The proceedings will be published. This project provides
an important and cost-effective forum for discussion and dissemination of
information on animal research ethics. The investigator, panelists,
organizational auspices, and dissemination plans are excellent. Support in the
amount of $14,227 is granted.