* 8714830
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Mechanisms and Regulation of Ionic Transport by the Chloride Cells of Fish
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Jose Zadunaisky, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1991
* USD 6,365.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Jose A. Zadunaisky of
the New York University Medical Center, and Dr. Brahim Lahlou of the Faculte des
Sciences, University of Nice, in the area of ionic transport. In particular,
mechanisms and regulation of ionic transport by the so-called "chloride cells"
of fish gills will be studied. In those species that permit it, changes from a
fresh to a salt water environment, or vice versa, cause the secretion by these
cells of chlorine ions, which modifies the electrical conductance of the skin of
the gills to change. The hormonal process which regulates this secretory change,
as well as how that change facilitates adaptability, is little understood. In
this study, skin cells from the gills of an adaptable species will be isolated
and mounted in test chambers, in which their electrical properties can be
monitored. Hormones and other factors will be added to the cell preparation, and
the response of the cells to various changes in the composition of the fluid in
which the cells are immersed will be studied. The French and American groups
have a long history of fruitful collaboration in this field. The results of this
research may provide new information concerning basic processes of ion transport
and membrane permeability, and may also provide a better understanding of the
regulation of absorption by complex epithelia in animals in general.