* 8714716
* Development of a General Transfer Theory for Semi-Bounded   Medium with Discrete Scatterers
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1989
* Ramat Shabahang, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1989
* USD 29,225.00

Often in engineering analysis compromises must be made, i. e. approximations are
used since the full or complete problem does not lend itself to rigorous
mathematical analysis. However, with the current explosive growth in
computational power many of these formulations can be significantly improved
with a view towards numerical solution rather than seeking an approximate
analytical solution. A good example is the formulation of and the solution of
the transport equation which occurs in such diverse application as remote
sensing, communications, computer imagine representation, and radiative heat
transfer. The General Transfer Equation will be derived based on Multiple
Scattering Theory for waves propagating in a semi-bounded random medium
containing randomly distributed discrete scatters with nonuniform background.
Computational technique will be developed to solve this multiple scattering
problem. Futhermore, comparisons will be made with existing limiting approximate
solutions, e.g. Distorted Born Approximation and the classical Transfer
Equation. The research will be carried out at an undergraduate institution by
two faculty members from different fields of engineering; mechanical and civil
engineering utilizing supercomputer resources at a NSF supercomputer center.
This limited support of short duration will serve to stimulate more creative
environment for cross-disciplinary engineering research to explore new
computational methodologies.