* 8714924
* Expedited Award:  Thermotropic Behavior and Novel           Applications for Polymer Liquid Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Shaw Chen, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 01/31/1989
* USD 30,000.00

Research Summary: One important form of fluid microstructures is the so-called
liquid crystal. In this project, highly pure polymer liquid crystals will be
synthesized under supercritical fluid conditions for the investigation of
thermotropic behavior and for novel applications in laser systems. A sound
understanding of structure-property relations will permit molecular design of
polymer liquid crystals for desired applications in a number of technological
areas involving interfacial and transport processes. Uniqueness/Innovation: The
proposed methodology, if successful, is innovative in that polymer liquid
crystals can be prepared cost effectively in high purity to meet the needs of
high energy laser technology. To achieve the optical homogeneity as demanded in
laser technology, it is proposed to carry out polymerization and purification
simultaneously. Polymer liquid crystals reported in the literature have been
consistently prepared in liquid solvents, where the subsequent removal of
remaining solvent and unreacted monomer and the refinement of molecular weight
distribution are both difficult to accomplish. Significance/Technical Impact: An
economical approach to the preparation of polymer liquid crystals in high purity
should have profound impact on a number of technological areas. The synthesis of
highly selective biologically active membranes, controlled administration of
highly soluble drugs, thermally sensitive gas and vapor barriers, photoactive
polymers, are examples of applications with potential benefits from the results
of this proposed study. The emphasis on polymer liquid crystals in relation to
the laser technology should have immediate contributions to the induction of
non-linear optical effects including frequency conversion, four wave mixing,
laser beam self-focusing, and electro-optical switching. The ultimate goal of
this project is to furnish structure-property relations based on extensive
analyses of highly pure liquid crystal samples, thereby providing a sound basis
for molecular design for existing and new applications.