* 8714972
* Design and Performance Evaluation of 0.1 um                 Gate-Length Modulation-Doped FET's for Millimeter-Wave      Amplification
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Mukunda Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur R. Bergen
* 09/30/1990
* USD 217,866.00

This research is concerned with the design and realization of 0.1 Um gate-length
modulation-doped field-effect transistors (MODFET's) for signal amplification
above 100 GHz. The research to be carried out at PSU will involve device
structural design dictated by the desired mm- wave performance, and electrical
measurements and characterization of completed devices. The task of device
fabrication will be undertaken by the G.E. Electronics Laboratory, Syracuse, NY,
and test samples will be made available to the PI for studies at no additional
costs to NSF. The research would examine the quality of the pseudomorphic
InGaAs, and the associated heterostructure layers in the proposed n-
AlGaAs/InGaAs/GaAs MODFET structure. A low Al-molefraction in the Si- doped
AlGaAs has been very effective in reducing the deep DX centers that usually
cause the well known I-V collapse in the conventional n- AlGaAs/GaAs MODFET's.
The high performance of the 0.25 Um gate-length pseudomorphic MODFET's studied
under the current project has been main motivation to the proposed 0.1 Um gate-
length MODFET structure which is expected to provide useful power gain in the
100 to 200 GHz range. The proposed research recognized the importance of
optimized materials growth for the desired MODFET structure, and a thorough
investigation of the material and device electrical properties in order to
achieve a better understanding of the device operation.