* 8714630
* Mathematical Sciences: Orthogonal Polynomials and Some of   Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Mourad Ismail, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 08/31/1989
* USD 81,856.00

Several specific topics will be addressed in this project. The first of these
concerns Wilson polynomials - these are a general class of polynomials governed
by four parameters and are related to classical hypergeometric functions
(appearing as seems of the initial segments of these functions). Work will be
done on asymptotic expansions of polynomials as certain of the parameters
increase withound bound. The work is motivated by problems in combinatorial
design. A second area of research concerns continued fraction expansions of
quotients of hypergeometric functions. This idea can be traced back to work of
Gauss and continues to be of interest because convergent positive continued
fractions are Stieltjes transforms of the positive measure against which the
denominator polynomials are otrhogonal. Ultimately one will want to invert the
transform to find the elusive measure. Another direction represents a
continuation of the principal investigator's work on Askey-Wilson integrals.
Some remarkable applications of special functions have been made to the
evaluation of complex definite integrals. The Askey-Wilson example was one in
which an unexpected combinatorial evaluation was discovered. The current work,
in collaboration with Dennis Stanton, will seek to flesh out the fundamental
ideas behind this discovery. They will begin with a particularly simple class of
polynomials and seek to connect the integral of products of these polynomials
with basic identities found in decompositions of multipartite graphs.