* 8714668
* Nonlinear Functional Analysis and Partial Differential      Equations; U.S.-Italy Program
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Louis Nirenberg, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1990
* USD 15,250.00

This award supports a program of research exchanges by leading mathematicians
from the U.S. and Italy, under the direction of Prof. Louis Nirenberg of the
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Prof. Umberto Mosco of the
University of Rome. The aim is to continue excellent scientific contacts already
established and to broaden them with short research visits, primarily to centers
in Rome, Pisa, Florence, Pavia, Milan, Trento, Bologna and Trieste. These
research visits will focus on the theory and application of nonlinear
differential equations with particular emphasis on: 1) fully nonlinear second
order elliptic partial differential equations; 2) the use of capacitory methods
in the study of regularity and variational stability in elliptic equations and
variational inequalities; 3) periodic solutions of Hamiltonian systems and of
other problems involving nonlinear vibrations; and 4) the further development of
techniques from nonlinear functional analysis, calculus of variations and
algebraic topology to attack nonlinear problems. This award adds an
international component to currently supported work of Prof. Nirenberg. The
quality of the participants is very high and the topics are at the forefront of
nonlinear analysis. Furthermore, many of the topics arise from applications to
mathematical physics, nerve conduction problems, elasticity, fluid dynamics, and
consequently have deep and substantive connections to other scientific fields.