* 8714673
* Carbonyl Sulfide and Carbon Disulfide Emissions from        Temperate and Boreal Forests Along an Acid Rain Gradient
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* John Hobbie, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 06/30/1991
* USD 472,657.00

Carbonyl sulfide and carbon disulfide are two long.lived sulfur gases that play
an important role in the chemistry of the stratosphere and the energy budget of
the earth. The magnitudes of the various sources of these two gases are not well
established but current analysis suggests that: 1) biotic and not industrial
sources appear to dominate the global carbonyl sulfide and carbon disulfide
inputs to the atmosphere; and 2) upland soils appear to be a major biotic
source. A large fraction of the upland soils of the world are covered by
forests. In the Northern Hemisphere, many of these forests are receiving high
inputs of sulfur and nitrogen associated with acid rain. It may be suggested
that there is a potential relationship between the magnitude of anthropogenic
inputs of sulfur and nitrogen to forest ecosystems and the magnitude of carbonyl
sulfide and carbon disulfide emitted from these systems. The temperate and
boreal forests that are under the influence of acid rain may be an important
source of carbonyl sulfide and carbon disulfide to the atmosphere. This project
is concerned with measuring carbonyl sulfide and carbon disulfide emissions from
forest soils along an acid rain gradient in North America and to test the idea
that the sulfur and nitrogen inputs to these forests in part control the
carbonyl sulfide and carbon disulfide emissions.