* 8715882
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Nonlinear Internal Waves  in Rotating Fluids
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1991
* W Melville, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1991
* USD 13,862.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professor W.K. Melville,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Dr. Dominique Renouard of the
Institut de Mecanique de Grenoble, France. The subject of this work is the
propagation of nonlinear internal waves in rotating systems. Long nonlinear
internal waves occur commonly on ocean coasts, sea straits, and fjords. These
waves are generated by flows, such as tidal flows, over various kinds of
topography. However, there is at present no detailed agreement between the
available experiments on these waves, and results of numerical simulation. To
understand this problem, the proposed work will involve an investigation of
waves generated in a rotating channel in the laboratory, and the development of
theoretical models to describe the observations. Flows past islands or
constrictions in rotating channels will also be studied. The French and U.S.
collaborators have been in informal contact on the subject of the proposed
research for a considerable time, and have carefully prepared the joint effort
to be pursued. The Coriolis Laboratory in France, at which much of the work will
take place, is a unique facility. The expertise of the U.S. investigator, on the
other hand, will contribute to the design and conduct of the experiments, and
the development of numerical solutions for comparison with theory. This work may
have important effects on our understanding of tidal flow and coastal erosion.