* 8715133
* U.S.-Italy Joint Seminar on the Political Science of Cultureand Politics in the Italian Republic, 1948-1988; Bellagio,  Italy; July 4-8, 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1989
* Samuel Barnes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/1989
* USD 9,154.00

This award will support a workshop on Italian culture and politics from the
years 1948-1988. The workshop has been jointly organized by Prof. Samuel H.
Barnes of the University of Michigan and Prof. Marzio Barbagli and Prof.
Gianfranco Pasquino, both of the University of Bologna, Italy. Few countries
have changed as dramatically as Italy over the past forty years. Migration and
economic growth have altered demographic patterns and created a vastly changed
society. Membership in the European Community and increased secularization and
education have brought about important changes too. This workshop will focus on
the evaluation of the continuity and change in Italian culture over the period,
as they have had an impact on the political system. The participants will
examine the relationship between cultural patterns and the functioning of the
political system. They will address the question of how continuity and change in
Italian culture and subcultures relate to changes in the political orientations
of mass publics and of elites and non-elites in politically relevant
institutions. Numerous national surveys as well as unobtrusive methodologies
such as content-analysis, interpretation of representative documents and
proceedings, personal observations, the historical record itself, and the like
will be used in gathering data for position papers. The organizers are
distinguished scholars who have contributed much to the conceptual, theoretical,
and methodological underpinnings of the proposed workshop. The workshop has the
potential to increase our understanding of the relationship between broad
cultural and more narrow political concerns and to reassess the way we look at
complex political systems and processes.