* 8715145
* U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research: Mathematics and   Computational Questions in Fluid Mechanics and Combustion
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1992
* David Hoff, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 10/31/1992
* USD 20,150.00

This award will support collaborative research in applied and computational
mathematics between two groups of U.S. and French scientists, based at the
University of Indiana at Bloomington and the French National Institute for
Information Science and Automation (INRIA). The U.S. group will be led by
Professor David Hoff; on the French side the project will be led by Dr. Bernard
Larrouturou, INRIA, Sophia-Antipolis and Dr. Roger Temam, Laboratoire d'Analyse
Numerique, University of Paris-South. The research will focus on a number of
problems concerning reacting and nonreacting fluid flows. The project is
subdivided into the following areas: 1. Navier-Stokes equations and turbulence
2. Numerical methods for reaction - diffusion systems and combustion problems 3.
Reacting and nonreacting compressible flows 4. Flows of collisionless plasmas
and the Vlasov-Maxwell Equations This research joins two groups of outstanding
U.S. and French applied mathematicians. INRIA is widely recognized for its
concentration of expertise in computer research, automation, mathematics and
scientific computing; it provides an excellent combination of fundamental
research with industrial collaboration in these areas. This award will allow
fruitful collaboration to continue in the important area of fluid mechanics and
combustion theory.