* 8715005
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Molecular Precursors To   Refractory Transition Metal Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1991
* Leonard Interrante, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1991
* USD 14,400.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. Leonard Interrante
of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and Dr. Patrick Cassoux of the Laboratory
for Coordination Chemistry of CNRS, Toulouse, France, on the chemistry of
transition metal compounds. Molecular and polymeric precursors to selected
transition metal silicides, carbides, and nitrides will be synthesized and
studied. The objective of this work is to increase our fundamental understanding
of the pyrolysis chemistry of potential organo-metallic and coordination
compound precursors and the relationship of this pyrolysis chemistry to
molecular structure. Various materials may be inserted into the organometallic
derivatives of the pyrolytically reacting constituents. The effect of different
materials on the temperatures at which these derivatives decompose, and on the
composition of the solid reaction products, will be studied, using both thermal
analysis methods and by the identification of the pyrolysis products. Particular
emphasis will be placed on the silicides of tungsten, molybdenum, and other
refractory metals, but additional investigations of the carbides and nitrides of
Ti, Zr, and Hf will also be made. The U.S. and French collaborators will
continue joint efforts begun several years ago. The French collaborator has
considerable experience in the area of transition metal coordination chemistry
and overall, the group in France has analysis experience and equipment
complementary to that available at the U.S. institution. The refractory metal
compounds to be considered are of importance in evolving semiconductor
technologies. Their low-temperature pyrolytic deposition, which could be made
possible as a result of this research, would be of considerable significance.