* 8715473
* U.S.-Italy Joint Symposium on Processing and Manufacturing  Science of Polymeric Matrix Composite Materials;            June 6-10, 1988, Capri, Italy
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,06/30/1989
* John Kardos, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/1989
* USD 17,750.00

This award will partially support a symposium jointly organized by Prof. John
Kardos of Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri and Prof. L. Nicolais of
the University of Naples, Italy on the topic of processing of polymeric matrix
composite materials. In recent years, the use of composite materials has
expanded from aerospace applications to consumer product industries. Many
consumer products must be produced in large volume and at relatively low unit
cost, not to mention the fact that aerospace manufacturers are also sensitive to
the leverage that low unit cost has on expanded applications. Low unit costs in
turn are associated with short production cycle times and high production
yields. In this context, management of the curing, forming, and shaping
processes for composite materials represents as significant a change to the
materials and manufacturing organizations as the impact the technology has had
on the design development functions. This symposium, jointly supported by the
National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Italian National Research Council
(CNR), will bring together leading researchers from both industry and academia
to discuss advances and current problems in the processing of these materials,
thus helping to address manufacturing process operations in both the consumer
product industries and in those industries in which composite materials are
utilized in high performance primary structural applications. Because of current
worldwide interest in composite materials, this symposium is both timely and of
potential benefit to the U.S. and Italy and, furthermore, should increase
collaborative interactions between U.S. and Italian researchers.