* 8715027
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Biochemical and Genetic   Dissection of Tn10 Transposon Termini
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1988,12/31/1993
* Nancy Kleckner, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1993
* USD 13,750.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. Nancy Kleckner of
Harvard University and Dr. Olivier Huisman of the Institut Pasteur, Paris, in
the area of genetic analysis of mutant proteins. The objective of this work is
the structural and functional dissection of DNA sequences at the ends of a gene
segment, which is capable of moving from place to place in the chromosomes of an
organism. Such a gene segment is called a transposon; the particular transposon
to be studied in this work is called Tn10. Transposition of transposons leads to
mutation, and the mutations which occur are to be studied by both genetic and
biochemical methods. In the latter, assays for the binding of important proteins
to specific DNA sequences should reveal the effects of specific mutations on
known processes, and could show new intermediates in the reaction which might
accumulate due to intermediate mutational steps. The French collaborators have
considerable experience in genetic analysis. Additional materials, as well as
expertise in use of an in vitro biochemical system for analysis of the Tn10
transposition, will be brought to the project by the U.S. investigator. The
knowledge of complex interactions between DNA and proteins that is expected to
result from this research could lead to enhanced progress in our understanding
of the processes of the generation, and therefore of alteration, of life itself.