* 8715270
* Dissertation Research: Chloroplast DNA Phylogenetics of     Madiinae (Asteraceae)
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1987,04/30/1990
* Donald Kyhos, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 04/30/1990
* USD 11,100.00

Dr. Donald Kyhos of the University of California at Davis will supervise
graduate student Bruce Baldwin in a study of the evolutionary relationships of
the Hawaiian silversword plants and their western U.S. allies, the "tarweed"
group of the sunflower family. Emphasis is placed on molecular-level compari-
sons of chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) among a large number of species in this group,
to detect mutational differences between species and infer their phylogenetic
connections. The tarweed group is of great evolutionary interest because it
comprises two very isolated elements: the Hawaiian "silversword" alliance of 26
species and the western North American tarweeds. The growth forms and physiology
of the Hawaiian species have evolved dramatically, although breeding barriers
between even the most divergent species (woody trees and herbaceous rosettes)
are weak. In contrast, the continental tarweeds are conservative in structure
and form, yet they have developed strong genetic barriers to interbreeding.
Study of this contrasting pattern of island versus mainland evolution in plants
at the DNA level, the level of the gentic code, offers great promise for
resolving several problems. These include resolution of the phylogenetic
connections among the species, determination of the pattern of colonization
among the Hawaiian taxa and of the role of hybridization in species formation,
and measurement of the relative rates of change in DNA and in morphological
form.