* 8715149
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Electron Crystallography  of Plant Polysaccharides
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1989
* Donald Miller, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1989
* USD 5,690.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. Donald Miller of
Clemson University and Dr. H. Chanzy of the Centre de Recherche sur les
Macromolecules Vegetales, of CNRS in Grenoble, France, in the area of molecular
imaging of organic materials. These materials are easily destroyed by the
electron beams used in imaging inorganic materials. Therefore, special imaging
techniques must be developed, which utilize low-energy beams without sacrificing
resolution. The objective of this work is to increase the resolution with which
electron-beam-derived molecular images of plant polysaccharides can be obtained.
Electron-beam images will be produced, using the electron microscope at the
collaborating French institution; the images will then be enhanced, using image-
processing algorithms developed by the U.S. investigator. Laser interferometry
will be used to obtain parallel data on molecular structure in order to check
the algorithms developed. The capabilities of the two laboratories and
investigators are complementary, with equipment and expertise for electron-beam
imaging already available in France and image-processing expertise in the U.S.
The techniques to be developed in France will be transferred to the U.S.
laboratory, where they will be available for later use by the U.S. investigator
in his studies of plant polymers. These techniques will also be useful for the
study of other beam-sensitive materials, such as viral samples or polymeric
photoresists.