* 8715273
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research: Purification of Tyrosine   Phosphoproteins
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1992
* John Burr, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/1992
* USD 12,450.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. John Burr of the
University of Texas at Dallas and Prof. Paolo Comoglio of the University of
Turin Medical School. The src gene of Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) is responsible
for the ability of this virus to transform cells in culture and to induce tumors
in birds and other animals. The investigators plan to determine the mechanism by
which the protein encoded by the oncogene (src) of this virus results in a
malignant transformation. With this in mind, they want to identify those
cellular proteins that are natural substrates for the protein. They have
obtained a library of monoclonal antibodies which are reactive against
phosphotyrosine-containing proteins. Using these antibodies, they have begun to
identify and purify individual candidate substrate proteins. The U.S. P.I.'s
preliminary results on the purification and the generation of immunological
reagents against the proteins discussed above are very encouraging. The Italian
P.I. is one of the world leaders in the use of anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies
and the researchers are experienced collaborators. The investigators are
addressing an important problem with significant implications concerning our
knowledge of cell transformations and malignancies.