* 8715107
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Input-Output Analysis     of Household Consumption
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Wassily Leontief, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1991
* USD 12,490.00

This award will support a series of small U.S.-French workshops on the topic of
input-output analysis of household consumption. The workshops will be organized
by Professors Wassily Leontief and Faye Duchin of the Institute for Economic
Analysis, New York University, and on the French side by Dr. Bernard Real,
Groupe de Recherche sur les Besoins, University of Social Sciences, Grenoble.
The workshops aim to establish a framework for a detailed representation and
analysis of the changing structure of households and their activities, which
will eventually be integrated within the input-output model of the productive
sectors of the economy already developed by the Institute for Economic Analysis.
Specifically the workshops will develop guidelines for a detailed, quantitative
description of households and their activities and will develop a methodology
for projecting future household consumption activities reflecting different
technological innovations by the following steps: 1) establishment of an
operational concept of household consumption activities and units of
measurement; 2) a systematic and comprehensive classification scheme for
households; 3) analysis of household activities in terms of a set of processes
and the technological requirements for carrying out these processes; 4)
application of the methodology developed in the previous steps to the U.S.
Consumer Expenditure Surveys for 1982-83; and 5) a series of field studies
concerning adoption of innovations by households. These steps will provide the
framework for a model capable of analyzing technological change in different
types of households. Under this proposal a prototype framework will be developed
for a limited number of households and process categories capable of expansion
to a more comprehensive model in future work. The qualifications of the U.S. and
French participants are outstanding. Professor Leontief is a Nobel laureate, who
continues to dominate the research in input-output technology. The results of
this joint project should provide valuable information for economic researchers
working on the subject of the impact of automation on labour.