* 8715832
* Chemistry and Biochemistry of Energy Transferring Reactions in Biological Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1993
* William Jencks, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1993
* USD 463,300.00

Uncoupling of the calcium transporting ATPase of sarcoplasmic reticulum by
removal of the catalytic metal ion will be characterized further. The metal ion
specificity and rate and equilibrium constants for development and disappearance
of the uncoupling will be determined. The steps involving the binding and
release of calcuim at the low affinity site will be measured directly to
determine the mechanism and thermodynamics of these steps. Structure- reactivity
correlations for nucleophilic reagents with phosphorylated pyridines will be
done in order to determine if there is a metaphosphate intermediate in
catalysis. Although an enormous amount of work has been carried out on chemical
reactions that generate carbocations a limited amount of work has probed these
indirectly by trapping reactions. This will be done. The substitution reactions
at carbon will be investigated as will the ionization of thiamine. A mechanistic
understanding of vectorial processes in biology is being established with this
work. Knowledge of the basis the efficiency of catalytic processes in living
systems is of great importance for fundamental work and for applications. The
most rational approach to genetic engineering requires information at the level
of mechanistic detail that this work provides