* 8715323
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Synchrotron Radiation     Compton Scattering Studies
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Arthur Bienenstock, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1991
* USD 10,570.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. Arthur Bienenstock
of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (SSRL), and Drs. Genevieve
Loupias and Jerome Tarbes of the Laboratoire de Mineralogie-Crystallographie of
the Universite de Paris, in the area of high-intensity X-ray Compton scattering.
The objective of this work is to utilize the high-intensity X-rays emitted by
synchrotron radiation from the beam lines on the PEP storage ring at SSRL to
perform very high resolution electron momentum density measurements using
Compton scattering. Achievement of this objective requires design and
construction of an energy-dispersive detection apparatus optimized for detection
at energies near that of the scattered X-rays; calibration of this apparatus by
measurements on previously studied materials at higher resolution than has been
previously possible; and, finally, the study of complex systems such as the
transition metals above and below the Curie temperature. The French
collaborators have considerable experience with high-resolution Compton
scattering, which should assure that the SSRL facilities are equipped for these
measurements in a relatively short time. Following the installation of the
detectors, the U.S. and French groups will study different materials: the U.S.
group will investigate elemental semiconductors and metals, while the French
group will study both natural and artificial layered structures. The two groups
will jointly analyze the results obtained, and although measurements will be
made at SSRL, some data analysis will take place in France. The research will
advance the technique of Compton scattering itself, and will provide a resource
for high-resolution scattering measurements to the scientific community at
large.