* 8715073
* RUI:  New Dielectric-Loaded Multimode Horn for Satellite    Communications - (REU &amp; Women and Minority Supplements)
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Ramakrishna Nair, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/1991
* USD 122,555.00

The primary objective of this RUI research project is to perform in- depth
analytical and experimental investigations toward the design, fabrication and
evaluation of an antenna system characterized by excellent electrical
performance to meet all requirements for satellite communications and other
space applications. Another important objective is to provide undergraduate
students with significant experience in the analysis techniques of antenna
radiation and wave propagation. Students will also acquire a background in
fabrication and evaluation of antenna systems for specified purposes. These
critical skills can be applied in graduate-level work, future research,
engineering development and manufacturing. The proposed antenna is a dielectric-
loaded double-flare conical horn. Design of the horn will combine 1) techniques
for multimode operation for improved antenna patterns with low cross-
polarization and reduced sidelobes and 2) the technique of dielectric loading
for gain and directivity enhancement. The antenna will have attractive features
in simplicity of design, ease of construction and greater gain to replace the
corrugated conical horn currently in use for satellite communication. The
antenna's performance will be demonstrated theoretically through rigorous
analytical treatment, and will be established experimentally by observation of
unique features of high gain, greater directivity, reduced sidelobes, low cross-
polarization and wide bandwidth. A variable beamwidth facility required for
special applications in satellite communication will also be investigated.