* 8715920
* Planning Conference for an I/UCR Center for Thin Films and  Interfaces
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Joseph Loferski, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 01/31/1989
* USD 12,000.00

The Committee on Science, Engineering and Public Policy of the National
Academies of Science and Engineering and the Institute of Medicine identified
the field of Thin Films and Interfaces as a "high leverage research opportunity
that is ripe for discovery." Industrial interests, which cover the wide range of
industries, appears to be very high and opens the possibility that an I/UCRC on
Thin Films & Interfaces maybe visible and viable. This award is funding an
Industry Planning Meeting to study the feasibility and viability of an I/UCR
Center on Thin Films and Interfaces to be operated by Brown University and the
University of Rhode Island. The universities have drafted a prospectus for the
centers research and operations that will provide a basis of study at the
September 28 and 29, 1987 meeting. The co-principal investigator and their
colleagues are recognized experts in their fields and have the necessary
industrial interaction to run this meeting. This award has been coordinated with
Dr. Ranga Komanduri, Division of Mechanics, Structures, and Materials
Engineering. The Program Manager recommends that Brown University (along with
the University of Rhode Island) be awarded a $12,000 grant for one year for an
Industry Planning Meeting for an I/UCR Center for Thin Films and Interfaces.
Future funding will be based on a new proposal.