* 8715118
* Dissertation Research: A Systematic and Evolutionary Study  of Corallorhiza and Allies (Orchidaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1987,10/31/1990
* Jeffrey Doyle, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 10/31/1990
* USD 10,930.00

Dr. Jeffrey Doyle of Cornell University will supervise a graduate student, John
Freudenstein, in a morphological and biochemical study of the orchid genus
Corallorhiza. About 12 species have been recognized in the genus, but because
the plants are small, leafless herbs which are superficially similar, their
taxonomy is problematic. One primary objective of the study is to re-evaluate
the species of Corallorhiza using new multivariate statistical techniques
applied to old as well as new characters. These characters will come from a
thorough study of the genus with regard to shape and form of their flowers and
stems, their internal construction (anatomy), and the mutational changes which
can be measured by comparing their DNA (especially chloroplast DNA). In addition
to indicating the species boundaries within the genus, this information will be
used to address other questions, such as the evolutionary relationships of
Corallorhiza species. DNA information, analyzed by computer-aided cladistic
methods, will be especially important here. Additional questions in the group
include the evolution of self-pollination, possible parallel trends among
species in mycotrophy, and evolution of the chloroplast DNA in a leafless group
of plants relative to that in leafy plants. Such information will be of general
use in further orchid research.