* 8715010
* Dissertation Research: Natural Selection and the Role of Pheromones in Colias
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1987,05/31/1989
* Orley Taylor, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 05/31/1989
* USD 4,966.00

The closely related sulfur butterflies, Colias eurytheme and C. philodice,
coexist over much of North America. Although they are capable of hybridizing,
the females of each species normally prevent this by evaluating both visual and
chemical (i.e., pheromonal) information provided by courting males. Taylor and
colleagues now have evidence that the male pheromones within a species are quite
variable both in quantity and quality and that unmated females often reject some
courting males of their own species while accepting others. Preliminary data on
C. eurytheme generally support the hypothesis that an otherwise suitable
courting male may be rejected or accepted by a female based on the qualities or
quantities of the chemicals making up its pheromone. Although a vast amount of
work has been done on the identification of pheromones of many insect species,
relatively little is known about the extent or kind of within-species pheromone
variation, and practically nothing is known about what causes this variation or
its effects on mating behavior. Colias eurytheme and C. philodice are
exceptionally suited to serve as model species for examining the role of within-
species variation in insect pheromones. The courtship system is well understood
both behaviorally and genetically, the pheromone components have been
identified, and these species can be mass-reared in the laboratory making them
susceptible to genetic manipulation and behavioral experimentation. Modern
methods of pest-management often include the use of the pest-species' pheromone
either for sampling or for actual attempts at suppression. The result of this
study should make clear that pheromone variation can be considerable and cannot
always be ignored.