* 8715355
* Strength Evaluation of Cohesionless Soils with Oversize     Particles, SFC Award in Pakistani Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Farhat Siddiqi, Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources (PCRWR)
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1989
* USD 30,000.00

Objectives and Relevancy: This project provides support for collaboration by Dr.
Richard J. Fragaszy of the Department of Civil Engineering, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, and Dr. Farhat H. Siddiqi of the Pakistan Council of
Research in Water Resources (PCRWR), Islamabad, Pakistan. The two scientists
plan to study and evaluate existing models for predicting static and cyclic
strength behavior of soils containing oversized particles. They plan to test
specimens of selected prototype soils with various maximum size particles
similar to those used in earth-filled foundations and earth-filled dams. They
plan to study the effects of grain shape and silt/clay content on material
behavior. Static and cyclic tests on 6 inch diameter specimens will be conducted
at Washington State Univ. All soil classification tests as well as static and
cyclic tests for the molded specimens of 1.4 and 2.8 inch diameter will be
conducted in Pakistan. The U.S.-Pakistan Program supports joint projects where
the capabilities of the participants complement each other, and the research
area is important to both countries. This project meets these criteria well.
Merit: The project is quite important to Pakistan where large dams for
irrigation and for power generation are usually built of earth materials. A
better understanding of the strength of these materials can help improve the
design of the structures. In the U.S. the results can benefit those designing
canals and embankments or designing structures for earthquake conditions. The
Pakistani scientist has worked on this problem while at the University of
California, Davis and Berkeley, and has developed specific modeling hypotheses
which will be tested in this project. The U.S. scientist is actively engaged in
this area of research. The project is likely to strengthen the collaboration
between Pakistan and the U.S. in science and engineering. Funding: The project
is being funded under two grants: 1. INT8711042 to Washington State University
as follows: FY87 U.S. $22,000 from ECES plus U.S.$13,079, and SFC$2,500 from INT
FY88 U.S. $22,000 from ECES plus U.S.$13,079 from INT FY89 U.S. $22,000 from
ECES plus U.S.$13,079 from INT 2. INT8715355 to Pakistan Council of Research in
Water Resources: FY87 SFC$30,000 from INT.