* 8715557
* Database Support for Computer Integrated Manufacturing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* David Hodges, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1991
* USD 786,139.00

The project aims to increase competitiveness in the semiconductor industry
through improved methods of computer-integrated manufacturing techniques for
microelectronic fabrication. In particular, the work will develop systems that
integrate all data on product and process design, equipment, process and
facility control, quality assurance and testing, and production scheduling. The
data base will contain process recipes, listings of work in process, and
physical and electrical test results. As far as possible, the different versions
or "views" of the data for a single process should be created on demand from
this single database representation. Continuing real-world testing will be a
major part of this research. The test bed will be the University of California-
Berkeley's Microlab. Database management systems and programming aids for
manufacturing now under development at Berkeley and sponsored by various
organizations will be utilized. Initially, four specific application areas will
be investigated: facility management, tracking of work in progress, automatic
inspection, and the application of Berkeley's expert system to low- pressure
chemical-vapor deposition. The significance of this project lies in the boost to
productivity and product quality that successful completion will bring. Beyond
the immediate payoff in semiconductor wafer fabrication, the work is likely to
lead to valuable insights into the basic nature of production organization and
control that will be applicable to other manufacturing operations as well. The
researchers involved can be counted on to take a broad point of view and their
graduate students will be a valuable resource in bringing sophisticated tools
and methods to the manufacturing environment.