* 8715960
* Image Processing and Digital Typography
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Robert Morris, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing grant
* Joyce
* 12/31/1990
* USD 150,437.00

This research studies several aspects of the production documents by computers.
The central focus is on the manner in which characters are represented for
discrete devices such as CRT screens, laser printers, and digital
phototypsetters. Image processing techniques such as digital filtering and
spectral analysis are applied along with incremental scan conversion algorithms
to select the pixels which are to be turned on in representing a given
character. These techniques can produce both gray scale fonts for color and gray
scale CRT's and binary fonts for printers and typesetters. The study attempts to
ascertain which digital filters, and with that parameters, produce the most
legible type. The resulting algorithms could be used in printers or composition
systems for real time scan conversion of characters from outlines, permitting
type in an infinite number of sizes and orientation to be produced on demand
from a finite collection of outlines. A second part of the study attempts to
analyze the images present in text in terms of various image processing models
of the initial stages of human vision. The aim of this is to apply similar
digital filters to the production of characters as is presumed to be applied by
the human visual system. This, in turn may point to greater understanding of
choices which should be made by font designers and by scan conversion algorithms
to improve the legibility and speed of computerized output.