* 8715231
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Studies in the Theory and Implementation of Automated Theorem Provers
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Jieh Hsiang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 06/30/1991
* USD 14,251.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. Jieh Hsiang of the
State University of New York at Stony Brook, and Prof. Jean-Pierre Jouannaud,
University of Paris-Sud, Centre d'Orsay, in the area of automated theorem
proving. The objective of this work is to investigate in an efficient manner the
usefulness of a large number of theorem-proving strategies developed by these
investigators. The researchers are most involved with strategies involving
equality and deletion inference rules, which are utilized most efficiently in
derivations based upon refutational strategies. They will develop a framework
for expressing refutational strategies. Using this framework as well as a new
proof technique which has been successful in proving the completeness of a wide
variety of theorem proving methods, they will begin development of a uniform
programming environment for producing and experimenting with computerized
theorem provers. The French collaborator has considerable experience in the
field of artificial intelligence and automated theorem proving. Cooperative
research with the U.S. investigator dates to 1983, involving exchanges of
individuals from both laboratories and has resulted in considerable progress in
the areas to be extended by the current work. The research results could have a
significant impact on the future design and implementation of theorem provers
and proof checkers, and on the theoretical basis of artificial intelligence
itself.