* 8715983
* Cosmological Evolution of Active Galactic Nuclei, BL        Lacertae Objects, and Clusters of Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1991
* John Stocke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 07/31/1991
* USD 82,100.00

A large, x-ray selected sample of extragalactic objects found "serendipitously"
in Einstein Observatory Imaging Proportional Counter exposures at high galactic
latitude will be optically identified and further investigated. The primary
objectives of this study will be to measure the x-ray luminosity function and
cosmological evolution of Active Galactic Nuclei (AGNs), including quasi-stellar
objects (QSOs), quasars and Seyfert galaxies, BL Lacertae objects and clusters
of galaxies. For the BL Lacertae objects and clusters, x-ray selection offers
the only objective and complete sample approach toward studying these objects
and hence finds AGNs not easily found by any other means (thus complementing
radio and optical selection techniques). Once obtained, these basic data will be
used to achieve the following major goals: (1). To measure the x-ray luminosity
function and cosmological evolution of AGNs, BL Lacs and clusters of galaxies;
(2). To integrate these luminosity functions to obtain the discrete source
contribution to the x-ray background to a higher accuracy than previously; (3).
To compare the cosmological evolution of BL Lacs with the evolution of AGNs to
determine the relationship between BL Lacs and quasars; (4). To measure the
cosmological evolution of x-ray emission in clusters of galaxies, to z equal to
a redshift of 0.3, to compare with models of the evolution of cluster potential
wells with cosmic time; (5). To accurately measure the absolute surface density
of extragalactic x-ray sources and their observed x-ray, radio and optical
characteristics.