* 8715119
* U.S.-Western Europe Regional Seminar: Pade Approximants and Related Topics, Boulder, Colorado, June 20-24, 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1989
* Arne Magnus, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 09/30/1989
* USD 7,830.00

This award supports the participation of ten U.S. mathematicians in a
multinational seminar coorganized by William Jones of the University of
Colorado, Arne Magnus of Colorado State University and Haakon Waadeland and Olav
Njastad of the University of Trondheim (Norway). The purpose of the seminar is
to bring together mathematicians from the U.S., Norway, and several other
European countries who share a common interest in Pade approximants but have
different mathematical backgrounds and viewpoints. Invited participants include
both senior and younger mathematicians with research expertise in topics such as
orthogonal polynomials, special functions, moment theory, continued fractions,
and other areas of approximation theory. The sharing of insight and
understanding from these related perspectives is expected to uncover new lines
of research and lead to increased cooperation among the participants from
different countries. Pade approximants and continued fractions are closely
related to many disciplines of pure and applied mathematics, including the
theory of moments, orthogonal polynomials, Gaussian quadrature, representation
of analytic functions, asymptotics and summability of divergent series. The
development of high speed digital computers has fostered their application to
numerical analysis, special functions, theoretical physics and chemistry, and
the theory of electrical networks and digital signal processing. The
interactions of the diverse participants should provide new insights that will
have impact on several of these fields.