* 8715889
* Presidential Young Investigator Award/Structural and        Functional Studies of Metalloenzyme Active Sites
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1987,04/30/1991
* Robert Scott, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 04/30/1991
* USD 187,500.00

This grant provides the remaining three years of funding for a Presidential
Young Investigator Award. The research project is in the general area of
bioinorganic chemistry and is concerned with the active site structures of
metalloenzymes and with the factors which determine the rates of electron
transfer between metalloproteins. To probe the effects of distance on rates of
electron transfer, general reactions will be developed for the carbodiimide-
assisted attachment of redox active transition metal complexes to lysine,
glutamate, or aspartate residues of cytochrome c. This approach will generate a
number of singly-modified derivatives with varying distances between the heme
and the attached complex, so that measurement of intramolecular electron
transfer rates will yield the distance dependence of that rate. This approach
will be extended to other proteins such as myoglobin and other cytochromes.
Another subproject will involve spectroscopic characterization of the Ni-
containing prosthetic group of S-methyl coenzyme-M reductase, the enzyme which
catalyzes the production of methane in the energy-producing cycle of
methanogenic bacteria. The nature of the axial ligands bound to Ni in the enzyme
will be determined using magnetic susceptibility, NMR, resonance Raman
spectroscopy and x-ray absorption spectroscopy.