* 8715128
* Dissertation Research:  Denitrification in Desert           Ecosystems of the Southwestern United States
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1989
* William Schlesinger, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 08/31/1989
* USD 12,865.00

Dentrification, the microbially mediated production of (N2O) and (N2), from
desert systems in the Southwest will be studied. Measurements of denitrification
potentials will be made on soil cores from three desert ecosystems. Data from
this research will improve our understanding of the nitrogen cycle in desert
ecosystems and it will also help us to interpret the importance of desert
ecosystems as sources of N2O, a major greenhouse gas. Measurements of
denitrification potentials will be made on soil cores from three desert
ecosystems - the Great Basin, Mojave and Chihuahuan deserts. In addition
laboratory studies will be conducted to determine what factors control
denitrification in deserts and what biochemical pathways are responsible for N2O
production in these soils. A state-of-the-art gas chromatographic technique
(G3Ni electron capture) will be used for the N2O analyses. The reserach will be
coordinated from Duke University, although much of the field work will be done
at the Long-Term Ecological Research site in southern New Mexico - New Mexico
State's Jornada site in the Chihuahuan Desert. The facilities available in
support of the research at Duke and at the New Mexico State are very good, and
the personnel to be involved in the work are of high quality. The Ecosystem
Studies Program recommends support of this grant request.