* 8715017
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Physical Gas Dynamics     and Molecular Energy Transfer
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Joseph Rich, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1990
* USD 19,780.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. Joseph W. Rich,
Ohio State University, and Dr. Jean-Pierre Martin of the Laboratory of Molecular
Energetics and Macroscopic Combustion at the Ecole Centrale des Arts et
Manufactures, Chatenay, France. The research will involve theoretical and
experimental studies of physical gas dynamics and molecular energy transfer,
with a concentration on the flow of molecular gases in a high state of
vibrational or rotational nonequilibrium. Dye laser measurements will be
performed on reaction kinetics in NO and CO gases, emitted from nozzles designed
to produce the desired nonequilibrium flow. Theoretical analyses will involve
calculation of the rate constants for collisions between molecules, and the
evolution of translational temperature, pressure, and density along supersonic
free jets. The theoretical results will then be compared to the experimental
results. Dye laser diagnostics and infrared emission measurements will be
performed at Ohio State University, in collaboration with the French
researchers, who have considerable expertise in these areas. Computer modeling
will be undertaken at both institutions and the resulting codes will be shared.
A systematic exchange of theoretical and analytical results will be initiated
via computer networks. The results of this work may have important applications
in such fields as high-energy gas lasers, hypersonic vehicles, and supersonic
ramjet aircraft.