* 8715427
* Direct Comparsion of Thermal Desorption from Supported      Metals and Metal Single Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1988,04/30/1992
* Richard Herz, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 04/30/1992
* USD 159,306.00

Thermal desorption from single crystals is normally performed under radically
different conditions from thermal desorption from supported metals. In order to
make direct comparisons, methods are being developed for measuring thermal
desorption from the two forms of metal under identical conditions of pressure
and temperature. Knudsen effusion cells are used to measure thermal desorption
from single crystals under relatively high pressure. Also being investigated is
desorption from supported metals directly into ultrahigh vacuum. Previous
single-crystal studies have shown that thermal desorption of carbon monoxide is
sensitive to metal surface structure; the techniques developed here may permit
this fact to be used to identify surface structures on supported metals.
Initially, the platinum-group metals are studied. Nanometer-sized metal
structures on the surface of support materials have important applications in
microelectronics and in catalysis. Several methods are available to measure bulk
composition and structure of such small structures, but most surface analysis
methods lack the resolution needed for this scale. This project develops
techniques that provide information on surface conformations in very small metal
particles.