* 8715864
* Biology of King and Emperor Penguins While at Sea
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1988,05/31/1995
* Gerald Kooyman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/1995
* USD 502,461.00

Penguins are an important component of antarctic ecosystems, and represent
88-98% of the bird biomass of the Southern Ocean. Considerable information has
been gathered on penguin activities within colonies, but little is known about
activities after they have left the colony and are foraging at sea. The diving
behavior and energetics of King and Emperor penguins is of specific interest,
since these species dive much deeper than other penguins and presumably utilize
a distinct food resource. It has been impossible to study the at-sea behavior of
these birds until very recently. Kooyman proposes to study the diving behavior
of Emperor and King penguins at sea using microprocessors developed in his
laboratory to store data on dive duration, dive depth, and swimming velocity.
Information will be obtained on the diurnal pattern of dives, prey depth
distribution, and swim speeds during travel to food patches and while catching
prey. Energetics at sea will be determined indirectly by first obtaining
laboratory measurements of oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production at
antarctic environmental temperatures and at various swim velocities. Using these
values, a time budget estimate of energy production will be validated by
conducting a controlled laboratory experiment using doubly labelled water for
the energy determination. Both the behavior and energetic results will be used
for interspecies comparisons of hunting strategy, success rates, and energy
inputs per trip between King and Emperor Penguins, and to test several
hypotheses regarding diving physiology. Data should be of value to various broad
programs concerned with antarctic food webs.