* 8715042
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Theoretical Studies of Spin Polarized Quantum Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1993
* William Mullin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1993
* USD 8,886.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. William J. Mullin
of the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and Dr. Franck Laloe of the Ecole
Normale Superieure, Paris, in the area of quantum physics of polarized systems.
The goal of this research is to increase our understanding of fundamental
processes which are affected by strong polarization of electron spins. Materials
which exhibit such polarization, and hence whose properties are not completely
described by classical physics, include gaseous hydrogen and certain isotopes of
liquid and gaseous helium. The effects of spin polarization on atom-atom
interactions in these systems can be large if the polarizations are opposing in
the interacting atoms. These actions can lead to large effects on mean free
paths, and hence on the measurable properties of pressure, thermal conductivity,
viscosity. This theoretical study will involve investigation of possible
extensions of the classical kinetic equation (which describes atomic motions in
the system) to the quantum regime. The study will also examine how the effects
of strong polarizations can be incorporated into this quantum-capable equation
in a solvable manner. In addition, the possibility of seeking new experimental
observations related to quantum effects in spin-polarized systems will also be
explored. The U.S. investigator has already performed considerable research on
solutions of the kinetic equation, and the French collaborator's previous
experience with derivation of the collision integral--the term which actually
describes the atomic interactions--for the kinetic equation is complementary.
The U.S. and French investigators will therefore benefit from joint efforts on
this problem. The kinetic equation will be solved for measurable transport
coefficients, such as heat conductivity and viscosity, if possible, and
alternative modes of measurement of the transport coefficients of polarized
helium gas isotopes will also be examined. This work could have important
benefits in the areas of thermodynamics and cooling systems, superfluidity, and
superconductivity.