* 8715730
* Collaborative Research: Open-water Planktivores and         Turbidity:  Their Influence on Size-structured Interactions among Centrarchid Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Gary Mittelbach, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 12/31/1989
* USD 22,440.00

Most lakes and reservoirs of the southeastern and central United States differ
from upper-midwestern lakes by having very turbid water and the presence of
open-water fish species which feed predominantly on zooplankton (e.g., gizzard
and threadfin shad). These two factors have profound effects on the production
of invertebrates and fishes in lakes. This study will examine how the presence
of shad affects fish species interactions, as well as studying the impact of
shad on other aspects of the lake system (e.g., algae and zooplankton). It seeks
to extend the substantial understanding gained from studies of northern fish
communities to a geographically broader portion of the country. Because species
interactions in fishes are often complex due to changes in their diet and
habitat use as they grow, (e.g., many large predatory fish begin their lives
feeding on small zooplankton), the impact of shad and turbidity can only be
understood by considering how each factor influences all points in a fish's life
history. The project will utilize a series of laboratory, pond, and whole-lake
experiments designed to examine the effect of shad on the larvae, juveniles and
adults of three important sport fishes; bluegill, largemouth bass, and white
crappie. This work capitalizes on a unique opportunity to study fish,
zooplankton and phytoplankton in two Ohio reservoirs before and after the whole-
lake introduction of threadfin shad. The study will provide much needed insight
into the effects of introduced planktivores on the resident fish fauna and their
potential role in lake management. Ohio Department of Natural Resources is
funding additional research on the study reservoirs which will add generality
and depth to the total information base being generated.