* 8715560
* Assembly and Function of the Cofactors of Fumarate Reductasefrom Escherichia Coli
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Gary Cecchini, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 09/30/1991
* USD 223,500.00

The research proposed is intended to expand knowledge on how iron-sulfer
clusters and covalent flavins assemble and function in membrane-bound protein
complexes required for electron transport and energy conservation. The studies
are aimed at answering the existing questions relating to the interrelationship
between the three iron-sulfur clusters known to be present in fumarate reductase
and whether there is a requirement for a "flavin-ligating" enzyme to catalyze
the formation of covalent flavin protein complexes. The research will also
address questions about the relationship between iron-sulfur cluster structure
and protein sequence and the role of the individual clusters in electron
transport. Approaches used to meet these goals include genetic modification of
fumarate reductase by both oligonucleotide-directed and chemical mutagenesis
methods. The modified proteins will then be analyzed by biochemical assays in
order to define the catalytic activity of the modified enzyme and its cellular
location (membrane-bound or cytoplasmic). In addition we will use biophysical
approaches such as EPR and magnetic circular dichroism to monitor the function
and structure of the iron-sulfur clusters of the enzyme. This research will
contribute to our understanding of how complex flavoprotein oxidoreductases
assemble into functional protein complexes and thus help elucidate the path of
electron transport through such proteins.