* 8715306
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Operator-Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/1987,04/30/1989
* Jean-Lin Journe, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 04/30/1989
* USD 28,000.00

Work on this project will concentrate on three problems in mathematical
analysis. The first, arising from the Calderon- Zygmund theory of operators,
synthesizes the traditional operator theory with methods of real variables and
harmonic analysis to give sharp criteria for the power-boundedness of pseudo-
differential operators. Particular emphasis is to be placed on the so-called
Kato conjecture which contends that the domain of the square root of a general
divergence-type operator is the fundamental Sobolev space H. This conjecture has
been shown to be connected with on-going research on the problem of boundedness
of the Cauchy-kernel along curves. Work will be done on the corresponding
multilinear question where very little is known at this time except that the
one-dimensional proof of the conjecture will not carry over. Applications to
boundedness of broad classes of differential operators will be developed. The
second line of investigation is related to the idea that a function which is
infinitely differentiable in vertical and horizontal directions is itself
infinitely differentiable. In the study of Anosov diffeomorphisms or flows one
wants to show similarly that certain functions defined on a manifold are smooth.
This work will consider the restriction of functions on stable and unstable
foliations in an effort to expand present results from infinitely differentiable
to the real-analytic version. Results of this nature should have application to
the study of the Livsic equation for systems with non-zero Lyapounov exponents.
A third thrust will be concerned with the time evolution of a system in quantum
theory, if the evolution is determined by a one-parameter group. This work deals
with the problem of giving an infinitesimal characterization of the cocyles, for
a given one-parameter automorphism group, that is, a structure theorem playing
for cocyles, the role of Stone's theorem for one- parameter unitary groups. This
investigation should provide insight into the relationships between methods of
classical and quantum probabilities.