* 8715397
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Simulation and Design Optimization of Mechanical Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1993
* Edward Haug, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1993
* USD 5,273,048.00

Rapidly advancing technologies in the fields of mechanical systems dynamics,
structural mechanics, design sensitivity analysis, optimization, computer
architectures, computer science, numerical analysis and computer graphics need
to be integrated into an overall mechanical system simulation and design
optimization program that can be used by industry. As a result of NSF Planning
Grant CDR 87-00749, the University of Iowa has shown that an Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center for Simulation and Design Optimization of Mechanical
Systems is both feasible and viable. This five-year continuing grant is funding
along with industry the initiation of an Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center for Simulation and Design Optimization of Mechanical Systems at
the University of Iowa. This Center's research program is addressing: Dynamic
System Simulation, Design Optimization, Advanced Software System Integration and
Graphics Communication and Control of the Design Process. Over two dozens
companies have become members of the Center providing support of approximately
$1M. The Co-Principal Investigators and his colleagues are nationally recognized
experts in their fields and have the knowledge, resources and support necessary
to operate this Center. Drs. dePennington (DMC) and Marsh (MSM) are providing
partial support. The Program Manager recommends the University of Iowa be
awarded $75,000 for the first year of a five year continuing grant. The five-
year continuing grant is to be cost shared this first year with $50,000 (CDR),
$20,000 (DMC) and $5,000 (MSM). The U.S. Army, TACOM, is providing $50,000 to
co-fund this Center with NSF. An additional $147,000 supplemental funding to
augment the Center's research program is being provided by for other Government
laboratories. Another $5,000 is for "Supplemental Funding of Women, Minority,
and Handicapped Engineering Research Assistant." Follow on funding during the
last four years will be in accordance with the following renewal criteria. Near
the end of each 12-month period, the Program Manager and/or the Head of The
Division of Cross-Disciplinary Research will review the progress of the Center
on a number of renewal criteria, including the following: (1) extent to which
university/industry interaction and collaboration is developing; (2) extent to
which the support base for the center is expanding; (3) extent to which a robust
research program is developing. If review is satisfactory, the Program Manager
will recommend support of the next period of this continuing grant.