* 8715533
* Dark Halos of Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* George Lake, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 01/31/1991
* USD 69,800.00

There are observational data that can be explained more easily if there is non-
luminous (dark) matter in galaxies. The effects of the dark matter can be
studied by comparing the theoretical models with observations. This research is
to study the effects of dark matter and the research plan is divided into four
basic topics: - An observational study of NGC5666 - an elliptical galaxy with a
disk of gas that provides a unique opportunity for the study of the mass
distribution of an elliptical galaxy. - Observations of the rotation curves of
dwarf galaxies. - A broad look at modeling dark halos of galaxies. The results
of careful fitting of existing data will be shown. These techniques will be used
to fit the new observational material. The need to include "core pulling" in
detailed models will be shown. While these phenomena have been generically
described by a number of investigators, they have not yet been incorporated in
model building. - Simulations of the evolution of the expansion and recollapse
of a protogalaxy. The common theme that unites these projects is that they are
all aimed at determining the form and distribution of dark matter. The
simulations are needed to relate these quantities to the properties of dark
matter at the time of galaxy formation and at still earlier times. Finally the
research will give results about galaxy halos: Are they cold, warm or hot? Are
uniformities in properties due to nature or nurture?