* 8715519
* Calcium-Activated Non-Specific Cation Channels in Burster   Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1989
* Lloyd Donald Partridge, University of New Mexico School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1989
* USD 20,000.00

Calcium plays a crucial role in coupling excitation to many functions of
neurons. One important example is the activation of ion channel gating. A
recently discovered class of Ca++.activated channels is the non.specific cation
(CAN) channel. Dr. Partridge intends to establish that these channels, found in
a wide diversity of tissues, constitute a unique channel class. Dr. Partridge
has shown previously that CAN channels exist in burster neurons. Although the
characteristics of CAN channels can be surmised from piecemeal data from
numerous tissues, a solid understanding of their role in cell function and a
detailed study of channel characteristics in a single preparation are lacking.
The proposed research will utilize cell.attached and excised membrane patches
from burster neurons to measure CAN channel selectivity, kinetics, and links to
cell metabolism. The project will accomplish two important goals. (1) The
physiological role of CAN currents has been established in burster neurons, thus
a detailed description of CAN channels will provide an important link between
the cellular phenomenon of bursting and the action of a specific class of
membrane channels; and (2) Focusing descriptive information about CAN channels
on one preparation will provide strong evidence to support the hypothesis that
CAN channels represent a unique class of membrane.