* 8715421
* IRAC Support of Indonesian Primate Breeding and ConservationProgram
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1987,09/30/1987
* Dennis Johnsen, National Institutes of Health
* Interagency Agreement
* Christopher Platt
* 09/30/1987
* USD 3,000.00

An interagency transfer of funds by the NSF to the National Institutes of
Health will provide partial support for the Indonesian Primate Breeding and
Conservation Program. Indonesia is presently one of the two remaining countries
in the world that is exporting cynomolgus monkeys for use in biomedical
research. In addition, Indonesia is the only source country for pig-tailed
macaques and Celebes black apes. While support for development of the natural
habitat breeding program will not satisfy U. S. needs for the cynomolgus monkey
by itself, it does strengthen future access to this and the other species that
occur naturally in Indonesian habitats. The natural habitat breeding project
provides a good potential model and testing ground for similar projects
elsewhere in the tropical and semi-tropical areas of the world where non-human
primates are found. A success in Indonesia could help future efforts to develop
future projects in the Philippines, Malaysiam, Thailand, and perhaps India.
Cynomolgus monkeys are a model primate used in several NSF supported projects
and the continued availability of this primate is essential to several
biological research programs. This interagency transfer will allow NSF support
as a member of the Interagency Research Animal Committee for the development of
a natural habitat breeding project in Indonesia to produce retrovirus free
cynomolgus monkeys for biomedical research. An addition project objective is to
make a substantive contribution to the achievement of broader conservation goals
to assure more dependable primate export.