* 8715102
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research on Prediction of Floods and Precipitation Events
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Jose Salas, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/29/1992
* USD 13,925.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. Jose Salas,
Colorado State University, and Prof. Renzo Rosso of the Politecnico di Milano in
Milan, Italy. The researchers intend to collaborate in the area of flood hazards
and precipitation prediction. As a main objective they plan to develop, document
and exchange information concerning prediction of extreme floods and short term
precipitation events. The investigators' plan calls for the use of multivariate
distribution functions, maximum likelihood techniques for regional flood
estimation, and the theory of point and cluster processes for prediction of
precipitation. Each side has ongoing research aimed at 1) prediction of extreme
floods based on available data at more than one site, 2) regional flood
frequency analysis based on parsimonious mixture models and improved estimation
techniques, and 3) analysis and prediction of short term precipitation
processes. The Italian side has expertise in the area of flood prediction based
on mixture models, estimation concerning regional flood frequency and the
corresponding software, and in the determination of external properties for some
alternative models applicable to short term rainfall. The U.S. side brings to
the collaboration expertise using bivariate general extreme value distributions
and the experience in estimation and application of short term rainfall models
for a large data base. Consequently, this collaboration and the attendant
exchange of information and techniques should prove to be mutually beneficial.