* 8715060
* Studies of Aerosol Scavenging by Ice Particles in Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Randolph Borys, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/28/1990
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this research is to determine what fraction of the aerosols
and gases deposited in snowfall is due to liquid cloud water removal by the
riming mechanism, whether by snow crystal riming or by high mountain-surface
riming. This study will focus on how and where the various trace constituents of
the atmospheric aerosol are distributed among the three water substance
components within the cloud: ice, liquid water and water vapor. The results will
be interpreted using acquired knowledge of the microphysical properties of the
cloud at the study site. Estimates of the microphysical conditions within which
the ice particles grew will be made from observed meteorological conditions and
the use of a simple ice crystal trajectory and growth model. Knowledge of the
atmospheric conditions which occur and careful on-site characterization of the
cloud droplets, ice particles and aerosol particles should permit a better
understanding of what scavenging and growth processes lead to the final observed
ice crystal chemical composition. Key questions of atmospheric chemistry pertain
to the mechanisms by which airborne aerosol particles and gases are scavenged by
clouds and rain, and deposited at the earth's surface. Under freezing conditions
a significant fraction of these scavenged materials is deposited in rime ice,
which is the ice that results from freezing of supercooled fog or cloud droplets
either on preformed snow crystals or on objects at the earth's surface. The
scavenging of aerosols and gases under snowing conditions is believed to occur
predominantly by collection in liquid droplets and subsequent deposition in the
rime, rather than in the snow crystals. Data on the relative importance of
competing deposition mechanisms will contribute to the understanding of the
global cycling of the chemical elements in nature. In particular, this knowledge
should help to understand the conditions governing the deposition of acidic
materials at high mountain elevations. The recognition of forest damage at the
highest elevations has raised questions about what mechanisms cause these
effects to be so sharply delimited in areal extent. A detailed understanding of
atmospheric deposition processes should help to sort out the roles of acids,
oxidants, or other airborne constituents.