* 8715738
* Subtropical and Tropical American Estuaries: A Session of   the International Estuarine Research Conference;            October, 1987; New Orleans, Louisiana
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1987,03/31/1988
* John Day, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1988
* USD 5,875.00

This award will support participation by six Latin American and Caribbean
scientists in the Ninth Biennial International Estuarine Research Conference, to
be held October 25 - 29, 1987 in New Orleans. Among the six keynote theme
sessions of the conference is "Subtropical and Tropical Estuaries of Latin
America and the Gulf of Mexico"; this session is co-organized by Prof. John W.
Day, Jr., of Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, and Dr. Alejandro Yanez-
Arancibia, of the Institute of Marine Sciences and Limnology, National
University of Mexico. The six scientists supported by this grant will present
papers at this session and participate in other relevant sessions. The other
keynote sessions of the conference are: the importance of marshes to estuaries;
responses of estuaries to atmospheric processes; mechanisms of recruitment of
estuarine organisms; and comparisons of key processes among major estuaries. In
these sessions as well, regional comparisons will be highlighted, with
particular emphasis on subtropical and tropical estuaries in North and South
America. Expanded participation of Latin American scientists in the conference
will contribute significantly to this comparative approach, since current
research in that region is still not well represented in the international
literature. The themes addressed by the conference are of particular importance
to the coastal countries of the sponsored scientists, and they will also benefit
from new contacts with U.S. researchers. Papers from this meeting will be
published in a special issue of the journal Estuaries. Participating scientists
from the U.S., Latin America and the Caribbean are expected to benefit not only
from the knowledge to be exchanged about coastal ecosystems, management issues,
and aquaculture, but also from the stimulation of new professional interactions
and the strengthening of existing relationships.