* 8715018
* Dissertation Research: Ecological Determinants in           Jadera haematoloma (Hemiptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1987,05/31/1989
* Eric Charnov, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 05/31/1989
* USD 2,890.00

In order to understand why animals have evolved to behave in the ways that they
do, it is necessary to understand the function of their behaviors within
particular social or ecological contexts. A basic idea about male mating
behavior is that in species where single females are abundant, males will mate
with several females, but in species where females are rare, males will mate
monogamously and may physically defend their mate from other males. However, the
value of this generality is weakened because the varied species used to make
such a comparison differ in many biologically significant ways that may also
affect their mating behavior. Dr. Charnov and his student, Mr. Carroll, have
chosen to study a single species of semi-social insect, which in some habitats
has equal numbers of the sexes and in other habitats has many more males than
females. The investigators will compare the mating behavior of males between the
two habitats to see whether the insects have evolved the responses to female
availability that the theory predicts, and thereby provide a more direct test of
the theory than has been possible with multi-species comparisons. In addition to
testing theoretical predictions in an active area of biology, the research will
focus attention on the importance of studying differences between individuals
within insect species, rather than simply lumping variations into the species-
wide averages and generalities that have often typified the study of
economically important insects. Greater understanding of such differences is
likely to lead to the identification of key points in the life cycle at which
control measures can be taken with minimal impact on the environment.