* 8715928
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Earthquake Prediction Research /  Monterey, California / September 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1989
* Hiroo Kanamori, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 09/30/1989
* USD 12,500.00

This award will support U.S. participation in a seminar on "Earthquake
Prediction Research," organized jointly by Professor Hiroo Kanamori of the
California Institute of Technology and Professor Takeshi Mikumo of the Disaster
Prevention Research Institute, Kyoto University, Japan. United States and
Japanese participants will meet in Monterey, California in September 1988. The
seminar will address the use of real-time earthquake information for hazard
warning and prediction. The principle topics to be addressed are (1) earthquake
prediction experiments in the Parkfield, California and Tokai, Japan regions,
(2) rapid retrieval of earthquake source parameters and application to hazard
warning and prediction, (3) new developments in earthquake prediction studies,
(4) sociological impact of earthquake prediction and warnings, and (5) rapid
response during and after a large earthquake. This joint U.S.-Japan seminar will
be the seventh in a series of conferences on the subject held under the
U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science Program over a period of more than 20 years.
Japan and the U.S. are the only countries in the world with large-scale, real-
time earthquake prediction and monitoring capabilities. It is anticipated that
the seminar will lead to improved earthquake prediction and hazard reduction
programs in both countries.