* 8715536
* Advanced Study Institute on Finite-Element Analysis for     Engineering Design, Madras, India, August 1988, Award in    Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1989
* Junuthula Reddy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/1989
* USD 27,500.00

Description: Support is provided for ten U.S. scientists to participate in a
two-week Advanced Study Institute on Finite-Element Analysis for Engineering
Design to be held at the Indian Institute of Technology(IIT), Madras, India. The
Indian organizer of the meeting is Dr. C.S. Krishnamoorthy, of the Structural
Engineering Laboratory at IIT, Madras. Other participants are expected from
Europe and Asian countries. The objectives include exchanges of information on
recent work in several areas of finite element methods and its applications to
engineering design including three-dimensional stress analysis, plates and
shells, fracture mechanics, contact stress problems, heat transfer problems,
computer software and expert systems. Future research needs and developmental
activities are to be identified. The lectures are to be published in a state-of-
the-art book on the various topics. Scope: The meeting will bring top U.S.
researchers in this field with Indian, European and East Asian experts to
exchange information. The U.S.-Indian interaction is likely to lead to future
collaboration in this important engineering field where Indian scientists have
contributed significantly.