* 8715564
* Research on Improving Risk Management Through Improving     Theory and Practice in Risk Perception and Risk             Communication
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1991
* M. Granger Morgan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 08/31/1991
* USD 1,197,364.00

The overall purpose of this project is to develop improved theoretical and
practical understanding of risk perception, communication, and management.
Specifically, the research will (1) examine cognitive models that people use in
thinking and making decisions about risks; (2) develop improved risk
communication methods based on these models; (3) examine the role of risk
perception and communication in effective risk management; and (4) develop
improved analytic approaches and tools for risk management. As part of the
project, case studies will be undertaken in six areas: radon in homes, 60 hertz
electromagnetic fields, solar ultraviolet light, seat belts, dam safety, and
chemical carcinogens. Despite the importance of risk perceptions in risk
communication and risk management, little research has focused on integrating
theory and practice through multidisciplinary collaborative work. This
innovative project will integrate theoretical models and empirical data from
several case studies to develop improved methods for effective risk
communication and management. It is expected that the project will provide
important information for both analysts and decision makers. Specifically, it is
expected that the results of the study will (1) contribute to the development of
improved understanding of the role of risk perceptions in the decision making
process; and (2) provide analysts and decision makers with more powerful methods
for addressing difficult and complex issues in risk communication and
management.