* 8715517
* Applications of Solid-State Deuterium NMR Spectroscopy to   M-H, M-C-H, and M-H-C Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Leslie Butler, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 02/29/1992
* USD 130,514.00

This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
will support research in the area of organometallic chemistry. The project is
expected to provide fundamental information about the chemical bonds which hold
together the atoms of hydrogen-containing organometallic compounds. Such
compounds are important catalysts for the industrial synthesis of organic
compounds. This project will use three solid-state deuterium NMR techniques to
study bonding in organometallic compounds involving bonds of the types M-H,
M-H-M, M-(dihydrogen), M-(methylene)-M, as well as transition metal activated
C-H bonds. Correlations between molecular and electronic structures and
variations in the solid-state NMR spectra will be established by molecular
orbital calculations on model complexes. One of the solid-state NMR techniques,
ADLF spectroscopy, will be used to acquire high-resolution, solid-state
deuterium NMR spectra of adsorbed species on surfaces. The goal of the research
is to evaluate solid-state deuterium NMR spectroscopy as a technique for
fundamental studies of organometallic complexes and surface adsorbed species.
The anticipated benefits to solution and surface chemistry include determining
the structure of metal-hydrogen bonds and the electronic charge resident on
reactive carbon sites.