* 8715109
* U.S.-Italy Bilateral Seminar on Urban Storm Drainage;       Cagliari, Italy, July 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,12/31/1988
* Ben Yen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1988
* USD 21,498.00

This award will support a joint workshop, organized by Prof. Ben Chie Yen of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Prof. Carlo Cao of the
University of Cagliari, Italy, on the science and technology of urban storm
drainage. The workshop will focus on the following topics: experimental urban
basins, rainfall analysis for urban drainage, infiltration and other losses in
the urban environment, overland, gutter, and sewer flows, detention storage,
risk considerations in urban drainage, storm water management, storm water
modeling and data as a limiting factor, and water quality. Every year several
billions of dollars are spent on storm drainage facilities in the U.S., Italy
and other developed countries, not to mention the amounts spent for damages due
to flooding and deterioration of the environment. Considerable progress has been
made on the technology of urban storm drainage over the past twenty-five years
by researchers in both the United States and Italy. While research in the U.S.
has focused on pollution abatement, management, and computer modeling, the
Italians have emphasized methodologies for the design and rehabilitation of
drainage facilities. By bringing together investigators with complementary
approaches to common problems, this workshop should help to advance research in
this area.