* 8715508
* Observational Studies of High Redshift Quasars
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1992
* Maarten Schmidt, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 05/31/1992
* USD 127,140.00

The redshift cutoff of quasars will be studied by carrying out systematic
surveys for high-redshift quasars. It is known that the number of quasars of
given luminosity increases with increasing redshift. Beyond a redshift of 2.5 or
3, however, there is a drop in quasar numbers. This phenomenon probably
signifies the first appearance of quasars in the universe, about 2 billion years
after the Big Bang. At the present time the drop in quasar numbers at high
redshift is poorly documented. These quasars are very rare. Typically one high-
redshift quasar is found among 10,000 stars in the sky. The survey technique
will involve video recording the low-dispersion spectra of approximately 1
million faint objects with the 200-inch telescope at Palomar. The objects that
show emission lines will be selected. Follow-up spectroscopy of all the
emission-line objects will show which of these objects are quasars as well as
measure their redshifts. By careful control and calibration of the survey, it
will be possible to evaluate its completeness limits, and thus conduct a
quantitative census of high-redshift quasars. The results will allow the
evaluation of different hypotheses proposed to explain the sudden appearance of
quasars in the early universe. This phenomenon may well be associated with the
birth of galaxies.