* 8715771
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Analysis of Magnetic and  Satellite Derived Gravity Field Data on the Indian Ocean
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1992
* Millard Coffin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1992
* USD 20,819.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. John Sclater,
Institute for Geophysics, University of Texas at Austin and Dr. Roland Schlich,
Institut de Physique du Globe, Strasbourg, France. The researchers propose a
joint project to compile and interpret topographic, magnetic, deflection-of-the-
vertical and gravity data in the Indian Ocean and contiguous Southern Ocean, and
to bring such data to bear on geological and geophysical problems already
identified in this region. These data can be used, where coverage is adequate,
to produce high resolution plate reconstructions. Where coverage is less
adequate but broad based, this data can still be used to determine a generalized
tectonic history of an ocean. More than fifty percent of all magnetic anomaly
and depth data collected in the Indian Ocean in the past 15 years has been
recovered from non-U.S. research vessels. No attempt as yet has been made to
compile this data on an international basis or to interpret it collectively. The
principal investigators of this proposal request funding to cover the costs of
collaboration with the Institut de Physique du Globe de Strasbourg, which holds
one third of the magnetic and bathymetric data available on the Indian Ocean.
This support will be devoted to coordinating the U.S. and French efforts in
homogenizing and compiling their respective data sets. The compilations of all
available magnetic anomaly, bathymetric and geoid data collected from satellites
will be used to address the specific scientific problems that have been
identified. In addition, tectonic histories and high resolution reconstructions
deduced from these compilations will be of particular value to the Ocean
Drilling Program in the Indian Ocean.