* 8715414
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Stagnation Flow Stabilized Premixed Turbulent Flames
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Robert Cheng, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1990
* USD 14,000.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Robert K. Cheng of
the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory of the University of California, Berkeley, and
Dr. I. Gokalp of the Centre de Recherches sur la Chimie de la Combustion et des
Hautes Temperatures (CRCCHT) of CNRS, in Orleans, France. The work will focus on
an investigation of the fundamental properties of premixed turbulent flames
stabilized in stagnation point flows. This particular flame configuration is
considered ideal for testing numerical models of turbulent combustion, because
its behavior closely approximates that of an idealized one-dimensional flame.
Two different types of flame configurations will be studied: in California, the
planar turbulent flame brush formed by the impinging of a flame on a flat plate;
and in France, opposing flame jets. Both the French and American groups share
the same approach to the study of turbulent flame dynamics, employing laser
diagnostics to measure detailed statistical turbulence parameters. The proposed
collaboration will multiply the number of types of flame configurations that can
be studied using these techniques. The U.S. and French investigators have been
collaborating informally for the last two years, and this collaboration has
already resulted in two joint publications. Travel support provided by this
grant will facilitate the continuation of this work, which has important
practical ramifications in the design of high-efficiency apparatus, such as gas
or oil burners, which utilize flames.