* 8715474
* Dynamics of Non-Equilibrium Systems and Theory of Quantum   Fluids and Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1988,03/31/1991
* Michael Cross, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/1991
* USD 223,822.00

Part of the study is a theoretical program to investigate the spatial structure
and complex dynamics in non-equilibrium systems near the threshold of an
instability at finite wavenumber. Considerable progress has been made for
stationary instabilities, exemplified by convection in pure fluids. Experiments
on convection in binary fluid mixtures provide the impetus for theoretical work
on the rich behavior near the threshold of a dynamic instability. The methods to
be used are perturbational schemes leading to "amplitude" and "phase" equations;
numerical solution of the full fluid equations to answer specific questions; and
the numerical simulation of simpler model equations constructed to capture the
important physics near the instabilities. Although fluid systems provide
convenient systems for a careful comparison between theory and experiment, the
results should have wide applicability in diverse fields. The other part of the
work will study bulk and interfacial Helium, both to understand the microscopic
behavior of these simple but challenging model quantum systems, and to
investigate them as laboratories for novel physics in new parameter regimes,
where quantum effects dominate thermal, and collisional relaxation effects are
often small. Monte-Carlo methods provide an important tool for investigating the
microscopic physics, but must be tied in with analytic phenomenology to yield
any real understanding. Interfacial Helium provides an interesting two-
dimensional thermodynamic system, and has remarkable and experimentally vital
transport behavior that remains poorly understood.