* 8715380
* Support of ANSP Entomological Collections: 1988-1993
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1993
* Daniel Otte, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1993
* USD 349,115.00

The entomological collections at the Academy of Natural Sciences of
Philadelphia (ANSP) contain over three million insect specimens from around the
world. It is a world center for systematic research on orthopterans
(grasshoppers, crickets and their relatives). The collection contains over
10,000 type specimens, including some of the earliest-described and commonest
species of insects. At the current rate of growth, all storage space will soon
be filled. Presently, compactors occupy about 2/3 of the existing floor space,
and this project will allow compactorization of the remaining collection, thus
allowing a 25% increase in storage capacity. The ANSP houses one of the larger
collections of insects preserved in alcohol and on slides. The greater part of
this collection consists of aquatic insects, especially members of the family
Chironomidae (midges). These flies, as well as the other aquatic groups,
constitute an important element of the freshwater fauna and have been used as
reliable indicators of water quality. Curation of this collection has lagged
relative to to other portions of the collection and a large part of it must be
rehoused and properly curated. This project will provide a curatorial assistant
to accomplish this task under the guidance of Dr. Selwyn Roback, who assembled
most of the collection and will be retiring soon. In addition, a half-time
curatorial assistant will be provided to work on the large alcoholic collection
of spiders, mites and centipedes and on the Peale Collection, a separately
maintained collection of butterflies and moths that has scientific, artistic and
historical value.