* 8715195
* Energy Transport in Solar Flares
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1987,08/31/1991
* Gordon Emslie, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 08/31/1991
* USD 170,540.00

Over the past few years, in great part due to the acquisition of data from
spacecraft observatories such as the NASA Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) and the
Japanese Hinotori, a global picture of the impulsive phase of solar flares has
started to emerge, in which the radiation signatures in different spectral
regions are all seen to reflect the same underlying physical processes. The
spacecraft data show that the hard X-ray source evolves temporally and spatially
in a manner which is consistent with the predicted response of the atmosphere to
flare energy input by collisional degradation of energetic electron beams.
Spectral line profiles in soft X-rays reveal plasma emission measures and
velocities which are broadly consistent with the predictions of these electron
beam energy transport calculations of the group funded here. These and other
results are encouraging, because observations over a wide range of wavelengths
can indeed be used to address two of the most fundamental questions of solar
flare physics - the nature and cause of the primary energy release, and the
physics of the energy transport processes. The interplay between theory and
observation has progressed well beyond a simple comparison of qualitative
pictures. We are now at a stage where theoretical predictions can be used to
refine theoretical models and so increase our understanding of the basic physics
at work. This grant will support a program of work to continue this profitable
line of analysis. It will address diagnostics of flare energy transport
processes, notably those resulting from the acceleration and degradation of
suprathermal electrons, in hard X-rays, soft X-rays, and EUV. In addition, it
will critically examine the physics of the energy release and transport in such
a picture of the impulsive phase of flares, refining existing models to include
effects which have hitherto received only scant attention, such as reverse
currents, plasma collective processes and non-uniform magnetic field geometry.