* 8715230
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Identification of Genes   Responsible for Insecticide Resistance in Insects
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1991
* George Georghiou, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1991
* USD 13,855.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. George P. Georghiou
of the University of California, Riverside, and Dr. Nicole Pasteur and
colleagues at the Institute of Evolutionary Sciences of the University of
Montpellier II, France, in the area of insecticide effectiveness. The objective
of this research is to identify the genes responsible for resistance to
insecticide in insects, and then to use this knowledge to devise specific and
practical diagnostic tests for the detection of resistance mechanisms in
individual insects. A combination of toxicological, genetic,
biochemical/physiological, and molecular (DNA) methods will be used. Primary
emphasis will be on the genetic characterization of the changes at the molecular
level, which underly various specific resistance mechanisms. Efforts will be
made to determine changes in the structure of genes, as well as to isolate and
purify the proteins that are involved in other resistance mechanisms. The French
and U.S. investigators have a long history of productive collaboration. Joint
development of biochemical tests for the detection of resistance mechanisms will
be carried out on laboratory and field colonies of mosquitoes and house flies.
The two laboratories have complementary resources in the areas of toxicology,
physiology, biochemistry, and molecular genetics. This research could have
important applications in the fields of insect control and crop management.