* 8715512
* Anodic Oxidation Studies and Their Applications to Organic Synthesis (Chemistry)
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1992
* John Swenton, Ohio State University
* Continuing grant
* Alfons Weber
* 06/30/1992
* USD 183,236.00

This is a renewal project in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program.
Dr. Swenton is studying electrode reactions as a means of producing new
synthetic reactions for the synthesis of complex natural products. The use of
electrochemical reactions can make the synthesis more efficient and potentially
less polluting because greater control can be exercised over the reagents. This
program is comprised of two major areas of research. One part concerns the
anodic oxidation of anilide derivatives and the chemistry of the products formed
in these reactions. Preliminary work has established that high yields of
1,4-addition products are formed from anodic oxidation of two p-methoxyanilide
derivatives. Anodic oxidation of p-methoxyanilides in methanol in the presence
of lutidine serves as a general route to quinone imide ketals. These moieties
undergo 1,2- addition of organolithium reagents and 1,4-addition of malonate
anion in high yields. The work involves an in-depth study of the anodic
oxidation of anilides. The chemistry of the products from these anodic
oxidations will be investigated. These reactions not only serve as versatile
methods for obtaining uniquely functionalized anilides but also will provide new
approaches to ring systems present in many natural products. The second area of
major emphasis focuses on methods for carbon-carbon bond formation from
transient intermediates generated from anodic oxidation. Studies on the anodic
oxidation of 2'-substituted-4- hydroxybiphenyls have established the important
variables in the intramolecular reactions of olefinic centers with intermediates
generated from oxidation of the aromatic moiety. A study of this reaction with
other olefinic units and other solvent nucleophile combinations will be
performed. A route to dienones of the type generated in these model studies
would offer interesting approaches to a variety of naturally occurring dienones
(e.g., Pronuciferine) and products biosynthetically derived from
2,5-cyclohexadienones. Finally, an interesting thermal route to
2,5-cyclohexadienones will be studied, making use of recently developed quinol
ether anodic oxidation procedure. Since 2,5-cyclohexadienone intermediates
formed via phenolic coupling reactions are the biosynthetic precursors of a wide
range of natural products, a direct, mild, and efficient method for conversion
of p-substituted phenols to dienones would complement existing synthetic
approaches to these versatile intermediates.