* 8715515
* U.S.-Venezuela Cooperative Research:  Ultrastructure of     Contracting Muscle Studied by Rapid Freezing
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Roger Craig, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 01/31/1991
* USD 8,490.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professor Roger Craig of
the University of Massachusetts Medical School and Professor Raul Padron of the
Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientificas (IVIC) in Caracas,
Venezuela. The objective of this research is to study the structural mechanism
of contractile cells in muscle and nonmuscle tissue. These cells are able to
contract by the sliding of contractile filaments past one another without any
change in filament length. The sliding force is generated by the cyclic
interaction of myosin crossbridges with actin filaments and is powered by the
splitting of ATP during each crossbridge cycle. Using ultrarapid freezing
techniques, the investigators are able to arrest the crossbridges at transient
points in the cycle and directly examine, via an electron microscope,
intermediate crossbridge states. The physiological techniques and apparatus for
freezing the muscles, as well as the facilities and expertise for image
processing of the micrographs will be done at IVIC while the U.S. side will
carry out most of the freezing and the subsequent electron microscopy of the
samples. This research should provide insights into the molecular basis of
cellular movement and a better understanding defects in structure that occur in
diseased states.