* 8715439
* A New Interface Methodology for Microcomputer Based         Structural Analysis Programs
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* Carlos Pesquera, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 12/31/1988
* USD 27,582.00

The widespread availability of micro-computers together with an increase in the
awareness of structural engineers of the need to consider dynamic effects in the
design of structures, has created a need for structural engineering software
capable of modelling dynamic effects in buildings. The ETABS Program developed
on a large mainframe can provide the modelling capability required by engineers.
The first step to make ETABS available to the structural engineering community
is to convert it from a large computer environmental to the personal computer,
this has already been partially achieved. However, in the conversion, the
original batch-type input definition method was retained. This type of problem
definition approach is tedious and error prone. To make ETABS a practical tool
with widespread use, the data input and data output process should be
facilitated using the latest techniques of interactive computer graphics. The
research proposed will apply a series computer graphics user-interface utilities
that are currently under development to transform the data input and output
process of ETABS from a batch mode to a fully interactive graphical procedure.
The following objectives will guide the proposed research: 1. The resulting
software should run in a PC-AT environment. 2. Both the input and output process
will be through a menu- driven graphical interactive approach. 3. On-screen help
information should be available. 4. The resulting software should be
transportable to other engineering workstation configurations. 5. The pre- and
post-processor tools developed should be applicable to similar batch oriented
structural analysis programs. The PC-AT environment is proposed as the target
hardware configuration to make the end product of this research available to as
many engineers as possible.