* 8715389
* Mathematical Sciences: Domain Decomposition Algorithms for  Linear Hyperbolic Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1988
* William Symes, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 11/30/1988
* USD 12,000.00

The use of parallel computers for solving partial differential equations is
important in areas such as fluid dynamics, transonic flow, reservoir simulation,
weather prediction and structural analysis, where many of the problems of
interest can not be solved without the use of supercomputers. One technique for
applying parallel computers to the solution of these problems is known as domain
decomposition where the domain of interest is subdivided into several smaller
subdomains and the task of solving the partial differential equation on each
subdomain problem is assigned to a different processor. The global solution is
then pieced together from the solutions computed on the individual subdomains.
Much of the current work in the application of domain decomposition techniques
has been in the area of elliptic partial differential equations with very little
attention being given to hyperbolic equations. The investigator proposes to use
the methods of domain decomposition for the solution of linear hyperbolic
equations. The idea of using overlapping domains is introduced in the context of
linear hyperbolic equations to develop a domain decomposition algorithm which is
shown to be well suited for parallel processors. The questions of communication
costs and load balancing is presented. The investigator also propose to
implement parallel algorithms usong domain decomposition techniques in an
existing distributed computing environment. Domain decomposition algorithm are
important for the areas of applications mentioned above.