* 8715148
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Air-Sea Interaction       Experiment: CLUSE-HEXIST 3 (Physical Oeanography)
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Edward Monahan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1991
* USD 24,000.00

This award will support continued collaborative research between a group of U.S.
physical oceanographers led by Dr. Edward Monahan, Marine Sciences Institute,
University of Connecticut and French colleagues led by Dr. P.G. Mestayer,
Institut de Mecanique Statistique de la Turbulence, Marseille, France. The
research project, entitled "CLUSE HEXIST 3" is an outgrowth of the international
cooperative program HEXOS (Humidity Exchange over the Sea), which aims to
understand the humidity transfer processes from sea to atmosphere during gale
and storm wind events, with a special emphasis on the role of marine sprays. One
major effort in the HEXOS program is centered around the construction of
realistic numerical models of the coupled transfer processes within the lower
boundary layer. Such models are viewed as essential in the evaluation of the
impact of sea spray on the transfer process and as a guide in interpreting
measurements. Within the context of the HEXOS program, a laboratory oriented
subprogram, HEXIST, has been established. HEXIST, which stands for the HEXOS
Experiments in the Simulation Tunnel, is intended to take advantage of the
unique capabilities of the Large Air-Sea Interaction Simulation Tunnel of the
Institut de Mecanique Statistique de la Turbulence in Marseille. The transfer
processes of heat, water vapour and spray-droplets will be controlled
independently by means of the tunnel controls of wind speed, water, air and dew-
point temperatures and by artificial aeration devices (spray bubblers). Thus,
the tunnel measurements will provide a test bed for models that can eventually
be extended to the open ocean. In this project, U.S. and French researchers will
have the opportunity to design a new approach to laboratory studies of spray
droplet behavior using the Marseille facility. U.S. sensing technology and
analysis capabilities will contribute to the joint project. Together with other
coordinated elements of the HEXOS program, this series of experiments is the
most comprehensive attack to date on the complex question of water exchange at
the sea surface. The results of this research will have a major impact on
advancing parameterization of the water exchange process. Improvements in the
simulation of aerosol droplets will make the results of these experiments more
directly relevant to the modelling of oceanic processes.