* 8715781
* Feasibility Study for the Geoprops ODP Probe:  In-Situ      Measurements of Physical Properties
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1987,10/31/1989
* Daniel Karig, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 10/31/1989
* USD 32,835.00

The quantification of all aspects of the geosciences is creating a growing
demand for accurate measurements of such quantities as physical properties,
mechanical state parameters, and chemical compositions. ODP holes are becoming
increasingly recognized as important probes of environmental conditions as well
as records of lithology. Various techniques are available for measurements of
the desired quantities in ODP holes, but most of these have proved to be poor in
sections of moderately consolidated sediments, which comprise an ever increasing
percentage of footage drilled. At the JOI/USSAC workshop on Physical Properties
in ODP, this concern was addressed and a recommendation a made to develop the
Navidrill/Geoprops concept. In this concept, a 3 3/4" hole is drilled 5 m ahead
of the main bit with a mud-motor drive core bit and barrel. This Navidrill
assembly can be withdrawn on a sand line and Geoprops probe, an internally
recording system with packers and an array of sensors, can be quickly placed in
the small hole. A conservative initial design envisages measurements of
temperature, pore pressure. permeability, stress orientation and pore fluid
composition, but other measurements could be added if the concept is successful.
Before construction of the Geoprops probe, a feasibility study is necessary to
insure the need for and suitability of such an approach, to outline the
scientific and engineering constraints, and to develop a general layout. This
award will support such a study.