* 8715441
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Solid State Physics): Mag- netic Properties and Anisotropy in Rare Earth-Transition    Metal Multilayered Films
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* David Sellmyer, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/1990
* USD 47,655.00

The objective of this two-year cooperative research award between David J.
Sellmyer, University of Nebraska and Zhao Jiangao, Chinese Academy of Sciences'
Institute of Physics is to study amorphous multilayered magnetic films based on
rare-earths and transition metals. The investigators will concentrate on the
relationship between physical properties such as magnetic ordering, random and
coherent magnetic anisotropy and the microscopic structure of these alloy
materials. The structure of homogenous and inhomogenous glasses and the
potential of these materials for magneto-optic information storage will be
assessed. This new proposals extends the research performed under a 1985
U.S.-China cooperative research grant. Rare earth-transition metal base alloys
research is a very active and important area of materials sciences. These alloys
are currently considered to be the best candidates for electronic devices and
magnetic data storage. Their fundamental understanding will contribute to
improved and better designed materials. High field magnetization, x-ray
diffraction and electron microscopy measurements will be performed concurrently
at the University of Nebraska and the Institute of Physics. The combined efforts
of U.S. and Chinese scientists and laboratory facilities in performing these
important measurements fulfills the U.S.-China Program principal objective,
which is to advance scientific knowledge through international collaboration.