* 8715649
* Isolation of New Marine Natural Products from Burrowing     Sponges (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1993
* Nestor Carballeira, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 12/31/1993
* USD 267,060.00

This project is funded under the Organic and Macromolecular Program in support
of the Minority Research Initiative (MRI) effort of the NSF. This project is
making use of the rich natural resources near Puerto Rico to serve as a source
of potentially novel and useful chemicals. Sponges are being collected and
extracted, and the biologically active compounds are being purified and
characterized. New chemicals isolated in this work will be evaluated as to their
biological activity. A systematic study will be undertaken of the phospholipid
fatty acids from the burrowing sponges Anthosigmella varians, Chondrilla nucula,
Cliona caribboea, Clinoa delitrix, Cliona lampa, Siphonodictyon coralliphagum,
and Spheciospongia vesparium in search of biomedically important metabilites.
This work represents the first systematic study of isoprenoid phospholipid fatty
acids from marine sponges. The origin of these isoprenoid fatty acids is to be
determined, i.e., whether the sponge is synthesizing the acids from isoprene
units or if they are derived from planktonic or bacterial origin. Parallel to
the above mentioned work, a program aimed at isolating other biologically active
compounds i.e. cytotoxic agents, from these burrowing sponges is to be
initiated. Other tests, as for example, antimicrobial, antitumor, etc., will be
performed accordingly. The sponge collection and classification program is being
carried out in collaboration with other biologists from the University.