* 8715464
* Electrochemical, Spectroelectrochemical, and                Photoluminescence Studies of Transition Metal Halide        Clusters in Room Temperature Haloaluminate Ionic Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/1987,04/30/1991
* Charles Hussey, University of Mississippi
* Continuing grant
* Vickie Lewis
* 04/30/1991
* USD 208,406.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of nonaqueous electrochemistry. The primary thrust of this
experimental activity focuses on the electrosynthesis and characterization of
transition metal halide clusters in room temperature haloaluminate melts. Using
electrochemical, spectroelectrochemical, and electroluminescent techniques,
Professor Hussey will study the redox and spectral properties of bromo- and
chloro- complex clusters of rhenium, molybdenum, tungsten, niobium, and tantalum
in various oxidation states and he will also explore the range of melt acidities
over which these species are stable. Such fundamental knowledge of the
physicochemical behavior of these transition metal cluster complexes is
essential to an understanding of the structure, bonding, and reaction kinetics
of these catalytically important entities. These studies leading to this new
knowledge have been enabled in large measure by the advances that this
investigator has made during the tenure of his previous NSF grant, CHE- 8412730,
in developing sophisticated experimental protocols for handling these extremely
challenging systems. The continued development of new experimental methods in
molten salt chemistry is an added benefit that is also anticipated from this
research.