* 8715090
* Dissertation Research:  Evolutionary and Coevolutionary     Forces in a Three Trophic Level Interaction
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1990
* Peter Price, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 05/31/1990
* USD 9,300.00

This research will explore for the first time coevolutionary interactions in a
three trophic level system consisting of willow, Salix lasiolepis, a stem-
galling sawfly, Euura lasiolepis, and a parasitoid, Lathrostizus euurae. The
evolutionary forces on each member of the interaction will be studied as they
create a "window of vulnerability" for the stem- galler when it can be attacked
by the parasitoid. Lathrostizus can only attack larvae in each Euura gall for a
limited time period defined by the developmental rates of both the gall and the
sawfly. Preliminary evidence suggests that different willow genotypes and
phenotypes have galls with different "windows," resulting in widely different
parasitism rates. Experiments will answer the following questions: 1) Are gall
characters determining vulnerability to Lathrostizus attack heritable characters
of Euura, the willow, or interaction between the two? 2) Does the window of
vulnerability of Euura to Lathrostizus attack depend on plant genotype? 3) Can
the window of vulnerability be altered by changing plant phenotype? 4) Does the
window of vulnerability increase resource complexity decreasing the searching
efficiency of the parasitoid? 5) Is Lathrostizus better adapted to attacking
other gallers in the system? Results will contribute to the basic ecology of
tritrophic interactions.