* 8715510
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Magnetite/Ilmenite Variation and other Topics Concerning Plutonic Rocks
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1990
* R. Gordon Gastil, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 08/31/1990
* USD 3,950.00

This award will enable Dr. R. Gordon Gastil of San Diego State University to
collaborate with Dr. Masaaki Shimizu of the University of Tokyo and Dr. Shunso
Ishihara of the Geological Survey of Japan. Dr. Gastil will visit sites in Japan
where exposed granitic rocks have been subjected to detailed mapping and
geochemical analysis. These rock formations will be compared with those of the
California Peninsula as to the degree and significance of asymmetry and internal
structure, and the meaning of the magnetite/ilmenite boundary. Comparative
analyses of granitic rock structures from different geographic locations will
further the interpretation of magma development in subducting tectonic
environments, and thus help to unravel the origin and evolution of the major
types of granitic rock. Dr. Gastil has extensive experience in mapping the large
zoned plutons of the California Peninsula. Dr. Ishihara is considered the world
authority on the magnetite/ilmenite distinction in granitic terranes, and Dr.
Shimizu has recently published what is probably the most detailed study of this
distinction within a single pluton. Thus, the research will benefit
significantly from the complementary experience of the researchers.