* 8715342
* Surface Metrology Using Range Imaging
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1989
* Wesley Snyder, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* K. (Cheena) Srinivasan
* 01/31/1989
* USD 28,979.00

This proposal requests an Expedited Award for Novel Research to investigate the
feasibility of using optical range imaging to perform non-contact coordinate
measuring tasks. Recently developed optical 3-D sensors have the speed and
resolution characteristics to make an optical coordinate measuring machine (CMM)
theoretically feasible. Use of the proposed optical range imaging approach
should produce a speedup of several orders of magnitude over conventional
mechanical contacting CMMs, and provide a density of sampling points sufficient
to make "reverse engineering" practical. "Reverse engineering" is the production
of a CAD description of a part from an actual physical example of such a part.
This capability can lead to a dramatic improvement in productivity. Before
attempting to design an optical replacement for a CMM, it is necessary to
determine what artifacts, if any, may be due to the optical nature of the
sensor, how these artifacts may corrupt the accuracy of a measurement, and how
such corruptions may be corrected. The research plan is to develop an accurate
model of the camera, the surface being scanned, and the noise in the system; and
then to determine how to correct for the resulting noise and distortion. The
proposed approach is novel because it is mathematically unique, it will use
differential geometry to reconstruct range imagery rather than using traditional
Fourier methods. The ideas of using an optical range camera to replace the more
traditional coordinate measuring machine is a fairly new idea. The idea of
applying reconstruction theory to correct for anomalies in this context appears
to be completely novel. If successful, this approach could lead to a large
impact on industrial efficiency, because the capability to quickly produce
accurate solid model representations from a collection of range images of a
subject part is badly needed.