* 8715094
* Dissertation Research: A Molecular Approach to Sex          Identification of Monomorphic Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1987,03/31/1990
* Herbert Dessauer, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 03/31/1990
* USD 6,500.00

Currently, there is no simple, unambiguous, nontraumatic method of establishing
the sex of monomorphic birds, those whose sex is not apparent from external
appearence. Surgical identification, the method most frequently used, requires a
skilled veterinarian and is not applicable until the bird reaches sexual
maturity. Even with mature birds, identification of the sex organs can be
difficult, ambiguous or impossible. Because of the dangers from anesthesia and
surgery, most managers of captive breeding programs choose karyotyping to
identify the sexes. This method, though less dangerous than surgical sexing,
requires about a milliliter of blood and is such a specialized procedure that
only a handful of people/labs have been able to do it successfully. The goal of
this project is to develop a DNA probe which can be used in a standard DNA
hybridization technique, to sex a bird using DNA from a drop of blood or from
cells from the pulp of a feather. Such sex-specific DNA sequences have been
found in a variety of species. The investigators have created a genomic library
representing approximately 6000 random DNA fragments and are in the process of
identifying those DNA clones which hybridize to female but not male DNA. If
successful in isolating a probe from whooping cranes, the investigators will
attempt to develop sex- specific probes for members of other endangered species.
Although the project is primarily concerned with sexing birds, the results are
also expected to shed light upon molecular evolution of sex-specific DNA and, in
the long tern the phylogeny of birds.