* 8715633
* Identification of Structural Correlate Patterns for Protein Functional Domains
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1988,09/01/1991
* Temple Smith, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 09/01/1991
* USD 496,497.00

This project's aim is to develop a method to identiy patterns which represent
the structural correlates of protein functional domains. These will be
constructed from protein primary sequences annotated with structural inferences
derived from the primary sequences. The basis for the approach is that common
functions generally correlate with common protein structures, domains and/or
regions of invariant or equivalent amino acids. This is true even for
functionally related proteins with very different primary sequences. The
proposed method involves comparative analysis of sets of functionally related
proteins for a pattern consisting of elements of the common structure, invariant
amino acids and other properties which can be predicted statistically from the
primary sequence. The approach utilizes the input from the disciplines of
molecular genetic, biochemistry, and computer science. The project: will begin
by extending newly developed methods, which have been proven successful upon
initial application; and will culminate with the generation of a pattern-indexed
library of protein functional domain pattern descriptors. This will be coupled
with the software development required for their identification in new
sequences. The generation of this library will thus aid in the identification of
the function(s) and domain substructure of newly sequenced DNA coding regions,
which will be inmportant given the ease and anticipated rate of genome
sequencing in the near future. Advances in biotechnology have led to the
determination of the primary structure, or ordering of amino acids, of many
types of proteins. A computer based pattern recognition program would analyze
known primary structures to find common patterns, and this information could
then be applied to the study of newly determined sequences and to the design of
new proteins with specific functions. This capability would increase fundamental
knowledge in biology and lead to improved methods in biotechnology.