* 8715004
* U.S.-France Joint Workshop on Chemistry of Macromolecular   Materials, Williamsburg, Virginia, April 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1989
* James McGrath, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1989
* USD 9,106.00

This award will support a U.S.-France Workshop on the Chemistry of
Macromolecular Materials to be held in Williamsburg, Virginia in April 1988. The
workshop will be jointly organized by Dr. James McGrath, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute, and Dr. Ernest Marechal, Laboratoire de Synthese Macromoleculaire,
University of Pierre and Marie Curie, Paris, France. The meeting will focus on
polymer synthesis and modification reactions that are necessary to produce
important materials. Three subthemes will include (1) the chemistry of isotropic
and anisotropic matrix resins, (2) the synthesis and characterization of
multiphase polymers and (3) the utilization of reactive processing, particularly
with regard to grafting reactions, segmented copolymer synthesis and block
copolymer-homopolymer blend preparations. The program will be oriented toward
the development of novel chemistry that can be applied to prepare and modify
high performance engineering matrix resins in related systems. Given the
significant growth and utilization of macromolecular materials, the workshop is
very timely. Despite rapid growth, there has been insufficient emphasis placed
on the important chemistry and structural characterization identified with this
field. In particular, the development of advanced composite materials, which are
useful in many industrial applications, such as the aerospace, automotive, and
electronic industries, has proceeded to the stage where additional progress can
only be made by new advances in the synthesis of matrix resins and related
materials. France has been particularly strong in polymer synthesis, and the
French co-organizer Dr. Marechal is an internationally recognized expert in the
development of new polymeric materials. This seminar will provide an important
forum for the exchange of information between U.S. and French polymer chemists.