* 8715525
* Support for U.S. Participants in the XVI Pacific Science    Congress, Seoul, Korea - August 20-30, 1987
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1987,12/31/1987
* John Bardach, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* Alice W. Leeds
* 12/31/1987
* USD 30,000.00

Proposal Objective: This proposal requests funds to partially support
approximately 30 U.S. participants in the 16th Pacific Science Congress (PSC) to
be held in Seoul, Korea, August 20-30, 1987. The U.S. P.I. is Dr. John E.
Bardach, President, Pacific Science Institute of the PSA, Honolulu, Hawaii;
Prof. Tai Whan Shin, National Academy of Sciences, Republic of Korea, is
Chairman of the 16th PSC Organizing Committee. PSA if a well-established
international, nongovernmental organization dealing with interdisciplinary
science in the Pacific in environmental biology, earth sciences, information
science, and social and economic science. The theme of the Congress is "New
Dimensions of Science, Manpower, and Resources in the Pacific." This broad topic
will be developed through the following three general symposia and fifteen more
specific sections: (1) Development of Science and Technology in the Pacific
Countries; (2) Population and Food in the Pacific Basin; and (3) Prospect on the
Major Resources of the Pacific Region. More than 1100 scientists have
preregistered for the Congress. This project is relevant to the objectives of
the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Merit of the Proposal: The U.S. and
Korean coordinators of this international conference are highly respected
scientists who have had extensive experience in organizing international
activities. The U.S. P.I. has been the recipient of NSF awards in support of
previous PSA Congresses and Intercongresses. The proposed method of announcing
NSF support and the selection of the recipients of travel funds by a committee
of seasoned experts should be entirely satisfactory. U.S. participation in the
16th PSC will be beneficial to members of the U.S. scientific community.
Funding: This proposal is not supported by other U.S. government agencies or
other NSF programs. Only U.S. participants will be supported. A grant in the
amount of $30,000 is recommended. The Bernice P. Bishop Museum acts as the
fiscal agent for the PSI, and handles administrative activities of the PSI. The
offices of PSI are in the Bishop Museum. Dr. W. D. Duckworth, Director of the
Museum is Vice President/Treasurer of the PSI.