* 8715051
* Artificial Intelligence for Computer-Aided Design
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1991
* W. Harmon Ray, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1991
* USD 263,885.00

The overall goal of this research project is to apply artificial intelligence
(AI) methodology to computer aided design (CAD). In the area of computer-aided
engineering design, AI techniques hold the promise of achieving two significant
technical goals: 1. The production of CAD software which allows semi-skilled
non-specialists to produce good candidate designs so as to dramatically hasten
the dissemination and assimilation of new technology. 2. The possibility of
"discovery" by CAD software of new designs and design methods not conceived by
human experts. Over the past decade, the PI and his coworkers have developed two
CAD packages CONSYD and POLYRED presently in use by industry as well as by
universities as teaching tools. CONSYD allows the experienced user to
interactively build a process model from data, determine the principal control
problems through process simulation, and use a wide variety of sophisticated
design procedures to synthesize several candidate designs of control systems
which can be evaluated in plant testing. The current limitation of CONSYD (and
other CAD packages for control system design) is that the design procedures
require the user to have a relatively sophisticated knowledge of the control
theory behind each design method. Similarly POLYRED can be used to design
polymerization reactors and requires expertise in design, polymerization and
reaction engineering on the part of the user. To overcome some of these
limitations on the population that can use these CAD packages, the PI proposes
to devise AI strategies which will allow the average control engineer in
industry to use CONSYD and the typical industrial scientist and engineer
involved in polymerization reactor modelling and design to use POLYRED. The
first step will be to create an expert system for control system design which
will sit above CONSYD and call the appropriate FORTRAN programs in the CONSYD
and POLYRED packages for detailed technical calculations. The second part of the
project will involve the study of "discovery" and "learning" features which
could be added to the AI design package. For the control systems design problem
there are two types of "learning" which will be studied: 1. The discovery of
new, previously unknown, types of control system designs which may arise from
the application of expert systems with fixed rules. 2. The formulation of new
design rules based on the accumulated experience of the AI package. Similar
learning features will be incorporated into the polymerization reactor system.
The results will not only be new software for these two specific areas, but will
also increase the knowledge base on the use of AI techniques and expert systems
to nontrivial, real problems.