* 8715013
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Main-Chain Polymer Liquid Crystals and Model Compounds with Conventional              Thermoplastics and Ionomers
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Rita Blumstein, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 06/30/1991
* USD 14,650.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professor Rita B.
Blumstein, University of Lowell, Massachusetts, and Dr. Ferdinand Volino, Centre
d'Etudes Nucleaires de Grenoble, France, in the area of polymer liquid crystals
(PLC's) and compounds from conventional thermoplastics, which can model PLC's.
Novel liquid-crystal polymers and compounds which can be used as models for them
will be synthesized, and their structure will be studied at the microscopic
level, using nuclear magnetic resonance and neutron and X-ray scattering. Their
thermodynamic and mechanical properties will be studied at the macroscopic
level. This research will continue a seven-year collaborative effort, which has
yielded important results in other areas of polymer studies. The U.S. and French
researchers have complementary skills, and the Grenoble laboratory possesses
equipment not available otherwise to the U.S. principal investigator. NMR and
neutron scattering, and investigation of the microscopic properties of the model
systems, will be done at Grenoble; macroscopic properties will be investigated
at Lowell. One graduate student from the U.S. will also be trained in the
microscopic techniques at Grenoble. The project should increase our
understanding of polymeric liquid crystal systems, and could result in the
development of new liquid crystal materials with improved impact resistance and
transparency.