* 8716846
* Biochemical Mechanisms Regulating Cellular Response to      Growth Factors
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Philip Vulliet, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Stacy Springer
* 10/31/1991
* USD 178,800.00

Dr. Vulliet's research will investigate the biochemical mechanisms controlling
cellular responses to growth factors. Previous work has demonstrated that PC12
cells respond to treatment with nerve growth factor (NGF) and epidermal growth
factor (EGF) by altering the phosphorylation of specific proteins. Dr. Vulliet
has identified a unique site distinct from other known phosphorylation sites on
tyrosine hydroxylase that is phosphorylated following NGF and EGF treatment. The
amino acid sequence around this site suggests that it may be phosphorylated by a
novel protein kinase. Screening of other known kinases for their ability to
phosphorylate tyrosine hydroxylase has failed to demonstrate any phosphorylation
of this specific site. Using a synthetic peptide identical with the first 19
amino acids of tyrosine hydroxylase, Dr. Vulliet has developed an assay for this
kinase activity and succeeded in obtaining a partial purification and
characterization of this protein kinase. Dr. Vulliet now proposes to further
isolate, purify and characterize this novel kinase activity by employing a
combination of traditional biochemical techniques and FPLC methods to develop a
rapid purification of this kinase from pheochromocytoma tissue. Other embryonic
and neoplastic tissues will be examined for the presence of this particular
kinase activity. The biochemical and kinetic properties of this enzyme will be
investigated. In addition, the physiological function of this kinase will be
investigated in PC12 cells treated with a variety of growth factors. Dr. Vulliet
anticipates that this novel protein kinase may play an important role in
mediating the biochemical responses of the PC12 cells to NGF and EGF.