* 8716970
* Isotopic Studies of Oceanic Islands and Ocean Crust
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1991
* Mark Kurz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 05/31/1991
* USD 372,533.00

In this study the PI will continue the investigation of isotopes of noble
gases, such as, Helium, Xenon and Argon in oceanic rocks for which he has been
continuously funded by NSF since 1983. The study would involve measurement of
helium and other nobel gas isotopes and comparison of their ratios to isotopic
ratios of heavy radiogenic elements such as Sr, Nd, and Pb in a variety of rocks
from Tristan da Cunha and Gough, from Islands in the South Central Pacific Ocean
and from the Mid ocean Ridges. The investigator also proposes to conduct helium
diffusion experiments on basaltic glasses and mantle minerals by stepwise
heating to understand the process of Helium migration from the mantle. The
purpose of this study is to find the applicability of Helium and other noble gas
isotopes in understanding the various processes and the chemical evolution in
the mantle which has shown inhomogeneity in space and in time. The preliminary
investigation on the Hawaiian rocks by the PI has already resulted in new
findings. Dr. Kurz is a very capable scientist and has contributed substantially
to the field of noble gas geochemistry. The results of his previous NSF funded
studies are considered to be of high quality by the scientific community and
this study has a very high chance of being successful.