* 8716479
* Evolution of Staphylococci Genomes
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1988,10/01/1989
* Michael McClelland, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/01/1989
* USD 54,700.00

To contribute to the long term goal of understanding the structure of bacterial
chromosomes and their evolution, a complete physical map of ordered restriction
fragments will be constructed for the genome of the Staphylococcus aureus and of
other species in the genus Staphyloccus Large DNA fragments, averaging 100,000
base pairs, produced by endonucleases that cleave l5 to 30 times in these
genomes, (Sma I, Sac II and Bgl I), can be separated by pulsed field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE). To produce a physical map using these endonucleases as
tools, a transposon derivative from Tn917 with a Not I (GCGGCCGC) site will be
constructed and transposed into the genome. Since there are no sites for Not I
in the S. aureus genome this introduced site will be unique. It will act as a
zero point for the rapid production of an accurate physical map of Sma I, Sac II
and Bgl I sites by indirect end-labeling of DNA separated by pulsed field gel
electrophoresis. Subchromosomal libraries will be constructed from restriction
fragments separated by PFGE. These will be arrayed to produce ordered
chromosomal libraries. The physical map will be correlated to the genetic map by
probing the plasmid arrays with cloned genes. Differences in the physical order
of DNA between species will be compared by hybridizing individual members of a
chromosomal library array from one species to all members of an array from the
other species.