* 8716926
* Studies on Particle-Bubble Interaction in Relation to Fine  Particle Flotation, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* S Venkatachalam, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 01/31/1991
* USD 57,143.00

Objectives and Relevancy: This project is for a cooperative research between Dr.
P. Somasudaran of Columbia University and Drs. R. Mallikarjunan and S.
Venkatachalam of the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) at Bombay. The project
is aimed towards understanding the mechanisms of a potential fine beneficiation
technique, namely, electroflotation and developing it for beneficiation of
selected problem ores. The expertise in IIT, Bombay in electrochemistry and
flotation techniques complement that at Columbia University in surface and
colloid chemical aspects of flotation of fines in the investigation. The study
will include the electroflotation of selected oxides, salt type and sulfide
minerals as a function of bubble size and size distribution charge produced,
using different electrode designs, and studiesof forces of interaction of such
bubbles with minerals. The U.S.-India program supports cooperative research
between scientists of the two countries in areas of interest to NSF when benefit
is expected to result from the collaboration This project falls in that
category. Merit: The U.S. scientist is one of this country's top scientists in
the field of materials and minerals processing. IIT Bombay is one of India's
prestigious academic and research institutes. The research area deals with an
important problem facing the mining industry in the U.S. and is also important
to India. Funding: The project is being funded under two grants: The Indian
Inst. of Tech. at Bombay: INT 87-16926 $57,143 in Indian currency Columbia
University: INT 87-04303 $17,135 in Indian currency plus US$29,218