* 8716685
* Neuromorphic Cognitive Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1991
* Anthony Garito, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/1991
* USD 619,997.00

Significant progress in computational neuroscience and neuroengineering requires
a multifaceted interdisciplinary research program in several interrelated areas:
Mathematical modeling and analysis of neural nets to better understand their
collective behavior and capabilities for practical applications.
Neurophysiological studies to better understand how retinal information is
processed by neuronal assemblies in the striate and extrastriate cortex. Neural
vision systems and their VLSI implementation for scene analysis and primitive
extraction. Architectures and opto-electronic implementations of self-organizing
neural nets partitioned into input/output and internal neurons for supervised
and unsupervised learning with stochastic and deterministic state update rules.
Higher order processing, in interconnected neural net modules utilizing,
sequential and cyclic storage and recall, generalization, for multisensory data
fusion and knowledge aggregation. Smart sensing and recognition from sketchy
information with emphasis on object recognition including study of object
representations that produce distortion invariant recognition. Highly structured
associative memory and processing of spoken language. Study of optical materials
and devices suitable for realizing artificial plasticity and learning specially
in nets with unipolar binary neurons and ternary synaptic weights that
facilitate opto-electronic implementations. The present proposal deals with
studies to be carried out by a group of faculty with extensive expertise in the
above areas, from the schools of Engineering and Medicine. Results of this
research are expected to contribute to the development of a new generation of
neuromorphic cognitive systems and to outperform more conventional approaches to
signal processing. outperform more conventional approaches to signal and