* 8716532
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Effective Hamiltonian    Theories of Molecular Electronic Structure
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Karl Freed, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1991
* USD 17,050.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Karl F. Freed, Department of
Chemistry, University of Chicago, to pursue with Dr. Hosung Sun, Department of
Chemistry, Pusan National University, for a period of 24 months, a program of
cooperative research on effective Hamiltonian theories of molecular electronic
structure. The collaborators will develop the necessary methods for calculating
dipole moments, diagonal and off-diagonal spin orbit couplings, other non-
adiabatic couplings, relativistic corrections, etc. in molecular systems. The
major thrust of the proposed research involves the extension of quasidegenerate
many-body perturbation theory (QDMBPT) to treat properties other than energy.
The calculation of molecular properties other than energy often provides a more
stringent test of the accuracy of electronic structure calculations than does
calculation of the energy. The collaborators bring complimentary skills to bear
on the research. Dr. Freed will provide much of the formal input including the
connections with semiempirical methods, while Dr. Sun will supervise the
sophisticated aspects of algorithm and code development with some contributions
to formal theory and applications. This project is relevant to the objectives of
the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. This project will add an
international cooperative dimension to Dr. Freed's research under NSF Grant No.
CHE8617480.