* 8716386
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Magnetic Pressure Confine- ment of the Optical Jets in Young Stellar Objects
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1991
* Thomas Jones, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1991
* USD 5,182.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Thomas W. Jones, Department of
Astronomy, University of Minnesota, to pursue with Dr. Seung-Urn Choe,
Department of Earth Science, Seoul National University, for a period of 12
months, a program of cooperative research on magnetic pressure confinement of
the optical jets of young stellar objects. The collaborators will investigate
the nature of ionized gas outflows from certain young stars. Theoretical
calculations then will be made in order to understand the mechanisms which
collimate these flows into narrow, jet-like structures. Various models will be
developed, used, and evaluated. The general area of the proposed research is one
that is currently very active in the United States. Gaseous jets have been
observed to emanate from young stellar objects. A somewhat novel process of
confining such jets will be explored in the present project. The collaborators
are highly respected scientists who have successfully cooperated in this field
for some seven years. The present project will allow these scientists to combine
their talents in the study of the research problem. This project is relevant to
the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and
engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean
participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering
Foundation (KOSEF).