* 8716143
* International Conference on Tropical Micro-Meteorology and  Air Pollution, February 15-19, 1988, New Delhi, India, GroupTravel Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Sethu Raman, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1989
* USD 41,000.00

Description: This project supports participation by ten U.S. scientists and up
to five scientists from developing countries to participate in an "International
Conference on Tropical Micro-Meteorology and Air Pollution, to be held in New
Delhi, India, February 15-19, 1988. The conference will include scientists from
several European countries, Australia and Japan. Topics to be covered will
include modelling and monitoring of pollution from combinations of small,
dispersed and large industrial sources, impact of future growth in the use of
alternative energy sources, and improved efficiency of combustion on air
pollution in the tropics, characterization of tropical boundary layer over land
and ocean, and procedures for dealing with accidental releases of substantial
quantities of toxic material in densly populated areas. The proceedings will be
published by the International Journal of Atmospheric Environment (published in
the U.K. and printed in India). Scope: The conference is sponsored by the
American Meteorological Society, the Third World Academy of Sciences, Trieste,
Italy, the Indian Department of Science and Technology, the Indian Science
Academy, and the Indian Meteorological Society. The U.S. P.I. is a leading
researcher on Indian atmospheric dynamics in collaboration with the Indian
organizer of the conference. It is likely that the meeting will stimulate
further collaborative research, as well as provide guidelines on dealing with
atmospheric pollutants.