* 8716459
* Electron Transfer in the Cytochrome c - Cytochrome c        Peroxidase Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* James Erman, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 09/30/1991
* USD 248,260.00

The cytochrome c - cytochrome c peroxidase system provides an outstanding
opportunity to uncover the intimate details of the structural requirements for
peroxidase activity, as well as those for long range electron transfer between
physiologically related heme proteins. The objective of this research proposal
is to elucidate the detailed mechanism of cytochrome c peroxidase catalysis with
special emphasis on characterizing the interaction between cytochrome c and
cytochrome c peroxidase. Experiments designed to clarify the stoichiometry of
binding between cytochrome c and cytochrome c peroxidase will be performed to
determine if, and under what conditions, more than one cytochrome c may bind to
cytochrome c peroxidase. The specificity of binding at the high affinity binding
site will be explored by utilizing a variety of cytochrome cs isolated from
different sources and through site-directed mutagenesis of cytochrome c
peroxidase. Transient state kinetic techniques will be used to investigate the
rate of electron transfer between ferrocytochrome c and the oxidized
intermediates of cytochrome c preoxidase. The specificity of the reaction
dynamics will be evaluated by using cytochrome c from various sources and the
role of specific amino acid residues in the enzyme will be explored by site-
directed mutagenesis.