* 8716282
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Generation and Application of Hot Dense Laser Plasma / Honolulu, Hawaii / May 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,05/31/1989
* George Miley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 05/31/1989
* USD 13,850.00

This award will support the participation of U.S. scientists in a seminar on the
"Generation and Application of Hot Dense Laser Plasma," organised jointly by
Professor George Miley of the University of Illinois and Professor Sadao Nakai
of Osaka University, Japan. United States and Japanese participants will meet in
Honolulu, Hawaii during May 1988. The seminar will focus on recent research
developments in laser-produced plasmas. Topics for discussion will include:
laser-plasma interactions; energy transport and radiation-atomic processes in
laser produced plasmas; high brightness x-ray sources; and various technical
applications of laser produced plasmas such as inertial confinement fusion and
particle acceleration. The unique high-temperature, high density plasmas which
are produced using powerful lasers represent a new regime of matter that is
receiving intense research in both the U.S. and Japan. This seminar will be the
fourth in a series that have been held on this general topic under the
U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science Program, beginning in 1972. The 1988 seminar
agenda emphasizes the potential new applications of laser plasmas in industrial
processing. The seminar will provide a valuable forum for assessing the state-
of-the-art in the field, for immersing relatively new investigators, and for
charting directions for future collaborative research.