* 8716142
* Study of the Tropical Atmospheric Boundary Layer During     Various Phases of the Indian Monsoon, A Guest Scientist     Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,09/14/1989
* Sethu Raman, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/14/1989
* USD 31,000.00

Description: This project supports a U.S. scientists to spend a sabbatical from
his university at two prestigious academic institutions in India, namely the
Indian Institute of Science (IIS) in Bangalore, and the Indian Institute of
Technology (IIT) in New Delhi. During that period Dr. Raman will continue his
current collaborative research on planetary boundary layer (PBL), monsoon
dynamics and air pollution, with scientists from the Center for Atmospheric
Sciences (CAS) at IIS Bangalore and at IIT Delhi. He will increase his work on
tropical boundary structures over land for both convective and stable conditions
and monsoon dynamics. He will participate in the design of a three-year
experiment at CAS for the study of the boundary layer structure in the monsoon
trough normally located along the Gangetic plains during Indian southwest
monsoon. At Delhi he will conduct research on air pollution meteorology and the
work on PBL parameterization for Regional Scale Weather Forecasting Models. His
contacts are Professors R.N. Iyengar at CAS, Bangalore and M.P. Singh at IIT
Delhi. Scope: The P.I. is one of the leading experts in the U.S. on modeling of
tropical weather, especially as related to the Indian subcontinent. He has long
experience in conducting research with Indian scientists under several grants
from NSF. One of the Indian collaborators (Dr. Iyengar) is Acting Head of the
Center for Atmospheric Sciences at the Indian Institute of Science, one of
India's top research institutes with excellent staff and facilities and with
well planned research agenda. Dr. M.P. Singh at the Indian Institute of
Technology in New Delhi is the Director of the Center for Atmospheric Sciences,
and has a large staff engaged primarily in atmospheric modeling and air
pollution studies. Drs. Singh and Raman have been collaborating for several
years on a project that involved sending U.S. students for field studies in
India. This project has the potential to produce significant results.