* 8716949
* Facilities Support for the Plant Resources Center,          University of Texas at Austin
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Billie Turner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 08/31/1991
* USD 225,310.00

The Plant Resources Center (PRC) of the University of Texas includes the
University of Texas Herbarium and most of the herbarium of C.L. Lundell. The
Plant Resources Center is also the site of a number of research programs that
involve the production of floras and monographic treatments of a wide range of
plant groups. Over the last 15 years, the number of specimens in the Plant
Resources Center has increased from 300,000 to 950,000. Moreover, the PRC, in
conjunction with the Botany Department of the University of Texas carries out an
extensive program for the training of plant systematists. During the next three
years, the PRC will receive the remainder of the Lundell collection, about
65,000 specimens, including important type material. In addition to the Lundell
material itself, the PRC will receive, during the next several years, over
75,000 specimens owed the Lundell Herbarium in exchange (these will now come to
the PRC). Because of the influx of new material, the PRC has requested
additional herbarium personnel, cases to house new material, and computer
equipment for keeping records and for the initiation of a register of type
material now housed in the PRC. At the same time the Lundell material is being
incorporated into the PRC, the lower plants and grasses, still housed in the
Biological Laboratories will be moved to the Main Building, thereby joining the
entire collection for the first time since 1975. The University of Texas has
promised the PRC an additional 5,000 sq. ft. of space for the new material. The
unification of the PRC and the acquisition of the Lundell material will place
the combined Texas-Lundell Herbarium in the top ten herbaria in the country in
terms of specimens, and assure that the PRC and the Department of Botany of The
University of Texas continue to be a leading research and teaching institution
of evolutionary and systematic biology.