* 8716288
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research; Study of Benioff Zone   Geometry and Stresses at the Tehauntepec, Mexico Transition Zone along the Middle America Trench
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Karen McNally, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/1991
* USD 26,869.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. Karen McNally of
the University of Santa Cruz and Dr. J. Gonzalez-Ruiz of the Centro de
Investigacion Cientifica y de Educacion Superior de Ensenada (CISECE) in Mexico.
Recent studies have focused on intermediate depth seismicity, looking at the
stresses and geometries associated with subduction processes. Evidence has been
found suggesting that subducting plates "tear" into segments at locations of
sharp changes in either the geometry of the trench or the dip of the downgoing
plate or both. Other evidence suggests that downgoing plates are highly
deformable. The investigators plan to extend present studies to include a
detailed study of the structure of the subducting Cocos plate at the Tehuantepec
transition zone beneath Mexico. This region is of interest because, among other
reasons, it may be the location of the triple junction between the Cocos-North
America-Caribbean plates; it is transitional between shallow angle and steep
angle subduction; volcano geometry, trench depth, plate age, and other features
change at this location; it is a seismic gap with unknown potential; and fault
mechanism and seismicity distribution change markedly from those of other areas
of Mexico. The investigators will use an observational approach by assembling
very accurate depths and focal mechanisms of regional earthquakes via synthetic
waveform modeling. Based on this earthquake data set, the geometry and the
nature and direction of stress and coupling between and within the overriding
and downgoing plates will be determined. The work will lead to a significant
publication regarding earthquake mechanisms, tectonic framework, and seismic
risk.