* 8716628
* In-Situ Optical Monitoring for Langmuir/Blodgett Deposition
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Pieter Stroeve, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1989
* USD 22,032.00

The opportunity to create design and manufacturing protocols for the creation of
engineered polymeric ultrathin film systems (PUFS) may well rest on the
development of sophisticated, in-situ diagnostics. The Langmuir/Blodgett
deposition technique offers the possibility of providing the foundation for the
application of organics to important emerging fields, such as optical computing,
electronics, and biotechnology. These applications depend on precise control of
materials properties such as positional and orientational order of active
moieties, alternation of layers, and thickness. With the need to investigate
mixtures and compounds of polymers being deposited in order to create film
systems possessing three-dimensional order, it has become evident that methods
need to be developed capable of tracking the elastodynamic, hydrodynamic, and
electrodynamic behavior of the monolayers as they are extracted from the
air/water interface. It is proposed in this project to introduce laser beams at
the contact line, as well as at the upper and lower resting positions. Second
harmonic generation (SHG), which appears to be a very promising probe, is used
here to study the orientation of molecules on the Langmuir layer, as well as to
characterize the order of completed film systems of optically highly nonlinear
dyes. By comparing the SHG from the Langmuir layer with that obtained at the
water contact line on the substrate, and later at the upper resting (drying)
position, the PI's are able to measure reorientation of the dye moiety through
polarization rotation, changes in area/molecule through amplitude changes, and
chemical degradation and drying by examining these same effects on different
molecules and substrates. In this initial effort, the PI's plan to attempt to
confirm that such measurements are possible, and that dynamics are occurring
during time scales which validate the need to pursue further study. If such
dynamical changes are evident, accurate monitoring may allow delicate adjustment
of trough conditions for improved film quality. These measurements will provide
valuable information not presently available concerning the distinctions between
the behavior of the early monolayers and that of subsequent layers. The optical
return signal will aid in establishing the transitional history of the Langmuir
layer as it is transformed into a specific deposited monolayer. If this work is
successful, it will open the way to additional optical and infrared
spectroscopies capable of detecting subtle changes in conformation and bonding
in thin liquid films.