* 8716238
* Genetics of Protein Secretionin Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Jonathan Beckwith, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 11/30/1989
* USD 150,000.00

A study will be made of the secretion machinery in E. coli, involved in the
export of proteins to the cell envelope. Various genetic selections and
screening procedures to isolate mutants defective in components of this
machinery. The mutants will define sec genes which will be cloned, sequenced and
their gene products identified. The function of the sec gene products will be
studied by examining in vivo phenotypes and behavior of sec mutant extracts in
an in vitro system. New selection procedures will be developed. In one, a
selection for derepression of a secA-lacZ fusion yields mutations in already
known sec genes and in a new gene, secE. In a second procedure, selection for
the inability to export bacteriophage lambda receptor to the outer membrane is
carried out after a shift to a designated non-permissive temperature. In
addition, procedures and mutants will be sought that allow a rapid shut-off of
the secretion machinery after a shift to non-permissive temperature. Mutant
selections will be used to define the components of the protein B-galactosidase
that prevent it from passing through the cytoplasmic membrane. These studies may
shed light either on the mechanism of protein passage through membranes or on
protein folding pathways. This project is concerned with the mechanism by which
proteins are transported (secreted) across membranes. Studies on higher
organisms have led to formulation of the signal hypothesis in which the presence
of an uncharged hydrophobic peptide (the signal sequence) facilitates
transmembrane secretion. Signal sequences have subsequently been identified on
bacterial proteins, thus allowing the powerful methods of bacterial genetics to
be used to analyze the secretion machinery. A variety of selection procedures
will be used to isolate bacterial mutants that are defective in secretion. These
mutants will define the bacterial genes that participate in the secretion
process and will allow isolation and characterization of the products of these
genes. Upon completion, this project will provide a detailed picture of protein
secretion in bacteria and will serve as a model for similar studies in higher
organisms.