* 8716591
* Studies of Molluscan Shells From Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Ventsand Cold-Water Seeps
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1987,11/30/1992
* Richard Lutz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1992
* USD 138,979.00

Proposed studies are designed to address four fundamental questions concerning
deep-sea hydrothermal vent and cold-water seep environments: (1) Are biological
processes in these environments relatively fast or relatively slow? (2) How do
the rates of biological processes vary among a wide variety of geographically-
separated hydrothermal systems and, more generally, between deep-sea
hydrothermal vent and cold-water seep environments? (3) How do the relatively
sedentary organisms encountered at the vents and seeps disperse and subsequently
locate and colonize these apparently ephemeral and geographically-separated
environments? and (4) What are the time scales associated with vent and seep
activity at particular sites throughout the world's oceans? Experiments will be
deployed and retrieved (and specimens sampled) using various deep-diving
submersibles at six geographically-separated hydrothermal vent areas (Galapagos
Rift, 13'N, 21'N, Guaymas Basin, Juan de Fuca Ridge, and Mid-Atlantic Ridge) and
one cold-water seep environment (base of the West Florida Escarpment). Detailed
comparisons will be made with the experimental results obtained (and specimens
at our disposal) from previous hydrothermal vent and cold-water seep
expeditions, relying heavily upon mathematical techniques developed during the
course of our ongoing NSF-funded studies. Results obtained from the proposed
studies should significantly increase our knowledge of both temporal and spatial
variability in rates of biological and geological processes within, among, and
between deep-sea hydrothermal vent and cold-water seep environments. Finally,
the proposed studies involve extensive collaborative efforts with French,
Canadian and Mexican scientists which should represent a significant step toward
closer integration of the major hydrothermal vent programs presently underway
throughout the world's oceans.