* 8716324
* Studies of Learning and Representation in Distributed       Connectionist Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1991
* David Touretzky, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 02/28/1991
* USD 527,695.00

Massively parallel connectionist systems having distributed representations of
knowledge, have two fundamental problems: developing faster and more effective
learning procedures for connectionist networks, and developing techniques by
which such networks can handle complex symbolic knowledge structures in addition
to the lower-level sensory knowledge being studied by groups. The learning work
generally focuses primarily on variations of the existing so-called Boltzmann
and back-propagation procedures. In this proposed effort "variable plasticity"
techniques in which not all of the weights have the same ability to change
during learning. The learning procedures developed will be evaluated by
application to problems in speech understanding, low-level image processing, and
control of a manipulator. Preliminary experiments in these areas are described
in the main proposal. The work on symbolic representations will focus on
language understanding and commonsense reasoning, specifically: increasing the
subtlety and richness of distributed symbolic representations, combining
multiple sources of syntactic and semantic constraint via parallel relaxation,
investigating problems in matching and complex inference, using learning to
adjust the behavior of an adaptive symbol processor problems in artificial
intelligence and cognitive psychology. systems. The proposed work is cross-
disciplinary in nature, applying techniques from mathematics, computer science
and the new field of connectionism to problems in artificial intelligence,
cognitive psychology, and