* 8716224
* Calcium-Dependent Protein Phosphorylation in the Green Alga Mougeotia
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Daniel Roberts, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1991
* USD 208,377.00

This research investigates the mechanisms of calcium action in plant cells.
Calcium is a very important regulatory molecule in all eukaryotes. It is thought
to play a role as an intracellular messenger that couples physiological
responses to external stimuli. The calcium binding proteins have been
extensively studied in animals. In this project, the potential targets of
calcium action will be investigated in plants. The goal of the research is to
advance our understanding of how calcium mediates the effects of environmental
stumuli on plant cells. The green alga Mougeotia has been selected as the
experimental organism because it is an attractive biological model of calcium-
dependent regulation in plants. The approach will involve purification and
characterization of the molecular targets of calcium in Mougeotia: calcium-
stimulated proteins and enzymes. The focus will be on a recently discovered
calcium stimulated protein kinase of Mougeotia. The purification and
characterization of the protein kinase will be carried out. Particular emphasis
will be on the elucidation of the molecular basis of calcium regulation by
identifying the calcium-binding effector molecules that regulate the activity.
Also, in order to determine the role of this kinase in Mougeotia, in vitro and
in vivo phosphorylation assays will be used to identify the substrates of the
protein kinase. The effects of phosphorylation on the in vitro activities of
these substrates will be assessed. The changes in in vivo substrate
phosphorylation levels under conditions that trigger or suppress calcium-
dependent responses also will be determined.//