* 8716005
* Physiological Adaptation and Phylogenetic Constraints on    Reproduction in Antarctic Birds
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Albert Bennett, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/1991
* USD 67,108.00

The adults of many species of Antarctic birds show morphological, physiological
and behavioral adaptations to their cold environment. However, it is not known
how adults and chicks have adapted to enable successful chick survival and
growth under Antarctic conditions. The thermoregulatory problems facing nestling
birds are tremendous due to their immature physiology, small size, poor
insulation and lack of mobility. The development of endothermy is a crucial
event during the ontogeny of young birds, and it profoundly impacts the
energetics and reproduction of their parents. Bennett will investigate whether
thermoregulation of young chicks is primarily influenced by behavior of adults
and chicks or the physiological capacity of the developing young, using three
charadriiform bird species (Kelp Gull, Antarctic Skua, and Greater Sheathbill).
These birds independently colonized Antarctica and are hence ecologically
convergent. The Kelp Gull range extends to lower latitudes, enabling comparisons
to be made both within and between species. The relative energetic costs and
survival implications of different behavioral strategies (including nest
construction, foraging patterns and brooding behavior) and physiological
adaptations (including resting and maximal oxygen consumption, conductance,
shivering capacity, and enzymatic activity in skeletal muscles) will be
assessed. This study will form a critical part of a larger study of the
evolution of development in charadriiform birds in response to ecological
pressures.