* 8716988
* Characterization of Culturable and Nonculturable Bacteria:  A 16S rRNA Sequence Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/1987,11/17/1988
* Jed Fuhrman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 11/17/1988
* USD 76,633.00

This project will use tools of molecular biology to approach a long-standing
biological oceanographic problem. Its major goals are to (a) learn what kinds of
bacteria dominate natural planktonic populations, (b) generate a bank of pure
cultures of heterotrophic oligotrophs, and (c) determine which, if any, cultures
are representative of major components of the natural populations. Until now,
most of the naturally-occurring bacteria have not been phylogenetically
characterized (or "identified") because they have resisted attempts to culture
them, precluding conventional identification. This project will circumvent the
problem with state-of-the-art techniques of RNA sequencing, and DNA cloning to
characterize microorganisms. Such work can now be done on freshly collected
material without culturing the microorganisms. This project will provide for (1)
unambiguous identification of the dominant marine bacteria, in a way appropriate
for comparing species compositions of both culturable and nonculturable
populations, (2) selection of isolates that are most closely related to those
dominating "real" marine populations, suitable for lab studies, (3) the
development of molecular probes to define population distribu- tions in other
locales and thus measure diversity within and between broadly different
environments, (4) the possible use of these probes for single-cell hybridization
studies for rapid microscopic identification of microorganisms in preserved
samples from any marine environment.