* 8716489
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Developmental Biology of the           Ascidian / Tohuku University, Aomori, Japan /               August 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,02/28/1989
* Charles Lambert, California State University-Fullerton
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 02/28/1989
* USD 18,502.00

This award will support U.S. participation in a seminar on the "Developmental
Biology of the Ascidian" organized jointly by Professor Charles Lambert of
California State University, Fullerton and Dr. Takaharu Numakunai of Tohoku
University, Japan. Six U.S. researchers will meet with Japanese scientists in
August 1988 at the Asamushi Marine Biological Station of the Tohoku University.
Topics of ascidian biology to be discussed include: the molecular basis of
fertilization and cell differentiation during cleavage, control of the
reproductive cycle, controls of colony formation and recognition, the
accumulation and function of metal ions during development, the mechanism of
metamorphosis, the formation of complex extracellular structures, and the nature
of substances made by ascidians which are toxic to viruses, bacteria and tumor
cells. Ascidians, as the most primitive of the living chordates, are ideal
organisms for studying basic questions in developmental biology and may teach us
much about the development and evolution of vertebrates. Remarkable strides have
been made over the last five years in our understanding of many aspects of
ascidian development. This joint U.S.-Japan seminar will provide a much-needed
forum for the exchange of research results and ideas between ascidian biologists
in our two countries.