* 8716994
* Role of Bacteria in Detrital Marine Foodwebs:  Mechanisms inBacteria-Organic Matter Interactions
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1987,04/30/1990
* Farooq Azam, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1990
* USD 230,000.00

Research is proposed to continue the study of the mechanisms whereby
heterotrophic bacterioplankton utilize particulate organic matter (POM) and
dissolved organic matter (DOM) in the sea. The PI is also studying the magnitude
and patterns of organic matter flux into bacteria in both the epipelagic and the
mesopelagic zones to determine how heterotrophic bacteria may influence the
vertical transport of biogenic production in the sea. The research will focus on
studying the mechanisms and rates of bacterial utilization of small detritus
(1-50 um). The PI will use laboratory produced and well-characterized "model
detritus" consisting of killed phytoplankton, microflagellates, and chroococoid
cyanobacteria. He will study colonization growth rates of bacteria on POM and
will examine enzymic mechanisms whereby bacteria hydrolyze POM into utilizable
DOM; determine shifts in bacterial cell-size, growth rate, and modes of organic
matter hydrolysis as a consequence of attachment to, or release from, POM. The
PI asks whether a colonized particle becomes a point-source of DOM as well as of
bacteria ("baby-machine"). A hypothesis will be tested that firm attachment to
POM is a survival/dispersal strategy of bacteria; they survive the passage
through metazoan gut and thrive in the fecal pellets. In field work using
uniformly Ä±14C! labeled detritus, the PI will measure the turnover times of
detritus of a broad size range, biochemical composition, and origins. The
research proposed will contribute towards developing a mechanistic framework for
bacteria-organic matter interactions in an ecosytem context. This knowledge
should be of value in elucidating the role of bacterioplankton in organic matter
fluxes in the oceans.