* 8716147
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Molecular and Physiological       Responses to Environmental Plant Stresses / Fairbanks,      Alaska / June 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,02/28/1989
* Bob Buchanan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 02/28/1989
* USD 15,790.00

This award will support the participation of U.S. scientists in a seminar on the
"Molecular and Physiological Responses to Environmental Plant Stresses,"
organized by Professors Bob Buchanan of the University of California, Berkeley
and F. Stuart Chapin III of the University of Alaska, together with Professor
Takeshi Akazawa of Nagoya University, Japan. United States and Japanese
participants will meet at the University of Alaska in Fairbanks during June
1988. The seminar will focus on the molecular and physiological responses of
plants to water, salt, temperature, light and nutrient stresses. Environmental
plant stresses are problems of interest scientifically and of concern
practically due to their cause of major crop loss worldwide. With the expansion
of agriculture to meet global food needs, the impact of unfavorable environments
on plant growth and development, and thus on crop yield, becomes increasingly
important. The application of modern molecular techniques and state of the art
instrumentation has already provided new insights into mechanisms of stress
effects on plants. Both Japanese and American scientists are doing research at
the cutting edge of this field. This seminar will provide a forum for the
exchange of recent research results and ideas, and encourage collaborative
research between scientists from our two countries.