* 8716250
* U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research: Numerical Solutionor Partial Differential Equations in Engineering Problems
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,02/28/1991
* Douglas Arnold, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 02/28/1991
* USD 17,410.00

This award will support ongoing collaborative research in applied mathematics
between two groups of U.S. and French scientists, based at the University of
Maryland and at the French National Institute for Information Science and
Automation (INRIA). The U.S. group will be led by Professor Ivo Babuska; on the
French side the project will be led by Dr. Michel Bernadou, INRIA -
Rocquencourt. The University of Maryland and INRIA have been working for many
years on finite element methods for the numerical solution of partial
differential equations that arise in engineering problems. INRIA has developed
the software system MODULEF; new theoretical approaches and related computer
implementations have been developed at the University of Maryland. Hence the
French and U.S. groups complement each other. The major objectives of the
proposed collaboration are: a) To develop a scientific framework characterizing
the relevant properties of existing methods which can be used for the assessment
of their effectiveness in practical computations, and to design new effective
methods. b) To assess the accuracy of computed results and the design of
adaptive procedures. c) To develop new mathematical formulations of important
engineering problems, with special attention given to problems for which the
available information (input data) has intrinsic uncertainties. This research
joins two groups of outstanding U.S. and French applied mathematicians. INRIA is
widely recognized for its concentration of expertise in computer research,
automation, mathematics and scientific computing; it provides an excellent
combination of fundamental research with industrial collaboration in these
areas. This award will allow fruitful collaboration to continue in the important
area of finite element theory and applications.