* 8716163
* Mechanism of Hormonal Induction of ACC Synthase
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1989
* Allen Phillips, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 10/31/1989
* USD 50,000.00

Ethylene is a plant growth regulator with potent effects throughout plant
growth and development, from seed germination through fruit ripening and
senescence and death of the plant. Other plant hormones affect the key
regulatory step leading to the synthesis of ethylene in plants. Thus, the
biosynthesis of ethylene presents a very complicated picture. The enzyme which
carries out the final biosynthetic step is present in extremely small amounts
and has eluded expert plant biochemists for years. This project funds a short
term project to purify and identify this key plant enzyme. Both the
phytohormones indole-3-acetic acid and brassinosteroid specifically affect the
conversion of S- adenosylmethionine (SAM) to 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic
acid (ACC), the key reaction controlling the production of ethylene. Despite
ethylene's role in diverse plant physiological processes, the major features of
control of its formation from SAM via ACC within the plant and how it acts have
not been established. The study of ACC synthase (the rate limiting enzyme which
catalyzes the reaction between SAM and ACC) and how phytohormones affect its
level in tissues have been hampered by the inability to obtain purified enzyme
and thus be able to detect specific changes in mRNA formation or stability which
could account for the elevation in ACC synthase activity. This study focuses on
the further development of the present purification scheme for obtaining
purified enzyme and also to characterize it. The enzyme being purified is ACC
synthase from etiolated mung bean hypocotyl tissue which has been hormonally
treated to elevate enzyme levels. Purification will involve chromatography on
phenyl sepharose, hydroxylapatite and anion exchange columns. The purified
enzyme will be characterized by denaturing gel electrophoresis and isoelectric
focusing. Kinetic properties and coenzyme content will also be analyzed. Once
this project is complete to study the regulation of ACC synthase can be
attempted and how other plant hormones affect transcriptional control of this
key enzyme can be learned.***//