* 8716055
* The Role of the D2 Protein in the Photosystem II Complex as Probed by Directed Mutagenesis and Mutant Analysis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Willem Vermaas, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1991
* USD 207,550.00

The D2 protein is a central component of the Photosystem II complex in
photosynthetic membranes, but its precise function is unknown. The role of
specific amino acid residues and polypeptide regions of D2 in function,
structure and assembly of the Photosystem II complex is being studied by
directed mutagenesis techniques. Specific mutations are induced D2. The psbD-I
gene (encoding D2) carrying site-directed mutations is introduced into a mutant
of the transformable photoheterotrophic cyanobacterium Synechocystis 6803, from
which the two psbD gene copies (psbD-I and psbD-II) have been deleted. Target
regions to create D2 mutations are identified in part by comparison with the
partially homologous M subunit of the reaction center from purple bacteria, for
which the detailed structure is known. The properties of the mutant Photosystem
II complex are analyzed in a variety of ways, including mRNA studies, and
analysis of Photosystem II protein composition and synthesis, electron
transport, chlorophyll fluorescence, specific EPR signals, herbicide binding,
and flash-induced absorbance changes. The results of this project will lead to a
detailed understanding of the role of specific residues and regions in an
important but poorly understood protein in photosynthetic membranes. Insight
will be gained on how the oxidizing complex is organized. Potentially
significant is that the protein complex can be altered to result in more
efficient operation.***//