* 8716660
* Petrologic-Tectonic Evolution of the Lau Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1988,03/31/1991
* James Hawkins, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 03/31/1991
* USD 314,231.00

The origin of backarc basins has been a topic of much interest and some
controversy to marine geologists, geophysicists and petrologists for several
decades. This interest stems in part because of their location close to island
arcs where different magma types are erupted synchronously with formation of the
backarc basin crust. The thermal and stress regimes of backarc basins are of
interest because they represent extensional tectonics, steep thermal gradients
and mantle upwelling and melting in regions which are dominated overall by
compression and subduction of old and cold sediments and crustal rocks to
considerable depth within the mantle. The present award will support a geologic
and geochemical study of the formation of the Lau Basin which lies to the west
of the Tonga Trench and Tonga Ridge in the southwest Pacific. The Lau Basin
began rifting within the last few million years and has shown a progressive
change in basalt chemistry from a dominance of island arc related basalts to
more normal backarc basin basalts. Such a change implies an evolution in the
mantle source region from which the basalts are erupted. The field program will
examine both the transition regions where mixed basalts have been erupted and
the spreading ridge where normal basin crust is presently being emplaced.
Subsequent laboratory analyses of recovered samples should fully define the
backarc melting regime and allow a comparison of the Lau Basin with the more
fully studied Marianas back arc basin. Data from the field program will also aid
in defining potential sites for ocean drilling.