* 8716342
* Ultrastructure, Photosynthetic Pigments, and Nutritional    Characteristics of Oceanic Ultraplankton Clones in          Culture
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1987,09/30/1990
* Robert Guillard, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1990
* USD 266,302.00

The eukaryotic ultraplankton (1-6 + um) is at times the most signigicant
component of the photosynthetic plankton, both in terms of biomass and primary
productivity, especially in the deep chlorophyll maximum (ca. 100 m depth). The
species comprising it have been studied very little for two reasons; besides
their small size, their fragility makes most preserve poorly for routine
observation, and their sensitivity has until recently made isolation into
culture exceedingly difficult. Our ultraplankton collection now contains some
200 clones in unialgal or axenic culture. With collaborators we are studying (1)
morphology and ultrastructure by light microscopy, SEM and TEM, and (2)
photosynthetic pigment suites by HPLC and techniques of carotenoid chemistry.
The results will assist in placing the organisms taxonomically and undoubtedly
will result in new taxa, new taxonomic criteria, and possibly major revision of
some higher systematic levels. We also study nutrition of the clones in culture.
Some have heterotrophic or phagotrophic capabilities. Requirements for trace
elements - Fe, Mn, Zn, Se - will be compared to the requirements of known
oceanic and neritic phytoplankton species by growth studies under defined
conditions. These studies, together with those being carried out by other groups
on photosynthetic behavior, other physiological properties, grazing, etc. will
give us much better understanding of the ecology of this important flora, now
available for study.