* 8716900
* I/UCRC for an Cooperative Partnership Initiative between    CAPPS and the Institut Pertanian Bogor
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1995
* Steven Schwartz, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 07/31/1995
* USD 728,639.00

Continuous aseptic processing and packaging is the most revolutionary
development food processing has seen in the last fifty years. This technology is
rapidly replacing other standard practices which have been commonplace. European
companies appear to be incorporating aseptic processing more rapidly then in the
United States. U.S. companies now recognize the need for research to maintain
competitiveness. As a result of an NSF planning grant (CDR 86-13062) an
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Aseptic Processing and
Packaging Studies appears to be feasible and viable. This five-year continuing
grant is funding the initiation of an Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center for Aseptic Processing and Packaging Studies at North Carolina State
University in collaboration with researchers from Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University. The initial research program will address Surface
Characteristics and Interactions; Product Properties; and Non-traditional
Processing. Nine companies are expected to be members of the Center providing
about 75% of the approximately $400,000 per year initial research budget. The
Principal Investigator and his colleagues are nationally recognized experts in
their disciplines and have the experience and industrial contacts necessary to
operate this Center. The Center has been coordinated with Drs. Duane Bruley
(CBT) and Frederick Heineken (EET). The Program Manager recommends that the
North Carolina State University be awarded a five-year continuing grant to be
funded as follows: $75,000 for the first three years, $50,000 for fourth year
and $25,000 for fifth year. An additional $5,000 is recommended for the
"Supplemental Funding for Support of Women, Minority, and Handicapped
Engineering Research Assistants" Program during the first year. Near the end of
each 12-month period, the Program Manager and/or the Head of The Division of
Cross-Disciplinary Research will review the progress of the Center on a number
of renewal criteria, including the following: (1) extent to which
university/industry interaction and collaboration is developing; (2) extent to
which the support base for the center is expanding; (3) extent to which a robust
research program is developing. If review is satisfactory, the Program Manager
will recommend support of the next period of this continuing grant.