* 8716460
* The Relationship Between Iron Availability and PhytoplanktonProductivity in the Southern Ocean
* O/D,OPP
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1992
* John Martin, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 10/31/1992
* USD 375,526.00

Southern Ocean waters are famous for their high phytoplankton productivities.
However, those familiar with the Southern Ocean know that the high productivity
is generally confined to shallow shelf areas and to waters along the ice edge;
in comparison, little productivity occurs offshore even though the waters
contain massive amounts of major plant nutrients. One possible explanation for
this finding is that an essential trace element or organic nutrient is missing.
Although evidence supporting this idea has been sought for the past 60 years,
rigorous testing was not possible before the recent development of ultra-clean
techniques which avoid trace-metal contamination. Martin has evidence which
suggests that iron is the limiting trace element. In order to test the theory
that the presence or absence of iron is responsible for variations in Antarctic
marine phytoplankton productivity, Martin proposes to measure iron
concentrations in nearshore and offshore Southern Ocean waters and in ice
samples using ultra-clean techniques. Ultraclean phytoplankton iron-enrichment
experiments will also be performed. Testing the iron-deficiency hypothesis is
important because the Antarctic ecosystem will never be adequately understood
without knowing the reason(s) why major nutrients are not used by phytoplankton.
The use or non-use of these major nutrients plays a significant role in
determining global atmospheric carbon dioxide levels.