* 8716218
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Physics &amp; Electrical Engr.)Excimer Laser Studies
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1990
* Roland Sauerbrey, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 07/31/1990
* USD 17,983.00

This two-year U.S.-China cooperative research project on excimer laser studies
between Frank Tittel and Roland Sauerbrey of Rice University and Zuguang Ma of
the Harbin Institute of Technology addresses two basic and challenging problems
in the field of visible laser systems and novel and promising ultraviolet
lasers: (1) the investigators will evaluate and implement techniques leading to
a more efficient, direct electrical excitation of broad band excimer lasers; and
(2) establish experimental and theoretical criteria needed to assess the
feasibility of novel, short wavelength lasers (the VUV and XUV region of the
electromagnetic field). This research will yield new, fundamental knowledge on
lasers and improved laser devices that have important applications in electronic
materials processing, remote sensing and biomedical research. The Rice
University and Harbin Institute of Technology collaboration is based on
complimentary research strengths and resources. Both groups have considerable
expertise in laser spectroscopy. The Rice group is particularly expert in
kinetics of excimer laser media; whereas, the Harbin group has considerable
experience in discharge laser physics. Linkage of the Rice and Harbin facilities
and expertise promotes the major purpose of a U.S.-China Cooperative Science
Program; which is, to advance scientific knowledge through combined scientific
efforts and abilities of American and Chinese scientists and engineers.