* 8716323
* Genes Active in Imaginal Discs During Morphogenesis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Jeanette Natzle, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 06/30/1992
* USD 242,400.00

The goal of this proposal is to understand the molecular biology of epithelial
morphogenesis in Drosophila imaginal discs at metamorphosis. Restructuring of
imaginal discs into the adult insect appendages requires extensive short
distance rearrangements of cells within the continuous epithelium, a widespread
morphogenetic mechanism. In Drosophila these morphogenetic events are initiated
by the steroid hormone 20- hydroxyecdysone and can be studied using in vitro
culture of mass-isolated imaginal discs. It has been possible to isolate and
characterize hormone-responsive genes that are activated during morphogenesis.
This proposal will focus on a genetic and molecular analysis of the regulation
and function of one gene, IMP-E1 (Inducible Membrane Protein-Early,
transcriptionally active in the initial stages of imaginal disc morphogenesis.
Gene function will be investigated genetically by isolation and analysis of
mutations that alter the effectiveness of the gene product. A biochemical
investigation of function will utilize immunological studies with an antisera
produced against a fusion protein synthesized in a bacterial expression system.
The mechanism of steroid hormone regulation of expression of this gene will be
determined and the fine- structure of the gene analyzed. This proposal will
further our understanding of the molecular biology of morphogenesis and the
genetic mechanisms by which complex processes like morphogenesis are controlled
during development. %%% Dr. Natzle proposes to investigate the properties of a
gene that may be essential for the normal formation of adult tissue during the
development of an insect. She has identified a gene that responds to a hormone
that induces the formation of adult tissue. By analyzing the regulation of this
gene at a genetical and biochemical level, Dr. Natzle will obtain basic
information concerning the function of this gene in the process of normal
morphogenesis. An understanding of the molecular choreography of morphogenesis
may enable us to better analyze developmental abnormalities that occur when
normal morphogenesis is perturbed or when cells within a tissue fail to retain
their normal interactions with neighbors and substratum and produce invasive
neoplasia.