* 8716558
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Endogenous Sleep Factors /        Honolulu, Hawaii / November 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1989
* James Krueger, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 09/30/1989
* USD 14,350.00

This award will support the participation of U.S. researchers in a seminar on
"Endogenous Sleep Factors" organized jointly by Dr. James Krueger of the
University of Tennessee and Professor Shojiro Inoue of the Tokyo Medical and
Dental University. United States and Japanese participants will meet in
Honolulu, Hawaii in November 1988. The seminar will provide a forum for the
exchange of research results and ideas related to sleep-promoting substances or
sleep factors (SF). Objectives of the seminar are: 1) establish definitions and
working hypotheses on SFs; 2) present evidence concerning newly described SFs;
3) discuss biochemical regulatory pathways for SFs; 4) present cellular and
molecular models for mechanisms of actions of SFs; 5) discuss the
interrelationships between SFs and substances involved in both immune and body
temperature regulation; and 6) provide a historical record from which the field
may grow. Sleep research and sleep factor research, in particular, are in a
state of flux. New and surprising interactions and substances have been
described in the past few years and it is likely that such advances will lead to
a better understanding of the fundamental brain mechanisms of sleep. This
seminar, by bringing together scientists from the United States and Japan which
are at the forefront of sleep factor research, will promote progress and
cooperation in the field.