* 8716623
* In-Situ Capacitance Sensor for Langmuir/Blodgett Deposition
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Pieter Stroeve, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1989
* USD 22,686.00

The opportunity to create design and manufacturing protocols for the creation of
engineered polymeric ultrathin film systems (PUFS) may rest to a great degree on
the development of sophisticated, in-situ diagnostics. The Langmuir/Blodgett
(L/B) deposition technique offers the possibility of providing the foundation
for the application of organics to important emerging fields, such as optics,
electronics, and biotechnology. These applications depend on precise control of
materials properties such as positional and orientational order of active
molecular structures, alternation of layers, and thickness. For L/B deposition,
surface pressure and Langmuir-layer area have remained the only necessary
diagnostic techniques because L/B methods were confined to simple organics. The
investigators have shown that it is possible to detect the thickness of a single
L/B monolayer using a capacitance sensor composed of interdigitated metal
electrodes. The sensor is fabricated on the substrate that is to be coated with
the L/B film. It is proposed to extend this work to examine other promising
applications of the capacitance sensor. It has been necessary to redesign the
sensor to eliminate or minimize subphase entrainment by the sensor itself. This
was achieved by coating the sensor with a hydrophobic monolayer and designing
the sensor so that the electrodes are normal to the interface during dipping.
The sensor also allows the study of the role of film drying on deposition
quality. In addition to quantifying subphase incorporation, the sensor is used
to study how L/B films coat over complex topography.