* 8716701
* A Study of the Transition from Continental Rifting to Seafloor Spreading in the Northern Red Sea
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1989
* James Cochran, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 12/31/1989
* USD 80,077.00

In this award, the principal investigator will study the transition of the
continental rifting to seafloor spreading in the Northern Red Sea. In an earlier
grant, the PI studied the early rifting of the continental margins of the
Northern Red Sea and acquired a large amount of geophysical data in the area. In
this study, the PI proposes to integrate underway geophysical data from Exxon
and ESP data from his French colleagues to his existing data base. The available
Exxon data set is quite extensive, consisting of closely spaced multichannel
seismic reflection profiles and gravity, magnetic and bathymetric data. The two
ship ESP data collected by the French are also of good quality and indicate
possible arrivals from the Moho. The interpretation of this increased data set
will lead to the understanding of the mechanism of extension in space and time
from the rift region to the sea floor spreading region in the Northern Red Sea
and the conditions under which such a transition takes place. The theme of the
research is of fundamental importance in plate tectonics. The structural and
tectonic information gained from this project can also be used as constraints in
thermal and mechanical modeling of the extension of lithosphere which leads to
rifting.