* 8716044
* Control of Steroid Receptor Binding to DNA by Hormones
* BIO,DCB
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Debra Skafar, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 09/30/1991
* USD 238,400.00

The proposed research will describe how steroid binding to its receptor alters
the equilibrium binding of the calf uterine estrogen and progesterone receptors
to DNA. The association constant for binding to DNA and the cooperativity of
protein-DNA interactions will be measured in the absence and presence of steroid
hormones. Association constants will be determined by using chromatography of
each receptor over small DNA-Sepharose columns at a constant salt concentration.
The degree of cooperativity will be measured using "salt back-titration"
analysis. This is based on measuring the salt-dependence of protein-DNA binding
at high concentrations of protein. Free receptor and receptor bound to DNA will
be separated by sucrose density gradient centrifugation and quantified by liquid
scintillation counting of tritiated steroid. By quantifying the equilibrium
binding of the estrogen and progesterone receptors to DNA in the absence and
presence of different ligands, these experiments will describe some of the
conformational changes in steroid receptors which are induced by ligand binding.
Estrogen and progesterone receptors are proteins which bind steroid hormones.
Hormone binding to the receptor induces a conformational change in the receptor
which, in turn, alters the binding of the receptor to specific DNA sequences.
Binding of the receptor to DNA leads to alterations in the expression of
specific genes. The proposed quantitative studies of the interaction between the
estrogen and progesterone receptors and DNA, and how DNA-binding of the
receptors is altered by steroid binding will increase our basic understanding of
the mechanisms by which gene expression is regulated by steroid hormones.