* 8716918
* Microphysical Treatment for Heterogeneous Nucleation:       Application to Atmospheric Cloud and Aerosol Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Donald Hagen, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 04/30/1992
* USD 169,860.00

Cloud and aerosol formation in the atmosphere are initiated by heterogeneous
nucleation and condensation processes on foreign particles. Cloud droplets and
aerosols thus formed are subject to further growth by coalescence. Foreign
particles in the atmosphere enhance nucleation with varying degrees of
efficiency. An understanding of this heterogeneous nucleation requires basic
(microphysical and chemical) knowledge, e.g., about the interactions between
vapor phase molecules and the surface of the foreign particle, surface
diffusion, and gas-to-particle conversion. Heterogeneous nucleation in the
atmosphere encompasses numerous particulate systems involving ions, organic and
inorganic species, bacteria, cloud condensation nuclei, and other pre- existing
aerosols. There is a paucity of basic understanding of the mechanisms leading to
gas-to-particle conversion in the atmosphere, particularly heterogeneous
nucleation mechanisms. The main objective of proposed research is to study the
embryonic stage. While classical approaches use bulk (macroscopic) parameters
for the microphysical phenomena of heterogeneous cluster formation and growth,
this work will us an approach based on molecular level descriptions. The
specific goals of the proposed research are: 1) to find micro- physical and
micro-chemical means of computing heterogeneous nucleation rates involving
various foreign particles (e.g., ions, cloud condensation nuclei and organic
particles), and differences in nucleation rates between different foreign
particle species; 2) to reveal microphysical and chemical properties of
heterogeneous clusters, in particular their stability, interaction, and
energetics at varying temperature and humidity. This work will benefit cloud
modeling for meteorology, lead to better understanding of cloud and aerosol
formation processes as well as those of smog, dust, and haze, and stimulate
experiments associated with droplet formation, sticking coefficients, and free
energy changes.