* 8716408
* Eustatic Sea Level Calibrated By Balanced Paleogeographic   Maps of Europe
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* William Hay, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 06/30/1991
* USD 219,953.00

This research award will help the investigator to reconstruct balanced
paleographic maps of the Western Europe and the adjacent North Atlantic shelves
and basins using the available information on the sediment types, their
thicknesses, ages and porosities for the onshore and offshore areas and global
sedimentary mass balance equations. This technique of loading the eroded
sediments back on to the continent and then calculating the continental
topography and thereby arriving at the uplift and subsidence rates is
extraodinarily imaginative and innovative. The PI using a similar data base and
mass balance calculations was extremely successful in reconstructing
paleotopography, paleodrainage basins, paleobathymetry and past uplifts and
subsidences of the North American continent and the adjoining areas for the last
70 MY. Such balanced paleogeographic maps will provide calibration for the sea
level curve for the Western Europe and will help in determining the significance
of epeirogenic movements vis-a-vis eustatic sea level changes in each of the
drainage and depositional basins. Also this modeling technique will produce the
kind of topographic information that is required for sophisticated climate and
ocean circulation modeling. During the 1st and 2nd year, the PI while on his
sabbatical in University of Munich will gather the necessary data. This will be
followed by rigorous computer intensive work to generate paleographic maps. This
study represents a wholly new approach in the determination of paleo sea level
rises and falls, a subject of much investigation at the present time. Dr. Hay is
an extremely capable scientist who for the last decade took leadership in
pioneering research in a variety of subjects and there is no doubt that the
proposed study will