* 8716032
* Steroid Effects on Brain:  Biosynthesis of 2nd Messengers
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1990
* Charles Mobbs, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1990
* USD 120,000.00

Dr. Mobbs proposes to examine the biochemical mechanisms mediating the effects
of estrogen on lordosis behavior. These effects of estrogen entail synthesis of
polypepties in the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (VMN) ; the peptides
are transported to, and released in the midbrain central gray (MGC). Estrogen
induces a specific protein that is transported from the VMN to the MCG. The
physical properties of this protein suggest that the protein is a member of the
synaptic vesicle-uncoating stress protein family. Using Western blots and
immunocytochemistry with appropriate antibodies, Dr. Mobbs will examine if the
mRNA's of this protein family are induced by estrogen. Using in vivo labelling
followed by HPLC, Dr. Mobbs will examine if estradiol induces the synthesis and
transport of peptides implicated in the control of lordosis; he will examine if
the inhibition of lordosis caused by antibodies to various peptides can be
reversed by stimulators of adenylate cyclase and/or protein kinase C. These
studies should suggest which peptides are acting through which second messenger
systems. The studies may form the foundation for a biochemical explanation of a
specific mammalian sexual behavior. Certain principles developed here, for
example the role of synaptic vesicle-uncoating protein, may be applicable to
control of neuronal connectivity in other systems.