* 8716024
* A New High Resolution Charge-Coupled Device Spectrometer    for McDonald Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Robert Tull, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 08/31/1992
* USD 481,140.00

The University of Texas McDonald Observatory will build a high- resolution
spectrograph of novel design incorporating a large echelle grating and prism
cross dispersion. Spectra will be projected onto the largest Charge Coupled
Device (CCD) image detector available -- the new Tektronix TK2048M. This 55-mm
square solid state silicon image detector will produce over 4 million picture
elements per exposure. With this combination the entire spectrum of an
astronomical object between the atmospheric ultraviolet (UV) cutoff and the
near-infrared (IR) limit of CCD sensitivity will be acquired simultaneously at
high resolution. A 1-hour exposure will obtain spectra of stars at V magnitude
11 with signal-to-noise 100, while useful spectra can be obtained to magnitude
15 in 3 hours. Major motivations for the new instrumentation are its ability to
gather quickly and completely spectra needed to determine CNO, (Carbon,
Nitrogen, and Oxygen) abundances in cluster stars and magnesium (Mg) isotopic
abundances in old metal-poor dwarfs, stars that are fainter than current limits
for these studies. The search for planets around nearby bright stars will rely
on the high radial velocity precision enabled by the statistics of large numbers
of simultaneously-measured spectral line profiles to determine small periodic
motions in the parent star induced by orbital motion of the planet.