* 8716384
* A Cooperative Climatological-Glaciological Program in the   Antarctic Peninsula, Phase 1
* O/D,OPP
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1993
* Lonnie Thompson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Campbell
* 08/31/1993
* USD 287,861.00

The principal objective of this multi-institutional and international project is
the reconstruction of a 2,000-year paleoclimatic record with high temporal
resolution (annual to decadal) for the southern Antarctic Peninsula. The
Antarctic Peninsula region exhibits two distinctly different climatic regimes.
Therefore, three different drilling sites (200-3000m cores) are selected to
provide information about both climatic regimes. The paleoclimatic
reconstruction is part of an ongoing comprehensive research program designed to
assess the temporal synchroneity and characteristics of the most recent
Neoglacial (Little Ice Age) event as it is preserved within ice cores at various
latitudes. Establishing the link between climatic variations from low latitudes
and from the polar regions will facilitate interpretation of globally
significant fluctuation within the longer climatic records. These ice cores may
provide further documentation and details of the mechanics of the El
Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events. The Antarctic Peninsula is one of the
key sites for global climatic and environmental reconstruction from ice cores
and is a necessary link between the ice core record from the interior of
Antarctica and South America. This project is undertaken in cooperation with the
British Antarctic Survey and the University of Washington.