* 8716338
* Studies of Mitochondrial Biogenesis in Yeast
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Diana Beattie, West Virginia University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1991
* USD 211,054.00

Specifically, the assembly of the cytochrome b-c1 complex in the mitochondrial
membrane will be investigated in mutant strains of yeast lacking cytochrome b,
the only mitochondrial translation product found in this complex. Recently, this
lab reported that the mutants lacking cytochrome b contain significantly
diminished (50-75%) amounts of the two core proteins as well as the iron-sulfur
protein and essentially none of subunit VII (the Q binding protein). By
contrast, cytochrome c1 was both spectrally and immunologically detectable in
all the mutants studied in amounts equal to that in the wild type. Subsequent
studies of the synthesis and import of these proteins into mitochondria from one
of the mutants suggested that cytochrome b is necessary for the proper
processing and assembly of core protein I, the iron- sulfur protein and the
Q-binding protein, but not for cytochrome c1, into complex III of the inner
mitochondrial membrane. The role of cytochrome b in the processing and assembly
of the iron-sulfur protein (ISP) will be investigated using an in vitro
transcription/translation system once the gene for the ISP has been cloned in a
suitable plasmid. The import of the ISP into both wild-type and cytochrome
b-deficient mitochondria will be compared plus the intramitochondrial sites for
cleavage of the precursor form of the ISP. Subsequently, the presequence of the
ISP will be modified to establish which amino acids are necessary for binding
and import of the ISP. The results obtained will establish a role for cytochrome
b in the overall assembly of the cytochrome b-c1 complex. %%% The long term goal
of this project is elucidate the factors controlling membrane formation in
yeast. This organism is a convenient experimental system because of its ease in
manipulation in the laboratory and its well studied genetics. The membrane being
studied is the inner mitochondrial membrane. The mitochondrion is the energy
factory for the cell. The biosynthesis of the inner membrane affords us an
opportunity to understand biological function based on the structural
information being generated and to understand how two genetic systems, one in
the mitochondrion and the other in nucleus, interact to direct the synthesis of
large biopolymers.