* 8717408
* Automated Identification Technologies in Construction:  DataContent Requirements
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1988,08/31/1990
* George Stukhart, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/1990
* USD 75,000.00

The objectives of this research are to investigate the potential applications,
data requirements, and symbology of automatic identification technology (AIT) in
industrial construction site materials management (CSMM) and to derive a
proposed set of standards for their use. The emphasis of the study will be on
the data requirements, although other topics are needed to make the study a
complete systems analysis. This systems formulation will be based on
demonstrated feasibility and preliminary testing of bar coding technology
developed through in-house studies and studies sponsored by industry users. The
tasks which would be executed are: 1. Study the Application Standards Developed
by Other Industries: This includes primarily the Automotive Industry, Department
of Defense, Health Industry, and Industry Bar-Code Alliance. 2. Continue
Research on Uniform Materials Coding. This research was started in 1986 by the
Construction Industry Institute (CII) but was not completed. To achieve Bar Code
Standardization, a uniform manner for embedding information within data fields
is needed. The researchers will contact the respondents to work with them to
discuss code content. 3. Develop a Model for a Transfer Code. Some bar proposed
code structure is necessary to transfer information between suppliers,
contractors and owners. For example, the manufacturer's identification should
include a certain number of characters; the buyers part number a certain number
of characters; and the work package or system a certain number of characters. 4.
Determine Data to be Encoded. This will include the above, plus data identifiers
(e.g. quantity, weight, unit of measure, authorization, serial number, container
code). 5. Develop a Proposed Set of Standards: This could include Parts
Identifiers, Equipment Tags, Shipping Labels, Purchase Orders, Warehouse Labels
and Others. It is assumed that the CII will provide a forum for exchange of
ideas, companies to contact, and the first working group for negotiating and
executing the proposed standard. An Electronic Data Task Force has been proposed
for May 1988. This new Task Force should assist in gaining overall CII support
of this Standardization effort.