* 8717185
* Mathematical Sciences: Spectral Duality of Differential     Operators Affiliated to von Neumann Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Jingbo Xia, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* None
* 06/30/1990
* USD 27,263.00

Operator theory is a central discipline in Modern Analysis. Its origins lie in
the study of mathematical physics and partial differential equations in the
early twentieth century. At that time, it was seen that numerous physical
problems in the theory of equilibria, vibration, quantum theory, etc. could be
studied productively via the integral equations that model the phenomena. In the
ensuing years, the subject of operator theory has grown to a central position in
such investigations, and in core mathematics as well. Also central to Modern
Analysis is the related discipline of operator algebras in which one studies
collections of operators simultaneously. As the mathematical construct which
best transfers the concepts of probability, measure theory, topology, and
geometry to noncommutative contexts, operator algebras relate to a rich and
important array of applications, from within mathematics itself to physics and
microbiology. Professor Xia ia a young specialist in the area of operator
theory. Although a recent Ph.D., he has already established an impressive
publication record. His research successes include continuity results for the
spectrum of periodic elliptic operators, for example Schrodinger operators. This
work utilizes the action of the (commutative) n-dimensional vector group on the
appropriate operators. He proposes now to extend his spectral duality theory to
the action of noncommutative groups on compact spaces, and to the spectrum of
the elliptic differential operators associated with the action. This is a
difficult project that requires operator theory, operator algebras, geometry,
harmonic analysis, and differential equations. However, significant results
along the proposed lines would have important applications to the mathematical
physics of disordered systems, the connection being through random differential
operators.