* 8717683
* An Experimental Test of An Avian Life History Model
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Jeffrey Walters, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 06/30/1991
* USD 160,999.00

In some species, some mature individuals, called helpers, assist others in
raising young rather than reproduce themselves. Studies of such cooperative
breeding have been extremely productive in the development of theory related to
the evolutionary basis of social behavior in animals. This research will test a
general theory known as habitat saturation, which relates group formation to
retention of young in an environment in which opportunities for dispersal are
limited. The investigators propose that individuals which remain in their natal
group as helpers rather than disperse are practicing a strategy for acquiring
high quality territories. The species they are studying is unique in
constructing cavities in living pine trees, and the investigators propose that
birds seek to acquire territories with existing cavities rather than expend the
great time and energy required to construct cavities in areas not previously
occupied. Previous research showed that the behavior of this species is
consistent with this hypothesis. Individuals that serve as helpers become
breeders by replacing previous breeders in the immediate vicinity of their natal
territory. Some inherit natal territory, others move to adjacent groups. In
contrast, individuals that do not serve as helpers, that is, disperse after
fledging, wander and may move to territories far from their natal site. This
research will test the hypothesis about the ecological basis of habitat
saturation and territory quality by constructing cavities in unoccupied habitat.
It is predicted that birds will occupy these territories once cavities are
present. In conducting this research, the investigators will monitor over 500
banded adults each year. These data provide one of the best demographic samples
available for any bird. This is particularly important because the red-cockaded
woodpecker is a federally endangered species endemic to the United States, and
its population dynamics are of great concern. This experiment, if successful,
will provide the first known means by which populations of this rare bird can be
increased through management.