* 8717315
* Environmental and Genetic Sex Determination in Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1991
* David Conover, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 12/31/1991
* USD 331,698.00

The objective of this project is to show how the seasonal effects of
temperature on sex ratio are adaptive. In a marine fish, the Atlantic silverside
(Menidia), thermal effects on sex ratio result in females being produced earlier
in the year than males. Females tend to be larger than males at the end of the
summer growing season, presumably because they have experienced a longer growing
season by virtue of earlier birth. Large size appears to be more important to
reproductive success in female than male silversides. Dr. Conover will examine
the related benefits of large size and longer growing period. His approach is to
compare the effects of length of the growing season on female and male body
sizes among latitudinal populations of silversides that experience very
different growing season durations. In these populations the level of thermal
control on sex ratio is also known to vary. He will also measure how populations
alter growth rate in an attempt to compensate for the differences in length of
the growing season that occur with latitude. The results of this study will
greatly enhance our knowledge of how environmental sex determination evolves. It
will also help us to understand how populations of a given species compensate
for differences in length of the growing season. This information is important
to fundamental ecological research. But it will also be useful in fish culture,
where the ability to environmentally manipulate the sex ratio, or to select
stocks from nature with the highest growth rate, would be highly advantageous.