* 8717661
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Development of a Unified          Perspective on the Organization of Communities and          Ecosystems / Honolulu, Hawaii / April 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,11/30/1988
* Donald DeAngelis, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 11/30/1988
* USD 11,600.00

This award will support the participation of U.S. scientists in a seminar on the
"Development of a Unified Perspective on the Organization of Communities and
Ecosystems," organized jointly by Dr. Donald DeAngelis of the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory and Professor Ei Teramoto of Kyoto University, Japan. United States
and Japanese participants will meet in Honolulu, Hawaii during April 1988. The
seminar will provide a forum for detailed discussion on the factors which
determine the structure and dynamics of ecosystems. The theme of the workshop
will revolve around two general questions. Are there regularities in food web
structure and, if so, do these regularities reflect constraints related to
dynamic stability, energy, or other factors on the ecosystem? How do ecosystem
properties and the characteristics of individual species change during
succession and evolution? There is considerable disagreement among theoretical
ecologists as to what factors are most important in the shaping of food webs.
Japanese theoretical ecologists have developed an impressive body of
mathematical theory for ecological networks that will facilitate the testing of
alternative hypotheses related to ecosystem structure. Becuase much of this
information is little known in the United States, the seminar will provide an
excellent opportunity for an integration of the work going on in our two
countries.