* 8717026
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Warm-Core Rings /                 Woods Hole, Massachusetts / October 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1989
* Peter Wiebe, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 09/30/1989
* USD 11,030.00

This award will support the participation of U.S. researchers in a seminar on
warm-core rings organized jointly by Drs. Peter Wiebe and Terrence Joyce of the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and Professor Takahisa Nemoto of the Ocean
Research Institute, University of Tokyo, Japan. Participants will meet in
October 1988 at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole,
Massachusetts for an exchange of research results and ideas on the physics,
chemistry, and biology of oceanic warm-core rings which form in the Gulf Stream,
Kuroshio and other western boundary current regions. The seminar will consist of
oral presentations of results, working group discussions of particular
multidisciplinary problems associated with ring structure and dynamics, a
summary session, and preparation of a report. Topics of discussion will include
ring formation, structure and evolution, and the differences in ring
characteristics between different western boundary current regimes. This seminar
will be a successor to the very successful workshop on oceanic rings held in
Tokyo at the Ocean Research Institute in 1985, also under the auspices of the
U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science Program. Knowledge of the structure and dynamics
of the Gulf Stream warm rings has been greatly advanced since the last workshop
as a result of studies carried out by the Warm-Core Rings Program. Similarly,
extensive new data are available on rings in the Kuroshio system as a result of
several recent multidisciplinary research cruises from Japan. The 1988 seminar
will provide a useful forum for the exchange of current research results and
should result in more cooperative research among U.S. and Japanese
oceanographers.