* 8717701
* REU:  Interactions Between Gas and Solute Exchange and Path-ways of Porewater Turnover in Intermittently Flooded        Wetlands
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Brian Howes, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 02/29/1992
* USD 612,058.00

Interactions between oxygen exchange, water influx, evapotranspiration and
drainage in sediments of intermittently flooded wetlands which ultimately
control much of the productivity and structure of these ecosystems are poorly
understood. These processes will be studied in: Several marsh zones (creekbank,
low &amp; high marsh) across the natural flooding- frequency gradient in Great
Sippewissett Salt Marsh, a well studied freshwater Phragmites marsh in Mass., a
Virginia marsh, an infrequently flooded salt marsh and plots where the flooding
and drainage regime (NJ) will be controlled: These field experiments will be
coupled with parallel laboratory experiments in lysimeters and plant chambers.
By studying several flooding regimes in several wetland types, the results will
allow determination of the generality of water turnover-gas exchange
interactions as processes structuring many types of intermittently flooded
wetland ecosystems. Gas exchange will be measured in relation to water table
excursions in these systems through the annual, lunar, daily and tidal cycles to
which they are subject. Fluxes will be measured with both natural (O2, CO2, CH4)
and tracer (Ne, C2F6,C2H6) gases and partition gas exchange between plants and
sediment surface fluxes. The water loss due to evapotranspiration will be
compared to drainage losses, and water replacement by flood water, rain and
groundwater will be measured. Direct measurements will be made of drainage,
evapotranspiration and total water loss from creekbank sediments and determine
the effects of plant biomass, sediment type and crab burrows upon drainage.
Relationships of interstitial salinity and sulfide concentration,
evapotranspiration rates, salt exclusion and root oxygen status in Spartina will
be determined. The solute losses from the wetland sediments by transport within
the plants and by drainage and surface exchange will be measured. Detailed
investigation of the interaction between gas exchange-sediment physics using a
multidisciplinary approach will be conducted in both a Mass. and Virginia marsh.
These experiments will also serve as an intercalibration of existing wetland
hydrologic techniques. The research team for this project is well experienced
and capable. All field sites offer excellent opportunities for research.
Facilities available are more than sufficient to the task.