* 8717833
* Submillimeter Observations of the Sun at the Caltech        Submillimeter Observatory and the James Clerk Maxwell       Telescope
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1991
* Charles Lindsey, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 03/31/1991
* USD 55,000.00

This grant will permit a series of observations of the Sun at submillimeter
wavelengths using the 15 m James Clerk Maxwell Telescope (JCMT), which has
recently become operational on Mauna Kea. This new telescope will allow
observations of the Sun with an angular resolution far better than that
attainable in the past. The program proposed here will have two parts: (1)
detailed observations of solar intensity oscillations over a range of
wavelengths; (2) observations of the photometric output of the sun; this will
lead to a better model of the temperature distribution on the solar surface.
These topics are highly relevant to chromospheric structure and dynamics and
hence solar terrestrial research. Part of the motivation in funding this
research program is the exciting opportunity provided by new powerful facilities
to explore an area previously inaccessible because of technical limitations. But
more than this, submillimeter observations offer the unique diagnostic advantage
that the spectral line formation is simple and well understood. The program is
of fundamental importance for clarifying the structure and dynamics of the solar
atmosphere. A broader purpose is to open the submillimeter telescopes at Mauna
Kea to the unlimited possibilities of submillimeter and millimeter solar
research.//