* 8717209
* REU:  Physiological Integration and Its Relationship to     Clonal Plant Demography
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1993
* Barbara Benner, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 07/31/1993
* USD 183,064.00

Clonal plants differ from many familiar types of plants and animals, in that
they are made up of a number of genetically identical individuals that are
interconnected with each other. Increase in population size results from the
production of new plants from those that already exist rather than from
production of seed. The principal goals of the proposed research are to
determine to what degree individual plants that comprise a clone are
physiologically linked to each other, what affect the amount of linkage has on
the production of new plants, and how the presence or absence of linkage
influences the pattern of population growth, and hence, persistence of the
clone. Manipulations of resource availability will be performed in the field,
and the short-term and long-term developmental consequences of these
manipulations studied. Radioactive carbon labeling experiments and tissue
nutrient analyses will reveal patterns of resource movement and utilization
within clones, and whether they vary through the year. The proposed studies will
increase our understanding of the relationship between physiological integration
and clonal demography, and contribute to our understanding of the costs of
reproduction and the appropriate unit of selection in this and other clonal
plants. Many commercially important plants (forage grasses, strawberries), and
commercially costly weeds (water hyacinths, crabgrass) grow clonally.
Podophyllum peltatum, the subject of this study, is the source of a drug used in
cancer treatment, podophyllin, an anti-mitotic agent. Understanding how the
environment affects the growth of such plants, and how the degree of
physiological integration among the components of such clones may ameliorate
these environmental affects, is a critical step in learning how to manage the
growth of clonal plants effectively.