* 8717543
* Variable Folivory: Effects on Interactions Between Seasonal Insect Species
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Stanley Faeth, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 12/31/1991
* USD 193,373.00

This research will test the effects of previous folivory on subsequent
folivorous insect species via alterations in the shared host plant, particularly
alterations in phenology. Specific factors hypothesized to influence such
interactions, including extent of folivory (partial vs. complete consumption of
leaves), amount of partial damage an dits effect on the third trophic level
(natural enemies), timing of folivory and long-term effects of folivory, will be
examined. These factors will be tested in a series of observations and
manipulative experiments involving leafchewers (early-season feeders) and
leafminers (late-season feeders) on the Emory oak, Ouercus emoryi. Preliminary
evidence suggests such factors can change the outcome of interactions between
seasonal folivores, and thus influence population dynamics and organization of
folivorous insect communities. The project will quanfify phenological and
chemical changes associated with varying folivory and their effects on
colonization, local extinction, survival, causes of mortality, and fecundity of
the leafmiing species on Emory oak. Although accumulating evidence indicates
that plants change following folivory, the precise effects on subsequent insect
species are equivocal. Yet such information is crucial in unerstanding how
plant-mediated interactions influence population dynamics and organization of
folivorous insect species sharing host plants.