* 8717157
* High Resolution Studies of Solar Flares, Active Regions,    Prominences and the Quiet Sun at Centimeter and Millimeter  Wavelengths
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1991
* Mukul Kundu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 05/31/1991
* USD 359,904.00

Understanding solar activity and solar flares remains one of the most important
unsolved problems in S/T research. In recent decades the rapid expansion in data
gathering, particularly from satellites and in the radio domain, has led both to
a greater understanding and to a better appreciation of the complexity of the
problem. The basic causes of solar activity are now understood in broad terms.
The convective zone beneath the solar photosphere is responsible for
differential rotation and for the generation of magnetic fields, whose rapid
emergence through the surface creates an active region. A solar flare represents
the sudden release of energy stored before the flare in the coronal region of
the sun's atmosphere. Energy may be stored as the free energy of a current-
carrying magnetic field. The basic requirement of all flare models or magnetic
field configurations is that storage of energy must be in a metastable state:
stable to small perturbations but unstable to large perturbations, which lead to
the impulsive release of stored energy. The different flare models are
characterized by specific magnetic field configurations in the corona, and by
the explosive reconnection of magnetic fields. The theoretical magnetic field
configurations can be subjected to observational tests using intensity and
polarization maps made with the VLA. The high spatial resolution available with
the VLA and the centimeter wavelengths at which the VLA operates are ideally
suited for determining the magnetic field structures of the flaring region. In
particular, using radio waves of different wavelengths, one can explore
different levels of the sun's atmosphere. Radio observations are also unique in
that they provide important information on the strength of the magnetic field in
flaring regions.