* 8717729
* Testing the Validity of Lake Sediment Chronologies Derived  from Distributions of 210Pb and 137Cs
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Robert Anderson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 01/31/1991
* USD 110,717.00

Problems have been identified with methods for reconstructing histories of lake
acidification, water quality, pollution, climate, land use, etc., based on lake
sediment records. A study of 12 Canadian Shield lakes in northwestern Ontario
(Experimental Lakes Area) showed that the flocculent, organic-rich sediments in
each of these lakes had been mixed to depths in some cases &gt;50 cm. Organisms
capable of mixing sediments to these depths do not occur in these lakes. Whether
this deep mixing resulted from natural physical processes or from a sampling
artifact could not be determined. However, the important point is that this
mixing was not evident in 210Pb profiles measured in these lakes. Without
additional information provided by 137Cs and radionuclides added experimentally
to 4 of these lakes, erroneously high sedimentation rates would have been
calculated from 210Pb profiles. Consequently, ages assigned to "events" recorded
in sediments of these lakes would also have been in error. Several of the
previously studied lakes have been resampled using a relatively new in situ
freezing technique that precluded sediment disturbance during sampling. These
sediments will e analyzed for 210Pb, 137Cs, and two radionuclides (60Co and
226Ra) added experimentally to certain lakes to determine the source of the
mixing noted in out earlier work. In addition, sediment profiles of 210Pb and
137Cs will be measured in annually varved lakes to evaluate the extent of
downward migration of these nuclides by diffusion in pore waters. The
reliability of traditional gravity corers for collecting undisturbed sediment
records will also be assessed. The outcome of this project will be important to
all scientist working with the records inherent to lake sediments. The
institutional setting for the work is excellent as is the record of
accomplishment for the investigator. A recommendation for funding is fully
justified.