* 8717674
* Life After NSF Funding:  An Assessment of Self-Sustaining   Industry-University Cooperative Research Centers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Denis Gray, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1989
* USD 38,173.00

Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers on a path to "self-
sufficiency" are funded by NSF generally for a five year period. During this
period an evaluation protocol provides data on industry/university interaction
and other factors that effect the Center's status. Until recently, no data was
planned to be collected after "self-sufficiency" was attained. This project is
conducting an assessment of "self-sustaining" centers via a questionnaire. The
objectives of the study are to: 1) assess the current status of Centers which no
longer receive NSF funding; 2) describe the process of becoming self-sustaining
and how Centers respond to this challenge; 3) identify functional and
dysfunctional practices and strategies for coping with this transition; 4)
develop recommendations for improving the rate and ease with which operating
Centers become self-sustaining. The National Science Foundation and the Co-
Principal Investigators have agreed to increase the research scope and add a
task to study the impact of Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers on
the experiences, attitudes and career paths of graduate students. Graduate
students involved in a center will be compared with those not involved. Studies
of both groups will be made while in graduate school and after graduating. The
Co-Principal Investigators are noted experts and well qualified to perform the
studies. The Program Manager recommends that the North Carolina State University
(in collaboration with the University of Florida) be awarded $38,173 for one (1)
year for this study which includes $5,000 for the added task entitled "The
Impact on Graduate Students of Participating in Industry Funded Research."