* 8717426
* Collaborative Project: Molecular Cloning of mRNA Encoding Latent Ig Allotypes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Kevin Dreher, Weis Center for Research
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 01/31/1991
* USD 54,000.00

In the rabbit, most immunoglobulin (Ig) nominal allotypes are presumed to be
inherited via codominant allelic segregation. However, latent or non-allelic
gene activation has been documented for the Ig kappa light and gamma heavy chain
gene loci. Serological and structural analyses have confirmed the existence of
these latent Ig allotypes. Molecular mechanisms acting at the nucleic acid level
which allow the expression of latent allotypes have yet to be determined. A
major obstacle in studying the expression of latent Ig allotypes has been the
inability reproducibly to induce the expression of latent Ig molecules. This
obstacle has been circumvented by antigenic stimulation using Trypanosoma brucei
to induce the expression of latent Ig kappa light and gamma heavy chain
sequences in the rabbit. Lymph nodes taken from infected rabbits have been shown
to contain poly (A) positive RNA sequences encoding latent kappa light and gamma
heavy chain allotypes. This represents the first time latent allotypes have been
detected at the nucleic acid level. The long term objective of this
investigation is to elucidate molecular and cellular mechanisms which generate
the expression of nucleic acid sequences encoding latent Ig allotypes. To
achieve this the following specific aims will be pursued: Isolation and
structural analysis of poly (A)-positive RNA sequences encoding: 1) latent b5
and b6 kappa lightchains, 2) the latent a1-e14 haplotype, 3) the nominal b6
kappalight chain secreted by the rabbit-mouse hybridoma cell line, H158.
Isolation of these RNA sequences will be achieved by employing standard duplex
cDNA cloning technology and novel allotype-specific screening methodologies.
Isolation of cDNA sequences encoding latent Ig allotypes will verify their
existence at the nucleic acid level and allow direct structural comparisons to
be made with their nominal allotypic counterparts. Information obtained will be
used in future studies designed to isolate the actively transcribed Ig kappa and
gamma genes encoding these latent sequences. These studies will contribute to
our overall understanding of the regulation of Ig gene expression.