* 8717875
* Determiniation of Band Oscillator Strengths of Atmospheric  Molecules from High Resolution VUV Cross Section            Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Kouichi Yoshino, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/29/1992
* USD 313,900.00

Light from the sun drives the chemistry of the atmosphere. The chemistry is
initiated by the absorption of light by various gases. Furthermore, each gas
absorbs the various colors (frequencies) of the light (the electromagnetic
spectrum) with varying efficiency. This efficiency is an important factor for
how deeply into the atmosphere a given color can penetrate and consequently at
what altitudes a particular chemical pathway will be important. In the upper
atmosphere, very energetic photons (colors of high frequencies) representing the
vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) region of the electromagnetic spectrum are weakly
absorbed by molecular oxygen, the second most abundant gas in the atmosphere.
Molecular oxygen is therefore important for the removal of these photons. The
absorption efficiency (or cross section) of oxygen in this spectral region is
particularly difficult to measure because of a complicated system of narrow
absorption lines known as the Schumann-Runge bands. Accurate measurements
require careful work with high resolution of the electromagnetic spectrum. Other
important processes in the upper atmosphere involve the absorption of VUV by
nitrogen oxide (NO) which similarly has a complicated spectrum whose absorption
cross sections are inadequately known. This project is a continuation of
research supported by NSF under Grant ATM-8318960. VUV cross section
measurements of oxygen and nitrogen oxide will be performed with a recently
constructed VUV Fourier transform spectrometer that can achieve a high spectral
resolution necessary for determination of absolute cross sections of molecular
bands possessing distinct rotational structure. Cross sections are to be
obtained at temperatures of 78K and 300K. These data will allow more accurate
modeling of the transmission of energetic light through the upper atmosphere
than is currently possible and will benefit various research efforts in
atmospheric chemistry and aeronomy.