* 8717633
* Chemical and Enzymatic Triggering of Chemiluminescent       1,2-Dioxetanes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1992
* A. Paul Schaap, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Koop Lammertsma
* 01/31/1992
* USD 256,900.00

This grant in Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry provides support for the
work of Professor Paul Schaap at Wayne State University. The work explores the
properties of thermally stable dioxetanes which can be triggered by chemical
reagents or enzymes to generate chemilumescence in organic solvents or in
aqueous solution. This work will give significant new insights into
chemiluminescent and bioluminescent processes. The results may also lead to the
development of new methods for ultrasensitive biological assays including
luminescent enzyme-like immunoassays and DNA probes. Various types of dioxetanes
will be studied to provide an understanding of the structural requirements for
efficient chemiexcitation. The mechanism for the formation of excited states
will be further elucidated by an analysis of solvent effects and kinetic
parameters. Chemical triggering will involve the synthesis of appropriately
functionalized dioxetanes for use as chemiluminescent substrates with alkaline
phosphatase, beta-galactosidase, chymotrypsin, aminopeptidase, and lipase.
Preliminary studies have shown that binding of the dioxetane to the enzyme can
result in enhanced chemiluminescence compared to chemical triggering in aqueous
buffers. Enzyme kinetic studies will also be carried out to determine Michaelis
constants and turnover numbers. Chemical and enzymatic triggering of dioxetanes
will also be investigated in organized assemblies such as micelles and
liposomes. Incorporation of the dioxetane and a flourescent co-micellar
surfactant in micelles will afford efficient energy-transfer chemiluminescence.
Experiments with reversed micelles will also be conducted.