* 8717303
* Flora of the Venezuelan Guyana
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Paul Berry, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1991
* USD 178,806.00

Dr. Julian Steyermark of the Missouri Botanical Garden, with assistance from
numerous U.S. and Venezuelan collaborators, will complete a descriptive
inventory of the estimated 8500 species of flowering plants and ferns of the
Venezuelan Guayana, a region of sandstone mountains and intervening valleys and
plains across the northern rim of the Amazon basin. The richness of this flora
is shown by the fact that half the species are endemic to the region, known
nowhere else in the world. Since the first explorations of this region, made
famous by Conan Doyle's stories of "Lost World," numerous expeditions have
brought back thousands of unusual and outstanding plants, described in numerous
publications. However, no single comprehensive work on the flora of this unique
region has ever been published. By amassing all this information into one
complete account, the resulting work will provide an essential and important
reference for use by ecologists, foresters, conservationists, agriculturists,
biogeographers, and taxonomists. Not only will it contain information, whenever
possible, on the medicinal and other uses of the species, as well as inclusion
of the Spanish and Indian tribal names, but it will include nearly 4000
illustrations of plants, most of them never previously published. The text will
also include keys for identification, notes on plant habit and ecological
habitats, elevational ranges, and geographical distributions, both within and
beyond Venezuela. The resulting work should be an outstanding contribution to
botanical science.