* 8717999
* Coordination and Integration of U.S.-Japan Program for Masonry Research
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1992
* James Noland, Atkinson-Noland and Associates Inc
* Continuing grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 08/31/1992
* USD 327,999.00

Masonry construction comprises a large portion of building construction in the
U.S. and the world. Reinforced masonry construction use is increasing in
moderate to higher seismic zones because of its apparent features of economy,
fire safety, architectural flexibility and ease of construction. The present
state of masonry structural analysis and design, and materials and construction
technologies does not enable an accurate prediction of building behavior under
lateral loads such as seismic loads. In the U.S., masonry buildings are designed
and built with methods, codes and standards that rely upon a mixture of working
stress methods, empirical rules, and questionable methods for determining
allowable stress values. Masonry is also a complex building material because of
the large number of design and construction variables which influence the final
product configuration and its response under seismic loads. In order to describe
the seismic response of masonry buildings it is necessary to develop the
fundamental knowledge base to determine basic design methodologies consistent
with safety and economic requirements. This research project integrates all
research tasks in the U.S. masonry research program. The masonry building
research program is an interrelated set of specific research tasks performed by
many different researchers which must be well coordinated to achieve programs
goals. Coordination activities include: scheduling and initiating research
tasks, identification and resolution of technical and operational problems,
management of adequate and timely flow of information among researchers,
scheduling and coordinating research group meetings and U.S.- Japan meetings,
interaction with the UJNR Panel on Wind and Seismic Effects, interaction with
potential user groups and working with industry, and dissemination of program
results. This project is part of the U.S.-Japan Coordinated Program for Masonry
Building Research and the Technical Coordinating Committee for Masonry Research
(TCCMAR) Program.