* 8717057
* Site-Specific DNA Cleavage at Orit of the F Plasmid
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1990
* Richard Deonier, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/1990
* USD 130,000.00

This project will explore the biochemistry of DNA processing at the transfer
origin (oriT) of the F plasmid from Escherichia coli K-12. DNA strand cleavage
at oriT is a crucial initial step in the conjugal transfer of the F plasmid,
which is related to a variety of conjugative drug resistance plasmids. Specific
cleavage at oriT can occur in the absence of conjugation with the aid of two to
four tra gene products. The genetic, physical, and biochemical basis for site-
specific strand cleavage at oriT will be examined. Oligonucleotide directed
mutagenesis will be used to identify functional sub-domains of oriT. Mapping of
relevant tra protein binding sites (e.g., for traI and traY gene products) will
be performed by using extracts and exonuclease III protection, and by using
purified gene products and footprinting. DNA/protein complexes ("relaxation
complexes") will be sought, and their composition and biochemical properties
will be investigated. Finally, attempts will be made to reconstitute the oriT
cleavage system in vitro, and to study any higher order quaternary complexes by
electron microscopy. These studies may help to define in general terms the
structural rules for DNA/protein interactions and for formation of nucleoprotein
structures. The presence of the F factor, a circular DNA plasmid, confers upon
E. coli the ability to transfer DNA to recipient cells that lack an F factor.
This process, bacterial conjugation, is initiated in the donor by introduction
of a break at a specific site within one strand of the double-stranded F factor
DNA. One of the ends created by the break is then transferred into the recipient
cell. Dr. Deonier will investigate the biochemical mechanism that is responsible
for introduction of the break and initiation of DNA transfer. Determination of
the exact location of the break and identifying the plasmid encoded gene
products that produce it will be major objectives. This project has the
potential to provide information on the poorly understood early steps in genetic
recombination. //