* 8717854
* Mode, Variability, and Frequency of Global Neogene Climate  Change:  The Role of the Southern Ocean
* O/D,OPP
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1992
* David Hodell, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Campbell
* 01/31/1992
* USD 230,689.00

This project is an investigation into the paleoclimatic variations of The
Southern Ocean since the late Miocene (the most recent 10 million years) through
the examination of climatically sensitive parameters from undisturbed piston
cores obtained in the northeastern Weddell Sea on Leg 114 of the Ocean Drilling
Program. Core recovery at this site was nearly continuous, and has already
yielded a detailed magnetic stratigraphy to 6.5 million years before present, so
that accurate dating of observed events can be expected. Identifying the
climatic changes that have occurred, and understanding the responses of the
antarctic current system to these changes is one of the major objectives of
marine paleoenvironmental research. Such understanding is based on the detailed
study of the sedimentation history of the region, which includes the location of
modern surface and bottom current pathways, the examination of closely spaced
samples from high quality sediment cores, and the regional correlation of
environmental events. The climate related parameters to be measured include
stable isotopes, percent carbonate and organic matter, silicoflagellates, and
radiolarian census data. Paleotemperature estimates will be made from diatom
assemblages, N. pachyderma coiling ratios, and silicoflagellate species ratios.
These have been quite successful when applied to a somewhat later time frame in
the subantarctic region.