* 8717079
* Geologic and Geophysical Studies of Mesozoic Guyots
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Edward Winterer, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 12/31/1990
* USD 430,000.00

This award will support Dr. Winterer of Scripps Institution to participate in a
study of the morphology, sediment history, and geochemistry of guyots which are
located between the Japan Trench and the Hawaiian Islands. This area of the
Pacific Ocean is known to be unique and is characterized by numerous seamount
chains, atolls and guyot groups which began forming during a Cretaceous period
of extensive volcanism. Data to be collected during a field program aboard the
Thomas Washington include reflection seismic profiles, gravity and magnetics
across individual guyots as well as sampling of these features. These data will
be used to examine questions on the age sequences of volcanism, Cretaceous
Pacific Plate motions, lithosphere flexuring and elastic/thermal thickness,
geochemical affinities and mantle sources of volcanics, seamount paleolatitudes,
thickness and internal stratigraphy of guyot reef caps, and the timing and
causes of reef drowning. These data will be used to examine the hypothesis that
the older northwest end of this "Darwin Belt" of seamount chains was underlain
in Cretaceous times by the type of mantle and thin, hot lithosphere that now
underlies the active, southeast part of the belt. This is a cooperative project
involving scientist at Scripps Institution, Texas A &amp; M University and the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Data from this project will be important
in planning future ocean drilling in this region.