* 8717898
* Conference on Organization of the Bacterial Chromosome;     May 23-26, 1988; Pine Mountain, GA
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1988,08/31/1988
* Monica Riley, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1988
* USD 10,000.00

Organization and structure of the bacterial genome is a broad subject, with many
areas of microbial molecular biology applying to several aspects of the subject.
Researchers from different areas of molecular biology or bacterial genetics who
share an interest in the bacterial genome viewed as a whole have interests that
stem from quite different perspectives, and tend to travel in non-overlapping
scientific orbits. This proposal seeks support for a conference that would
provide an opportunity for such scientists to get together and exchange
information and ideas on the organization and function of the bacterial
chromosome. Subjects to be covered at the meeting would include the organization
of DNA in the cell, the structure of the nucleoid, the involvement of
nucleoproteins, the effect of chromosomal structure on gene expression, the
plasticity of the genome in terms of genetic change, the existence of
constraints on such change, the control of global cellular functions, and a
summary of the progress made in assembling genetic maps, physical maps and
nucleotide and amino acid sequences, together with a consideration of problems
and solutions to achieving effective data management. A meeting of this kind has
not been held to date; it would seem to have high potential for generating fresh
intellectul exchange among scientists whose paths seldom cross, as well as among
those who are engaged in asking similar questions about structure and function
of the bacterial chromosome.