* 8717663
* REU: Parental Effects in Plantago lanceolata
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1992
* Elizabeth Lacey, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 09/30/1992
* USD 227,192.00

Many empirical studies demonstrate that parents can influence offspring
appearance (phenotype) beyond the effects of nuclear chromosomes that parents
contribute to offspring. For example, ecological and genetic studies have shown
that the physical environment in which the parents are grown can affect
offspring growth and reproduction. Likewise independent of environment, parents
can transmit extra-nuclear DNA to offspring; this DNA can also influence growth
and reproduction. Lacey's study will further characterize these parental effects
(defined as these non-nuclear contributions that parents make to offspring
phenotype), and also provide information about the role of these effects in
natural and artificial selection. The research will focus on the effects of
parental flowering time on offspring phenotype in Plantago lanceolata, an
herbaceous weed of agricultural fields and other disturbed habitat. Flowering
time effects will be examined directly. Also, because flowering time effects are
probably mediated through temperature change during flowing and seed maturation,
Lacey will examine how temperature affects offspring phenotype. Genetically
different parents will be cloned and then grown and crossed under different
combinations of temperatures and at different flowering times outdoors.
Offspring of the crosses will then be grown and traits measured. The traits that
will be measured determine an individual's fitness in a natural or evolutionary
context and yield in an agricultural context. Because yield will be measured,
the research will provide information that will be useful to crop breeders.
Maximizing yield (a goal of crop breeders) necessitates knowing whether
flowering time and temperature in one generation influence yield in the next
and, if they do, what yield components are affected. For example; if parental
flowering time, which is partially genetically controlled, is found to influence
offspring yield, then breeders should be able to improve yield in a generation
of commercial importance by altering flowering time or temperature in the
previous generation. Lacey's project will provide information about the
potential use of parental effects in crop breeding programs.