* 8717933
* An NSFnet Connection for the University of Hawaii
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1990
* Torben Nielsen, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jane C. Caviness
* 10/31/1990
* USD 88,000.00

Within the last year, a Campus Research Network (CRN) has been put in place
within the University of Hawaii System. The network currently connects computers
in the Department of Information and Computer Sciences, the Department of
Chemistry, the Department of Mathematics, the Department of Physics, the
Institute for Astronomy, the Hawaii Institute for Geophysics and the University
of Hawaii Computing Center. The network is organized as a collection of subnets
connected together through a common Ethernet backbone. The CRN is based on the
DARPA/DOD protocols suite although there are provisions to also handle some
DECNET traffic through parts of the network. The intent is to develop the CRN
into a full scale research network that is accessible to all researchers within
the State of Hawaii. The University of Hawaii proposes to connect the CRN to the
NSFnet through a satellite based link between the University of Hawaii Manoa
Campus and the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) where the West Coast
portion of the NSFnet backbone terminates. This link is intended to replace the
current link into SDSC. A replacement is needed since the link that now exists
was designed primarily as a terminal concentrator providing access to SDSC only
and not as a network connection for the University of Hawaii.