* 8717861
* Gas Chromotograph/Mass Spectrometer System for the          Determination of Atmospheric Sulfur Gases
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Alan Bandy, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 04/30/1991
* USD 428,000.00

A basic objective of current research on the chemistry of the atmosphere is to
develop an improved understanding of the fundamental processes responsible for
creating and destroying the trace chemical compounds present in the atmosphere.
In order to study and understand the chemical, physical and biological processes
influencing the composition of the atmosphere it is necessary to investigate and
develop improved techniques for measuring the compounds present in the air. The
objective of this project is to develop reliable new analytical techniques for
studying the cycle of sulfur species through the global troposphere. These
techniques have been designed to permit measurement of the concentrations of
gaseous species currently thought to be important in the biogeochemical cycling
of sulfur, carbon disulfide, through the atmosphere. These species include
carbonyl sulfide, carbon disulfide, hydrogen sulfide, dimethyl sulfide, methyl
mercaptan, and sulfur dioxide. The marine sulfur cycle is particularly
interesting because it may link biological activity in the oceans to climate and
cloud formation. Measurements of the concentrations of sulfur species provide
data that are important for developing a quantitative understanding of the
fluxes and reactions of these sulfur compounds. A technique of gas
chromatography/mass spectrometer with isotopically labelled internal standards
(GC/MS/ILS) has been developed and laboratory tested under NSF grant
ATM-8515000. The instrumentation is capable of real time measurements of sulfur
gases and is several times more sensitive than flame photometric detection.
Isotopically labelled internal standards have improved precision and accuracy.
This research will construct a field deployable (aircraft and ship platforms)
instrument and test the performance of the instrument in the field.