* 8717783
* Dispositional Optimism, Coping, and Stress: Extensions and  Mechanisms of Operation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Charles Carver, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 07/31/1990
* USD 137,620.00

For the past several years, Carver and Scheier have been trying to understand
the processes that underlie people's purposive (goal-directed) actions. In
developing a model of "behavioral self-regulation," they have been most
interested in the recent past in examining the role played by the person's
expectancies of success in dealing with problems that are encountered. In
general, this research has shown that the positivity of one's expectancies
serves to determine in an important way whether one will continue to persist in
the face of adversity, or give up instead. This finding becomes most interesting
when one realizes that these "expectancy effects" occur independently of the
person's actual likelihood of dealing with the problem successfully--i.e.,
independent of the person's abilities, skills, and facilitative environmental
resources. One limitation of previous work has been its focus on expectancies of
a somewhat restricted sort--e.g., the person's expectation of being able to
solve a particular task successfully, or of being able to execute a set of
specific actions within a particular behavioral domain. More recently, Carver
and Scheier have become interested in examining how the person's generalized
outcome expectancies effect his or her motivational efforts. Previous research
by these researchers and others has begun to document the benefits that
generalized expectancies can have on the coping process, when those generalized
expectancies are positive in nature. This research builds on prior studies of
dispositional optimism-pessimism by extending the generality of the findings,
and by attempting to isolate and examine some specific mechanisms whereby
optimism might be having its effects. During this next period of funding,
several new coping contexts will be examined, ranging from recovery from
coronary artery bypass surgery to recovery from cancer surgery. All of the
studies have been designed to provide information about underlying mechanisms,
as well as simply examine whether or not a sense of optimism really pays off.
Taken together, the proposed set of studies should facilitate understanding of
the coping process in general, and the role that dispositional optimism plays in
it.