* 8717322
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Manufacturing and Automation
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1993
* Michel Melkanoff, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1993
* USD 1,972,000.00

Because most products can be made more cheaply outside its boundaries the
United States is slowly losing its manufacturing base. Companies are now
recognizing that they must improve their productivity if they are to maintain a
market share in world markets. Research addressing manufacturing systems that
are cost effective is necessary to maintain our productivity and position in
world trade. Companies are now recognizing and supporting research on
manufacturing. Because of this increasing interest by companies, an
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on Manufacturing and Automation
now appears to be both feasible and viable. This five.year continuing grant is
initiating an Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Manufacturing
and Automation at the University of Southern California and the University of
California.Los Angeles in collaboration with the California Institute of
Technology, the Universities of California Irvine and Santa Barbara, and Arizona
State University. The initial research program is addressing: 1) An Intelligent
System for Automatic Generation of Manufacturing Process Plans; 2) Geometric
Modeling and its Applications in Design and Manufacturing Automation; 3)
Automatic Generation of Optimal Cutting Conditions for NC Machines in CAD/CAM;
4) Multi.Robot Assembly Process Planning and Scheduling; 5) Design for Automatic
Assembly and Maintenance; 6) Intelligent Simulation Systems for Automated
Factories; 7) Sensor Based Robot Systems for Automated Manufacturing in a Vacuum
Environment; 8) Dynamic Scheduling for Automated Manufacturing. Four companies
have joined the Center and another four have said they will join at the
beginning of the year when new budgets are available. Industrial support will
provide 40% of the Center's $1,000,000 initial budget and should increase to 60%
during the first year. The State of California has budgeted $200,000/year to
augment the Center's research. The Co.Principal Investigators and all his
colleagues involved in the Center are noted experts in there fields and have the
expertise and industrial relationships to operate this Center. This Center is
being cost shared with the Division of Design, Manufacturing, and
Computer.Integrated Engineering. The Program Manager recommends the University
of Southern California (and five associated universities) be awarded a five.year
continuing grant to be funded at $400,000 per year. This includes $100,000 per
year from the Division of Design, Manufacturing, and Computer.Integrated
Engineering. .FF. Near the end of each 12.month period, the Program Manager
and/or the Head of The Division of Cross.Disciplinary Research will review the
progress of the Center on a number of renewal criteria, including the following:
(1) extent to which university/industry interaction and collaboration is
developing; (2) extent to which the support base for the center is expanding;
(3) extent to which a robust research program is developing; (4) As industrial
support increases, all participating universities are to achieve a fair share as
determined by the.j.industrial advw is satisfactory, the Program ll recommend
support of the next period of this tinuing grant.