* 8717680
* Preparation of Russian-English Earthquake Engineering Dictionary
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1991
* William Nash, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 08/31/1991
* USD 34,067.00

The visit to the Soviet Union of the U.S. Working Group 10.04, "Construction in
Seismic Areas", during October 12-22, 1986, resulted in the signing of a new
protocol. Both sides agreed to participate in the preparation of English-Russian
and Russian-English dictionaries for use in translating technical articles
relating to earthquake engineering. At the same time, the U.S. delegation was
presented with a comprehensive English-Russian dictionary which included terms
commonly used in earthquake engineering. During the return visit of the U.S.S.R.
Working Group 10.04 during May 31-June 9, 1987, a new protocol was signed, which
contained the resolution that "Both sides agreed to continue to work to generate
a Russian-English as well as an English-Russian dictionaries on earthquake
engineering." This action is to implement this agreement. Professor William Nash
will prepare a Russian-English dictionary containing only those words and
phrases pertinent to earthquake engineering and seismology. The completed volume
will be prepared by contemporary desk-top publishing techniques and will consist
of approximately two hundred and fifty pages. The dictionary will make it
possible for a user with only a limited knowledge of the Cyrillic alphabet to
translate research papers from Russian into English. Two hundred copies of the
dictionary will be prepared and distributed. The dictionary will also be
submitted to the National Technical Information Service for continued
availability. Dr. Nash is eminently qualified to undertake this project. He has
an international reputation in the field of structural mechanics, as well as
through his editorship of the Journal of Nonlinear Mechanics. He is an active
researcher in the area of earthquake engineering, and has for many years
translated selected technical articles from Russian into English. He also has
the institutional facilities available to complete this task.