* 8717065
* Research on the Fundamental Penetration Mechanisms of a     Flat-Plate in Structured Clays
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Alan Lutenegger, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* MEHMET T. TUMAY
* 09/30/1990
* USD 76,000.00

This research deals with the problem of interpretation of the results of a
particular kind of field soil test. The overall problem involves the difficulty
of measuring relevant soil properties for use in the design of foundations for
buildings, stability of deep excavations, and other similar problems where
shearing stresses develop in the soil. The usual procedures for solving such
problems involve withdrawal of soil samples from the ground and performance of
relevant tests in the laboratory. Unfortunately, the act of taking the samples
results in significant changes in the soil properties, leading to designs which
are often uneconomical, but are occasionally unsafe. Efforts to resolve this
problem have recently involved development of tools to test the soil in place
("in situ"). Unfortunately, field conditions are much more complex than those in
the laboratory and it is often unclear as to how the field data are to be
converted into realistic soil properties. The PI's for this project are
concerned with field measurements involving the pressing of a flat plate into
the soil at a steady rate. They will use, and further develop, a theory
originally developed by Baligh at MIT, termed the "strain path method", to
predict stresses, strains, and pore water pressures around such a penetrating
plate. In addition, they will perform laboratory tests where plates will be
penetrated into large-sized soil specimens, and also field tests. The costs of
field tests will be greatly reduced through use of a field testing rig at
another university, that was funded through an NSF equipment grant. The
theoretical work will be funded by the Air Force and the field and laboratory
work by NSF. The goals of the research are then to develop a way of converting
data on plate penetration into soil properties for use in foundation design,
leading to a reduction in testing costs and in the cost of foundations, and to
verify the analysis using laboratory and field tests, and case histories.