* 8717343
* Iodine Transformations in Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1987,08/31/1990
* William Ullman, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/1990
* USD 110,076.00

Iodine is a reactive element which participates in many different classes of
reactions in waters, soils, sediments, and the atmosphere. It has been
implicated in a variety of important processes which control the stability of
pollutants in the atmosphere and the solubility of toxic metals in the ocean.
This proposal has as its main objectives (1) the determination of the speciation
of iodine in sedimentary pore waters and solids, (2) the identification of the
major classes of reactions which control iodine speciation and distribution in
sediments, and (3) determining the kinetic factors controlling iodine
distributions in the environment. The results of this study will have utility in
predicting both the distribution of iodine in the sediments, and, by analogy,
the iodine distribution in soils, surface waters, and groundwaters as well. The
proposed studies involve the determination of the speciation and distribution of
iodine in sediments under a wide range of environmental conditions (Eh, ph, and
temperature). Sediment samples will be incubated at in situ temperatures in the
laboratory to determine the rates of production and consumption of total
dissolved iodine and some individual reactive iodine species. Laboratory studies
will be made of the interaction of iodine redox chemistry with the chemistry of
other redox-sensitive species normally present in sedimentary pore waters.
Together the results of this research will lead to a better understanding of
iodine geochemistry and the way in which environmental conditions may control
iodine cycling and the cycling of other important solutes.