* 8717350
* Support of a Tarsier Colony at Duke University Primate      Center
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1990
* Elwyn Simons, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 07/31/1990
* USD 78,992.00

Tarsiers are a small family of rare and endangered primates found only in
Southeast Asia. The three extant species are all arboreal, and their secretive,
nocturnal habits make their biology largely unknown. Tarsiers are also of great
interest because their relationships to other primates are unresolved. The Duke
University Primate Center maintains colonies of two tarsier species. These are
the first large tarsier colonies assembled in the U.S. for purposes of scholarly
analysis. The Center has made important steps in determining optimal
environmental conditions for the animals and currently has a healthy colony with
several pregmant females. Recent major technological advances in neuroanatomy,
DNA hybridization, DNA sequencing and biochemistry provide new approaches to
help resolve the question of the relationships and biology of tarsiers. The Duke
Primate Center is at the leading edge of research in primatology and has
assembled a broad spectrum of scientific talent to study questions of tarsier
behavior, anatomy, reproduction, biochemistry and physiology. All activities are
accomplished through benign, non-invasive study of the living subjects, or of
those that were miscarried,stillborn, or have died of natural causes. This
project provides funds for partial support of the colony for two years.