* 8717471
* REU:  Phylogenetic Relationships and Evolution in the       Heuchera Group (Saxifragaceae) Using DNA Restriction        Fragment Analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Douglas Soltis, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1991
* USD 133,392.00

Previous studies of plants in the flowering plant family Saxifragaceae have
used evidence from morphology, chemistry, chromosomes, and hybridization
experiments. These earlier investigations have helped to clarify taxonomic
relationships among genera in what has traditionally been considered a
troublesome group. But given the evidence of parallel and convergent evolution
in morphological and phytochemical characters in other plant groups, the
phylogenetic affinities of these saxifrages remain problematic. Dr. Douglas
Soltis of Washington State University will apply the powerful new methods of
mutational analysis of chloroplast DNA, and to a lesser extent, nuclear
ribosomal DNA, to examine evolutionary change within this group. The goals of
Dr. Soltis's molecular systematic analysis are to: l. construct a phylogenetic
framework for the nine genera of Saxifragaceae under study, including the large
genera Heuchera, Lithophragma, and Mitella; 2. examine the placement of single-
species or monotypic genera among such larger, speciose genera; and 3. compare
the results from this analysis of DNA with data from other lines of taxonomic
evidence such as flavonoid chemistry, chromosomes, and floral morphology. In
this way, it will be possible to assess patterns of evolutionary change in
morphology, chromosomes, and phytochemistry.