* 8717570
* Collaborative Research: Reorganization of Nutrient Capital  in a Northern Hardwood Forest After a Whole-Tree Harvest
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1990
* Timothy Fahey, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 09/30/1990
* USD 203,647.00

Organic matter and nutrient dynamics in a regrowing northern hard wood forest
following a whole-tree harvest will be studied. Particular attention will be
paid to changes in the patterns and magnitudes of organic matter and nutrient
pools in the vegetation and soils of a system in years four and five after
cutting. Root studies will be emphasized since response to change of this
belowground component of forest systems in very poorly known. A number of state-
of-the-art techniques will be used in this study. For example, the relative
contributions of various plant species to organic matter stocks in the soil will
be determined using the cupric oxidation technique. This is a procedure for
identifying the proportions of phenolic monomers in lignin of plant tissues.
Preliminary evidence suggests that the initial proportions and changes in the
proportions of the monomers are species specific. Well developed forest growth
and hydrologic models will aid in the synthesis of the data derived from this
research. The research plan also includes further development of the below-
ground portion of the forest growth model. This research will add to our
understanding of how forests recover from disturbance. The knowledge gained from
this study is important for developing wise management plans for a critical
natural resource, the nations forests. The collaborative research effort between
researchers at the University of Pennsylvania and Cornell University will be
augmented by contributions from researchers at the University of Wyoming and
Yale University. All of the scientists involved in the study are productive. The
facilities at all involved institutions are excellent. The research being done
at the Hubbard Brook Experiment Forest in north central New Hampshire and the
field facilities there are excellent.