* 8717601
* How Do Bilayer Lipids Affect Sugar Transport in Native and  Synthetic Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1992
* Donald Melchior, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 08/31/1992
* USD 246,500.00

In order to understand both the physical and physiological function of a water
soluble enzyme, the enzyme must be considered in the context of its environment.
This is true also for intrinsic membrane enzymes. Drs. Melchior and Carruthers
have demonstrated that the activity of a "model" membrane enzyme, the human
erythrocyte sugar transporter, is a function of the lipid composition and
physical state of the membrane in which it is embedded. They have shown that
just as features of the aqueous milieu of water soluble enzymes determine their
activity, there are features of the lipid bilayer which determine the activity
of intrinsic membrane enzymes. Considerations of the behavior of membrane
enzymes cannot be divorced from considerations of properties of their resident
membrane bilayer. The research will now be extended to elucidate the mechanisms
by which bilayer lipids influence the activity of membrane enzymes. Drs.
Melchior and Carruthers will determine the nature of those interactions of
lipids with membrane proteins that alter enzyme activity. They will continue to
use as a model system the human erythrocyte sugar transporter molecule. By the
coordinated use of a variety of techniques for monitoring transporter function,
transporter structure, bilayer structure and state, a unique understanding of
the function of a membrane enzyme in the context of its bilayer environment will
be obtained.