* 8717276
* First International Conference on the Release of GeneticallyEngineered Microorganisms (REGEM l): Cardiff, Wales; April  5-8, 1988
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1987,10/31/1989
* David Pramer, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 10/31/1989
* USD 31,250.00

Funds will provide partial support for travel by American scientists to
participate in the first International Conference on the Release of Genetically
Engineered Microorganisms (REGEM 1). The Conference will convene April 5-8,
1988, in Cardiff, Wales under the auspices of the Society for Applied
Bacteriology (SAB), the Society for General Microbiology (SGM) and the American
Society for Microbiology (ASM). The Conference has as its goal to serve as a
forum for scientists throughout the world to discuss recent advances in
microbial ecology and molecular biology as they relate to environmental releases
of genetically engineered microorganisms. The conference program will consist of
three morning sessions of invited speakers. Roundtables are scheduled for the
afternoons and posters will be on display throughout each day. The Conference
will enable scientists with different educational backgrounds and experience to
interact so each can benefit from the special knowledge of the other. Adequate
American participation in the Conference is of special concern, because the
issue of environmental release relates directly to the capacity of this country
to maintain its present competitive advantage in molecular biology and
biotechnology as applied in the agricultural, environmental and medical
sciences.