* 8717556
* Polynuclear Transmetalation Reactions and Products
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Geoffrey Davies, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 02/29/1992
* USD 211,940.00

This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
is in the area of transition metal chemistry. The project is concerned with
reactions in which atoms of two different metals are exchanged between carrier
molecules to which they are attached, so-called transmetalation reactions. Of
particular interest are reactions involving polymetallic species, species which
contain several metal atoms within one molecule. One aim of the project is to
use transmetalation reactions to synthesize polymetallic species containing
atoms of two or more different metals within one molecule. Such mixed-metal
polymetallic species are expected to have interesting catalytic properties and
also are models of important enzymes, such as the respiratory enzyme cytochrome
oxidase. It may be possible also to decompose the mixed-metal species to yield
alloys of types which cannot be made directly from the constituent metals. The
focus of the project will be the newly discovered phenomenon of transmetalation
which leads to quantitative, stepwise replacement of metal centers in
polymetallic targets by other metals from simple molecular transmetalators. The
reactions proceed under mild conditions and the products are easily separated.
The major components of the research will be: 1) isolation, structural
characterization and electrochemical studies of cationic targets and
transmetalation products; 2) investigation of earlier and heavier element
transmetalation systems; 3) development and use of more economical
transmetalators; 4) identification of reactions of linkage transmetalators which
give large polymetallic molecules; 5) description of the selective ligand
chemistry of heteropolymetallic molecules; 6) use of transmetalation to generate
new bulk alloys and supported metal catalysts; and 7) development of
heteropolyorganometallic chemistry.