* 8717434
* Log Decomposition Processes as Influenced by Heterotroph    Community Structure
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1989
* John Lattin, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 10/31/1989
* USD 49,995.00

Detailed process-level and community-level studies will beconducted on
decomposing logs that are part of a long-term logdecay study centered at the
H.J. Andrews LTER site in Oregon. Specifically, the research will focus on
completing threeresearch tasks. First, a two-year study of nutrient dynamics
infour species of decaying logs will be finished. Data on changesin nutrient
content of the logs will be integrated withinformation on nutrient inputs
through processes such as nitrogenfixation, and outputs through processes such
as fragmentation andleaching. Second, logs set in the field 1985, will be
studied todetermine nitrogen fixation, fungal community distribution andenzyme
activity associated with the decomposer community. Thiseffort will complete a
study of seasonal patterns in log decay. And third, analyses of terpene and
phenol content of the logs setout in 1985, will be completed. Some of these
compounds arethought to serve as attractants for wood-boring insects and/or
asinhibitors of decomposition. The significance of this research is that it will
help us tounderstand the role of log decay in nutrient cycling in
forestecosystem. In old-growth forests of the Pacific Northwest,downed logs and
other woody debris comprise up to 22% of above-ground organic mass (live and
dead organic matter) and 81% ofaboveground detritus. This large mass of dead
woody material maywell serve as an important storehouse of nutrients and
regulatorof nutrient dynamics in these forest systems. Dr. Showalter and his
colleagues have good records ofproductivity in this research area. The
institutional supportavailable to them is superior.