* 8717990
* Morphological Properties of Dispersions of Tubule-Forming   Phospholipids (Expedited Award)
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1987,10/31/1988
* Paul Yager, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/1988
* USD 30,000.00

Lipid tubules are rigid, straight, thin-walled, hollow cylinders with a fixed
diameter of about 0.75 micrometers and axial ratios as high as 2000:1. The two
methods found by the principal investigator for fabricating them rely only on
the self-organizing properties of surfactants in solution, and yet allow high
yield and good control of the length distribution. Once formed, tubules can be
stabilized by polymerization, and further stabilized by coating with some
metals. Tubules could potentially replace graphitic fibers in many of their
current uses, and they have the added attraction of being intrinsically
biocompatible for use in biotechnological and medical applications. Research in
this emerging area has concentrated on single-component dispersions of a few
similar diacetylenic lecithins which were the first found by the principal
investigators to form tubules. Unusual packing of the hydrocarbon chains and
head groups in these lipids may lead to the production of a crystalline helical
ribbon that can convert to a complete tubule. This project initiates two
systematic, exploratory searches based on this theory: one for the thermal and
morphological effects of mixing tubule-forming lipids with others not believed
to form tubules, and another to determine if lipids not currently known to form
tubules will form them if subjected to appropriate conditions. The primary
characterization techniques are high power optical microscopy under controlled
temperatures, and, for higher resolution,