* 8717146
* Evolutionary Ecology of Marine Yeasts as Determined by      Molecular Relatedness
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Jack Fell, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 12/31/1989
* USD 49,505.00

There is a considerable lack of knowledge of the role of marine microorganisms
is biogeochemical cycling and other processes. This is due, in part, to
inadequate information on the fundamental biology of these marine organisms.
Recent advances in molecular biology have made tools available to answer a
variety of basic questions. This research will examine the origin and
phylogenetic relationships among marine yeasts. Preliminary investigations
indicate that marine yeasts originated from terrestrial plant parasites, the
heterobacidiomycetes, a group that includes such fungi as the rusts and smuts.
Recent studies have shown that the heterobasidiomycetes are capable of producing
free living yeasts stages that may be distributed by wing or land drainage. Our
studies, based on phenotypic characteristics, suggests that many of the marine
yeasts are evolved from, or are identical to, the yeasts stages of the plant
parasites. However, molecular studies, based on nuclear DNA relatedness, have
shown that comparisons based on phenotypic responses can be misleading because
the genetic bases for many of thes criteria reside in only a few genes. We
propose to determine the relationships between species of marine yeasts and the
relationships of yeasts to terrestrial plant parasites through studies of
molecular relatedness.