* 8717926
* Emulsion Polymerization Kinetics
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Gary Poehlein, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/1991
* USD 213,440.00

Emulsion polymerization involves polymerization in a heterogeneous system
consisting of an aqueous phase and a dispersed oil phase. The initiator,
initially located in the aqueous phase, diffuses into the oily phase where
growth and termination occur. These systems exhibit characteristically high
reaction rates and a high degree of polymerization. The product is comprised of
collidal polymer paticles in a stable suspension, often referred to as latex,
dispersed in the aqueous phase. Some products such as synthetic rubbers, molding
plastics and trade resins must be recovered from the latex before final
formulation and use. Other products such as surface coatings and adhesives can
utilize the polymeric materials in latex form. The general thrust of this work
is to develop a deeper and more fundamental understanding of the complex
phenomena comprising emulsion polymerization. Four projects are planned: 1.
Copolymerization studies in a reactor system comprising a tubular prereactor
followed by a series of two continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTRs). The focus
of the work is measurement of reaction rate, particle size distibution,
composition of the copolymer formed in each reactor, and molecular weights. The
work will involve studies of grafting reaction kinetics, morphology of the latex
particles from copolymerization reactions and the use of functional monomers
that are water soluble. 2. Determination of the distribution of free radicals in
latex particles. The focus of the work is on utilizing the concept of a
nonuniform radical distribution to model grafting reactions aimed at studying
the development of particle morphology. 3. Studying particle concentration and
size distribution which influences rheology and, in many cases, application
performance. The work will include studies of particle number control for semi-
batch systems. 4. Use of functional monomers with carboxyl groups to help
stabilize particles and improve application performance. The work should
elucidate, for example, the compositional parameters that characterize the
polymer molecules which are formed in the aqueous and oily phases. The results
should assist in the developments of new products and processes in which
grafting reactions, particle characteristics, and polymer molecular composition
variables are important.