* 8717380
* Quadrupole Ion Trap and Tandem Quadrupole Mass              Spectrometric Studies of Reactive Organic Species           in the Gas Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/1987,10/31/1990
* Hilkka Kenttamaa, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 10/31/1990
* USD 134,000.00

This grant in Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry is made under the auspices of
the Research Opportunities for Women Program. The award provides support for
research by Dr. Hilkka Kenttamaa, Purdue University, which is aimed at
characterizing the chemical and physical properties of molecular fragments in
the gas phase. Quadrupole mass spectrometry will be employed to measure
reactivity of both charged (cationic) and neutral (radical) fragments of organic
molecules. Understanding the reactivity of molecular fragments in the gas phase
is important both for understanding chemical events which occur in the upper
atmosphere, and for understanding the influence of solvation upon the many
chemical reactions which occur in solution. Two different types of quadrupole
mass spectrometers will be employed: an ion trap equipped with pulsed valves,
and a triple quadrupole tandem mass spectrometer. The various capabilities of
the two techniques will be utilized in studies on three different areas. (i)
Mechanisms and potential energy surfaces of acid-catalyzed reactions of epoxides
in the absence of solvents will be studied. In addition, experiments are planned
which will yield thermochemical data for neutral epoxides, protonated epoxides
and their isomeric forms. (ii) Relative stabilities and intrinsic chemical
reactivity of coordinately unsaturated borocations are a topic of interest. The
experiments employed will allow heats of formation to be determined for borenium
ions and various other boron-containing species, including derivatives of
neutral metaboric and metaboronic acids. (iii) Studies on bimolecular gas-phase
chemistry of ionized ylides and ionized zwitterions will provide information
concerning the thermochemistry and reactivity of these interesting ions as well
as their neutral gas-phase radical and diradical analogs.