* 8717134
* Interactions Between Planktonic Community Structure         and Nutrient Cycling Processes in Freshwater Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Robert Howarth, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Althea Ball
* 01/31/1991
* USD 317,916.00

Major interactions between planktonic community structure and nutrient cycling
in aquatic ecosystems will be researched; specifically the sites and rates of
nutrient regeneration, including comparisons of nitrogen and phosphorus.
Replicated pond experiments will be performed in a 2X2 matrix: fish added or not
(to obtain different zooplankton assemblages), and ponds treated with fertilizer
either with a high or low N:P ratio (to obtain different phytoplankton
assemblages). Differences in the mechanisms of nutrient regeneration under these
community structures will be examined. Four major hypotheses will be tested. (1)
In plankton communities dominated by edible algae and cladoceran grazers,
nutrient regeneration will occur principally in the water column. (2) In
communities dominated by cyanobacteria, a significantly greater fraction of
nutrient regeneration will occur in sediments (if dead cyanobacteria sink), or
within the cyanobacterial mat (if dead cyanobacteria float). (3) In communities
dominated by inedible eucaryotic algae, or in communities having a large
calanoid copepod component, a significantly greater fraction of regeneration
will occur in sediments. Finally, (4) the relative importance of the "microbial
loop" to nutrient regenration will change as planktonic community structure
changes. Results will not only test these ideas on how aquatic communities
operate, but will provide valuable insight which may prove useful in lake
management.