* 8717078
* Fabrication of a New Type Doppler Current Profiler
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Warren White, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 12/31/1990
* USD 68,819.00

This Ocean Sciences Instrumentation development project is a collaborative
effort between Scripps Institution of Oceanography and Amatek Corporation,
Straza Division. The project's intent is to develop, build and test a new system
of hardware and soft- ware for acoustic Doppler current profiling. It will
involve modifications to existing Amatek Doppler speed logs that are installed
on numerous commercial ships and research vessels. The new system will make use
of advances in LSI chip technology, the availability of new peripheral cards and
software for IBM AT compatible computers and all developed software will be
access- ible to the user. Knowledge gained will be in the public domain. Amatek
will provide a Doppler receiver chain module board and two digital signal
processing boards. Scripps personnel will oversee software development, the
selection of optimal signal processing algorithms, and preparation of
documentation manuals. Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers have become important
tools to derive the movement and circulation of water under a ship's path. These
devices are relatively new to academic researchers, but represent a major
advance in scientists' ability to study ocean circulation. Rapid advances are
still being made in signal processing electronics and Doppler sonar theory and
it is suggested that most research-oriented, commercial systems now available,
lag behind procurable technology. Also, restricted access to hardware and
software preclude the scientist from being being able to modify signal
processing algorithms to make best use of available data. Successful completion
of this project will further scientists' ability to use this new technology.