* 8717981
* "Physico-Chemical Properties of Associated Solutions"
* O/D,OISE
* 07/04/1987,07/03/1990
* Spela Paljk, Jozef Stefan Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/03/1990
* USD 0.00

This U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research project in physical chemistry between
Spela Paljk of the Josef Stefan Institute in Ljubljana and Oscar Bonner from the
University of South Carolina is continuation of a U.S.-Yugoslav joint research
program on the study of the physico- chemical properties of associated aqueous
and non-aqueous solutions. The aim of this study is to characterize the
structure of associated liquid mixtures by investigating the solute-solute
(dissolved substances) and the solute-solvent interactions. The proposed study
will carefully investigate the structure of cholesterol, a non-aqueous system.
The investigators have complementary research interests. Their previous
collaboration proved productive and resulted in numerous publications in this
field. This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on Cooperation
in Science and Technology and is supported through a joint fund consisting of
matching contributions from the U.S. and Yugoslav governments. The U.S.
contribution is provided annually by the Department of State. No NSF funds are
involved. The grants are composed principally of Yugolsav dinars and made to the
principal Yugoslav institute. Grants include travel for U.S. scientists to
Yugoslavia and a modest dollar allowance for Yugoslav scientists' living
expenses in the U.S.