* 8718300
* Neurobiological Analyses of Plasticity: Learning and Memory
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1987,04/30/1993
* Richard Thompson, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1993
* USD 351,783.00

The long-term goal of Dr. Thompson's research is to understand how the
mammalian brain codes, stores, and retrieves memories. This has proved to be one
of the most complex problems in the fields of neuroscience and psychology. It is
also one of the most important. Over the course of evolution, biological
organisms have developed two ways of storing information. One is the familiar
genetic code embedded in the DNA; the other, no less important, is the ability
to store acquired information and experience in the brain. In order to
understand the mechanisms of memory storage, it is necessary to identify the
specific circuitry in the brain required to store a given type of memory. Dr.
Thompson has selected a basic form of associative learning shared equally by
humans and other mammals, classical conditioning of discrete behavioral
responses learned to deal with aversive events. An example of such conditioning
is learning to close the eyelid in response to a tone (conditional stimulus, or
CS) that signals the occurrence of a puff of air on the eye (unconditional
stimulus, or US). Dr. Thompson and his colleagues have discovered that very
discrete regions of the cerebellum are essential for this basic form of
learning. They have also succeeded in identifying most of the essential brain
circuitry involved in this basic form of associative learning. Dr. Thompson and
his colleagues will use several neurophysiological methods and behavioral
training procedures to (1) complete the identification of the essential auditory
CS pathway, (2) determine whether or not memory traces are formed in this
pathway before it reaches the cerebellum, (3) characterize the patterns of
neuronal response in the essential US pathway and in the essential conditional-
response pathway, (4) determine the exact locations where memory traces are
formed, (5) begin analysis of the mechanism of memory-trace formation, (6)
determine if the essential cerebellar circuit can mediate the "cognitive"
behavioral phenomenon of "blocking," and (7) explore how higher brain structures
(cerebral cortex, hippocampus) modulate the essential cerebellar memory-trace
circuit. In addition to understanding basic mechanisms of memory storage, Dr.
Thompson's work offers the promise of understanding how motor skills are coded
and learned. The potential practical applications range from treatment of
learning disabilities to enhancement of skilled human performance to the
development of an entirely new approach to the problem of control of movement in
robotics.