* 8718560
* Biogenesis of Chloroplasts: Import and Assembly of Nuclear  Encoded Chloroplast Proteins
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1992
* Kenneth Cline, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 07/31/1992
* USD 208,600.00

Dr. Cline wishes to determine the mechanism by which polypeptides synthesized
in the cytosol are transported into the thylakoid membranes within the
chloroplasts. Thylakoids are internal membranes within cholroplasts.
Approximately 50% of thylakoid polypeptides are synthesized within the
chloroplast; the remainder in the cytosol. Recent evidence suggests that the
cytosolically synthesized proteins achieve their functional location by a
"soluble intermediate' pathway, in which precursor proteins pass through both
envelope membranes, traverse the aqueous stroma in soluble form, and insert into
thylakoids by a second transport (assembly) process. Dr. Cline's laboratory has
reconstituted the assembly process with chloroplast subfractions, but has not
yet rigorously demonstrated its involvement in an intact system. The proposed
studies will directly investigate the soluble intermediate pathway and
involvement of the in vitro assembly process by importing a thylakoid precursor
protein into chloroplasts under conditions that prevent assembly. Selective
conditions will be identified by thorough analysis of the energetics of the
assembly process. A second objective will examine the possibility that
chloroplast synthesized proteins. and imported proteins are inserted into
thylakoids by the same assembly apparatus. Assembly of chloroplast synthesized
proteins will be reconstituted in vitro and the assembly requirements compared
with those for assembling imported proteins. This work will increase our
knowledge of the biogenesis of chloroplast membrane proteins and will add to a
more general understanding of how proteins cross membranes.