* 8718947
* ROW: Ionic Interactions and Morphology in Ionomers by       Electron Magnetic Resonance Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1993
* Shulamith Schlick, University of Detroit Mercy
* Continuing grant
* None
* 08/31/1993
* USD 394,700.00

The objective of this research is to study the molecular and structural aspects
of phase separation in ionomers (ionic polymers) by continuous wave (cw) and
pulsed Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) methods. This approach is well suited for
studying the complex heterogeneous structure of ionomers, because it is non-
invasive and allows selective study of the portion of the sample where the
paramagnetic probe is located. In the hydrophilic phase, attempts will be made
to define the local environment of the cations, the intercation distance and the
size of ionic aggregates. The mobility and degree of crystallinity of the
polymer chains in the hydrophobic phase will be studied using peroxy radical
probes. The interface, and the penetration of the polar regions into the organic
network, will be studied by following the partition and dynamics of nitroxide
probes whose hyperfine splittings are sensitive to the polarity of the medium.
Weak interactions of the paramagnetic centers with neighboring protons and
deuterons, which cannot be detected by cw ESR, will be studied by Electron Spin
Echo (ESE) spectroscopy. DSC studies will be used to detect heterogeneity in the
phase structure and to deduce the relative amounts of bound and mobile water in
the system. Perfluorinated ionomers containing sulfonic and carboxylic groups
and polyurethane ionomers containing carboxylic groups will be investigated.
These studies are important for an understanding of ionic transport and
selectivity in synthetic and biological membranes, of photo-induced charge
separation processes in ionomers, and also for polymer blends in which phase
separation is prevented by crosslinking ionic groups.