* 8718634
* Mathematical Modeling and Information Acquisition:  An      Integrated Approach for Dynamic Decision-Making
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1988,08/01/1988
* Anantaram Balakrishnan, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/01/1988
* USD 45,972.00

Many operational problems encountered in practice require dynamic decision-
making based on incomplete information about the constantly changing operating
environment. Often decision-makers have the opportunity to acquire additional
information about the current state of the system before making a decision.
Obtaining more information enables the use of a more accurate and detailed
model, thus improving the quality of final decisions as measured, for instance,
by the expected payoff. However, acquiring information is usually expensive
(especially if imputed costs for time delays are included), with higher costs
incurred for more accurate and extensive information. Thus, gathering complete
information may not always be cost effective. The proposed research explores
this cost-benefit tradeoff in contexts where operations research models are
employed for decision-making. Rather than separate the problem specification
from the model formulation and optimization, the two are treated in an
integrated manner. A 'meta' model is defined for evaluating the tradeoff between
improving the quality of decisions through increased model precision and the
cost of information acquisition to achieve the increased precision. The problem
of routing messages in a network is examined in this framework and both optimal
meta algorithms and good heuristic approaches are proposed for solving the
problem. In a recent N.S.F. sponsored workshop entitled "OR - The Next Decade,"
one of the research topics emphasized was the development of a theory on the
trade-off between data gathering, model specification, and decision-making. The
results from this research should advance knowledge in that area.