* 8718903
* A Genetic Approach to the Identification of Cell Specific Elements within the SV 40 Enhancer
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Winship Herr, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 11/30/1991
* USD 238,400.00

The transcriptional enhancer of SV40 is the prototype mammalian enhancer and is
the most extensively analyzed. Genetic analyses of this enhancer in African
Green Monkey Kidney (AGMk) cells have shown that it consists of at least three
separate elements each of which can function in cooperation with one another or
duplicates of themselves to enhance transcription. To date these genetic
experiments have been limited to AGMK cells; it is probable that the SV40
enchancer contains additional elements that have been overlooked because they do
not function effectively in AGMK cells. This possibility will be explored by
performing genetic analyses in various cell types. This will be accomplished by
replacing the enhancer region of the murine papovavirus polyoma with the wild-
type SV40 enhancer and/or previously characterized SV40 enhancer mutants. These
polyoma/SV40 enhancer recombinant will be used to select for variants with
improved growth in a variety of different murine cell types including
fibroblast, lymphocytes, and embryonal carcinoma cells. Differing patterns of
enhancer rearrangement should be obtained depending on the cell line used which
will allow identification of elements displaying different cell- specific
activities. This project will lead towards a clear description of the complex
array of different elements within the SV40 enhancer.