* 8718310
* Genetics and Physiology of the Hypersensitive Response      Elicited in Plants by Pseudomonas Solanacearum
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Luis Sequeira, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/1991
* USD 238,400.00

The objective of this proposal is to define the genetic system that controls
expression of the hypersensitive response (HR) elicited by Pseudomonas
solanacearum in plant hosts and non-hosts. Dr. Sequeira has obtained a series of
genetically defined, transposon-generated mutants from both HR+ and HR- parental
strains. He has also determined that the hypersensitive response is induced by
plant signal molecules and, from one parental strain, he has purified a 60kD
protein that appears to be responsible for the tissue browning and collapse
associated with the hypersensitive response. He proposes to utilize the HR-
mutants to define the role of this 60kD protein in the response caused by P.
solanacearum in tobacco, potato, and cucumber. He also proposes structural and
functional analyses of the genes that code for the hypersensitive response when
these genes function in different genetic and phenotypic backgrounds. The aim is
to determine the role that HR plays in host specificity. A final objective is to
determine the nature of the signal molecules from the host that may be involved
in activation of HR genes in P. solanacearum. This study will enhance our
understanding of plant-bacterial interactions in general and specifically,
process of tissue browning and collapse associated with the hypersensitive
reaction in plant hosts in response to infection by bacteria.