* 8718370
* CICNet
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1992
* Roger Clark, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* George O. Strawn
* 11/30/1992
* USD 1,328,999.00

The Committee on Institutional Cooperation (CIC) proposes to implement a
regional communication network for its member schools and would also serve other
institutions in the seven - state region. The initial set of schools and the
states that would be included in the network are: Illinois- University of
Chicago, University of Illinois, Northwestern University; Iowa - University of
Iowa; Michigan - University of Michigan, Michigan State University; Ohio - Ohio
State University, Indiana - Indiana University, Purdue University; Wisconsin -
University of Wisconsin; and Minnesota - University of Minnesota. The NSF would
provide partial support for a high bandwidth (1.5 million bits per second) data
communication network that will support access to regional and national
computational resources and unique data bases, communication among researchers
especially for project collaboration, and university - industry cooperation and
technology transfer. A star topology is proposed with T-1 lines emanating from a
hub at the University of Chicago to each of the CIC institutions. The central
hub will be managed by a CICNet Network Support Center. A corporate partner will
install and manage the the T-1 lines. At each university CICNet access will be
through a gateway to the local campus network. The network will initially be
connected to the NSF backbone network at the University of Illinois--Urbana-
Champaign. All components will utilize the NSFNet standard TCP/IP protocols.
Each campus will provide local networking infrastructure for CICNet, including
technical support and user information services. The Network Support Center will
provide coordination and technical support for the campuses. Financing and
operational plans call for a steadily decreasing reliance upon support from NSF
and corporate partners, with full responsibility for all aspects of CICNet
devolving onto CIC at the conclusion of five years. NSF support will be for the
first 2 1/2 years only.