* 8718869
* Hunter-Gatherer Complexity in Coastal Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1989
* David Yesner, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1989
* USD 55,063.00

This grant permits Dr. Yesner, in collaboration with Argentenian colleagues, to
conduct archaeological research in the Beagle Channel area of southern
Argentina. The work will include both analysis of faunal remains from the
previously excavated site of Tunel and additional excavation at adjacent Playa
Larga. These two sites together provide information on over 7,000 years of
prehistory in this region. Both are extremely rich in artifacts as well as
faunal remains and can yield detailed information on human adaptation and social
organization. Preliminary work at Playa Larga indicates the presence of semi-
buried house remains. Dr. Yesner will place trenches across several of these to
recover both fauna and associated artifacts. He will analyze these, together
with materials from Tunel, to determine whether the sites were occupied
seasonally or on a year-round basis. He will also determine the extent to which
the inhabitants followed a specialized subsistence strategy and see how this
might have changed over time. Charles Darwin, when he visited this area
described then extant hunters and gatherers and stated that they existed at an
extremely simple level of organization. Since then, they have always been
described in the literature as such. However, if true, this would be an anomoly
since most marine based foragers exhibit greater social and technological
complexity. Dr. Yesner has noted that by the time of Darwin's visit these people
had a long exposure to European societies and what Darwin observed might not
just be a simple level of adaptation, but rather the result of European disease
and social disruption. Dr. Yesner's archaeological research should throw light
on this matter. This research is important because it will increase our
understanding of how humans adapt at a simple level of technology. Since humans
lived by hunting and gathering for over 99% of their existence, studies of
foraging societies can shed light on how human societies and adaptations
developed and provide the broader context within which we may better understand
ourselves.