* 8718242
* Modulation of Corticotropin Releasing Hormone Action
* BIO,DCB
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1990
* Gwen Childs, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 09/30/1990
* USD 80,000.00

This study will investigate basic mechanisms underlying cellular and
subcellular responses of pituitary cells to corticotropin releasing hormone
(CRH) and specific modulators of CRH action. It is focused on anterior lobe
corticotropes and will study CRH binding and internalization (with quantitative
electron microscopic cytochemical analyses) and hormone storage (with
immunocytochemistry). The study will determine if inhibitors (glucocorticoids)
or potentiators (vasopressin) of ACTH release alter the rate or route of CRH
processing by corticotropes. The reserve cell population that is activated to
bind CRH in the presence of the potentiator, vasopressin, will be identified.
The study will test the hypothesis that potentiation of CRH action is dependent
upon the activation of unique vasopressin sensitive cells that have the
potential to produce ACTH. Another hypothesis that will be tested is that
glucocorticoid inhibition of CRH action, in its early stages, includes either a
block in the transport of CRH receptors to the plasma membrane or a rerouting of
CRH-receptor complexes to lysosomes for rapid degradation. Changes in CRH
binding will be identified with a biotinylated CRH ligand and labelled avidin
stains. All cytochemical stains will be analyzed with the Bioquant System IV and
image analysis system. The results of this research will enhance the
understanding of basic mechanisms regulating the release of hormone by one type
of pituitary cell, the corticotrope.