* 8718156
* Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar: An Investigation in   Linguistic Theory and Its Computational Implementation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Carl Pollard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 08/31/1989
* USD 80,136.00

This is a proposal for renewed support of a project in linguistic theory which
has proven exceedingly productive, with results of both theoretical and
practical importance. The researcher is continuing to investigate the
possibilities and problems of an explicit theory of linguistic syntax and
semantics which operates on a single level of representation, with rules with
strictly defined and restricted formal properties. Most theoreticians have found
it necessary to postulate two or more levels of representation, and rules of a
variety of formal types, in order to account for the data observed in natural
language. The theory proposed here, by being more restricted in its scope and
power, makes much stronger and more interesting claims about the underlying
nature of language, and to the extent that it can be shown to be valid
empirically, it thus constitutes a significant advance in linguistic theory. In
order to validate the theory empirically, the investigator must deal
satisfactorily with the numerous empirical problems which have led other
researchers to postulate more complex theories, and that is the burden of the
project proposed here. The project has, as mentioned above, practical import in
addition to its empirical interest. The restricted theory being explored permits
much faster and more efficient computer processing than more diverse theories
do, and to the extent it can handle the data of natural language and produce
useful output, it offers the prospect of a major advance in computer systems for
natural language processing.