* 8718625
* Regulation and Function of Genes Expressed in the Accessory Gland of D. Melanogaster Males
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Mariana Wolfner, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 11/30/1991
* USD 245,950.00

The accessory gland of the D. melanogaster male secretes products that, when
transferred to females during mating, cause these females to increase
oviposition, lose sexual receptivity, and maintain viable sperm. Dr. Wolfner has
identified three abundant accessory gland-specific transcripts that encode
polypeptides with signals for secretion and processing to smaller peptides. The
goals of the proposed research are to characterize the regulation of these genes
and to investigate the role of their polypeptides in fertility. Dr. Wolfner will
determine the developmental regulation of the expression of the genes, and
whether frequent multiple matings affect their expression by Northern blot
analysis. A regulatory region of one of these genes will be defined, and used in
a novel method to ablate particular accessory gland cells. The effect of this
ablation on the synthesis of male-specific RNAs and upon fertility will be
determined. The function of each gene will be determined in three ways.
Antibodies which recognize its product will be used to follow the fate of that
product after mating. The gene product will be introduced into females and its
effects observed. Finally screens for mutants in one of the genes under study
will be carried out. Dr. Wolfner has clones for genes that code for potential
precursors to hormones that affect reproductive behavior. This provides
important tools for the study of hormone receptors, behavior as well as the
process of sexual differentiation.