* 8718391
* Continuation of Studies of Low and Middle Latitude          Particle Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1988,08/31/1991
* William Hanson, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 08/31/1991
* USD 431,784.00

This grant continues an observational and theoretical program involving a study
of the effects of particle precipitation at low/mid-latitudes during magnetic
storm events. The aim is to further our understanding of the exchange of energy
between the magnetosphere, ionosphere and atmosphere during magnetic storms. It
represents a continuation of efforts currently supported by NSF in which the
atmospheric emissions at mid- and low-latitudes are studied using a variety of
optical instruments. The observations are made principally from McDonald
Observatory in southwestern Texas, where the instrumentation views the emission
layer at mid-latitudes near 40 degrees geomagnetic latitude. These data have
been complemented by observations taken at low latitudes from Hawaii and Brazil,
which view the emission layer near 22 degrees and 12 degrees geomagnetic
latitude, respectively. Previous studies have led to a more detailed description
of the spectral characteristics of the emissions but they have also exposed many
questions that need addressing. In particular, the ultimate goal is to establish
a self consistent description of the mid and low-latitude emissions that occur
during magnetic storms and include the properties of the more thoroughly
described stable auroral red (SAR) arc and the type-A aurora that occur at
higher latitudes.