* 8718204
* Theoretical/Experimental Examination of New Physical        Constraints for Fluid Mixture EOS/MCR
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Philip Eubank, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 12/31/1990
* USD 151,000.00

This project involves two components: (1) a new theoretical approach to
multiphase equilibria predictions and (2) a new experimental technique for their
measurement. The first portion uses collinearity constraints and optimum tuning
at extreme loci to increase the physical reality of equation of state
(EOS)/mixture combining rules (MCR) prediction models. The second part of the
proposal uses the microwave cavity method for accurate dew and bubble point
curve location (to plus or minus 0.1 degree Celsius and plus or minus 0.1 atm),
plus the more traditional Burnett-Isochoric density measurements. The
improvement of the tangent plane method via new algorithms for minimization of
the Gibbs energy for multicomponent systems is an important related objective of
this project. Both the theoretical and experimental work in this project are
significantly different from anything studied before. The collinearity
constraints have not been used previously to determine which EOS/MCR
combinations are thermodynamically consistent. To date, EOS/MCR computer
programs, the backbone of industrial vapor-liquid equilibria predictions, have
been based largely on empiricism; this project is the first attempt in the past
thirty years to interject physical constraints into this field. While it is
difficult to forecast the results, they are likely to change the face of how
multiphase predictions at elevated pressure are made by oil/gas/chemical
companies. One of the strengths of the project is its ability to eliminate
particular EOS and MCR as thermodynamically inconsistent and thereby discard
proposed research initiatives. More positively, the collinearity constraints can
act as an overseer to guide one along prediction paths, which while partly
empirical, are, at least, thermodynamically consistent.