* 8718146
* Testing Solution Algorithms for Bilevel Programming         Transportation Models in a Mixed Economic System
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Tschangho Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/1991
* USD 47,247.00

Attempts to develop models to predict the impacts of public policies on the
actions of individuals and private organizations have been complicated by the
fact that private actors generally pursue their own interests, while public-
sector agencies operate consistently with what they perceive to be the
collective public interest. Governmental development of a transportation system,
for example, will have impacts on movements and facility locations of
individuals and corporations, which in turn will affect performance on the
transport system and create new demands on it. In the last decade, regional
scientists and economists have begun development of bi-level mathematical models
that represent and simulate the interaction between public and private
decisions. Tests of these models have been small examples, because efficient
procedures (algorithms) have not been developed to determine optimal solutions
when large data sets (such as those that would represent real-world problems)
are used. This project will develop and test new algorithms to solve large bi-
level programming models for mixed public-private transportation systems. The
research will proceed in three steps. First, a large-scale bi-level
transportation planning model linking public- and private-sector decisions will
be refined. Second, a set of solution algorithms will be developed and tested to
enable the model's use on a supercomputer with data on a large Korean
transportation network. Finally, the validity of the model and the solution
algorithm as a means of establishing public policies will be analyzed.
Theoretical and methodological benefits will result from this project.
Theoretical advances will be made by determining the extent to which bi-level
programming models help explain and predict public and private interactions and
by assessing how they can assist in the formation of public policy.
Methodological advances will be made through development of one or more
efficient solution algorithms for bi-level models when using supercomputers.
Better assessments of the speed and costs of such models also will be available.
This research therefore will expand our understandings of how public- and
private- sector actors relate in modern settlements, and it will increase our
knowledge of how mathematical modelling procedures can be used to address
complex social problems.