* 8718311
* Genetic Regulation of the Threonine Operon of Escherichia   Coli
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Jeffrey Gardner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/1991
* USD 193,700.00

Genetic and biochemical studies have shown that specific sites in bacterial and
bacteriophage DNA encode signals for transcription termination. These sites have
been found at the ends of genes, between cistrons within an operon and even
within gene coding regions of operons. It has also become clear that
transcription terminators play an important regulatory role in gene expression.
One objective of this research is to gain an understanding of the molecular
events involved in transcription termination at the attenuator site in the
threonine (thr) operon of Escherichia coli. A systematic analysis will be
undertaken of the sequence and structural features of the attenuator that are
necessary for transcription termination. A second objective of this study is to
examine transcriptional pausing at the pause site in the thr regulatory region
and at the attenuator. Variations of the standard footprinting technique will be
used to probe both RNA and DNA in paused complexes. A third objective of this
work is to examine the stability of the secondary RNA structures encoded by
wild-type and mutant attenuators. It has been proposed that the stability of the
secondary RNA structure is important for transcription termination. RNA will be
isolated in quantities sufficient to measure thermal denaturation profiles. This
will permit comparison of observed and calculated Tm values. It will also be be
possible to determine if the stability of secondary RNA structure is
proportional to termination efficiency. The last objective of the proposal is to
isolate and map mutations in genes that encode proteins that participate in
transcription termination in vivo. Mutants will be isolated that increase
transcriptional readthrough at rho-independent terminators. Characterization of
these mutants will provide information on which gene products are involved in
transcription termination in vivo.