* 8718011
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Partial        Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/1987,10/31/1989
* Bjorn E. Dahlberg, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1989
* USD 37,565.00

An analysis of qualitative properties of solutions of linear and nonlinear
partial differential equations will be made. A portion of this effort will be
aimed at the partial differential operators themselves and the harmonic analysis
which occurs naturally in this context. The main emphasis will be on linear
elliptic and parabolic equations with minimal smoothness conditions and on
nonlinear evolution equations. The genesis of this research lies in relatively
recent work of the principal investigator on basic boundary value problems for
the Laplace operator on general domains whose boundaries may have corners, edges
and other features which appear in applications but present obstacles to
mathematical analysis. Sharp maximal function estimates were obtained for the
Dirichlet problem over a certain parameter range. Similar results for the
Neumann problem were also obtained over a conjugate parameter range. Work will
proceed in an effort to find the appropriate analogous results for the general
elliptic operator. Equally important will be extensions of present theory in the
direction of systems. Although the two-dimensional case will work, the current
theory fails for higher dimensional systems. Work will also be done on the
inhomogeneous Laplace equation on nonsmooth domains. In addition to the forcing
function, zero boundary values are prescribed. It is known that averages of
second derivatives cannot be estimated in this setting, but it may be sufficient
to estimate gradients. Nonlinear evolution equations in this project will be
those related to fundamental work of the principal investigator on parabolic
equations involving only powers of the Laplacian. The object was to show that
nonnegative solutions must always exist. That being accomplished, work will now
proceed to focus on the Laplace operator applied to powers of the unknown
including changes of sign, the objective being that of showing existence of
variable-sign solutions and understanding their properties. Applications are
expected to the general theory of differential equations in particular to
potential theory.