* 8718226
* Comparative Genetics of Ciliated Protozoa
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1989
* David Nanney, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1989
* USD 90,000.00

The tetrahymenine ciliates are a large widely distributed assembly of
superficially similar eukaryotic protists. Studies on their ribosomal RNA
sequences indicate that they had a common orgin at a very remote time in their
evolutionary history, and that the modern species constitute of several
distinctive clusters. Of the more than 30 species that have been named thus far,
only one - Tetrahymena thermophila - has been subjected to systematic genetic
analysis. Most of our inferences concerning the genetic systems of ciliates are
based on that one model. Preliminary breeding studies have been carried out on a
few other Tetrahymena species, using mating types, immobilization antigenes, and
isozymic variants as genetic markers. These studies show that substantial
differences may exist in the behaviors of similar markers in different species.
The studies suggest that macronuclei may arise from micronuclei in different
ways in different species, and that the genetic material of the macronuclei may
be organized in substantially different ways. We propose to expand the
Tetrahymena breeding studies on some of the less well known species now under
study and to extend preliminary genetic analysis to even more widely separated
species if complementary mating types can be obtained. We particularly hope to
examine more fully the system of mating type determination in Tetrahymena
malaccensis, and the systems for mating type and serotype inheritance in T.
pigmentosa. The species in which we will search particularly for complementary
mating types are T. paravorax and T. caudata, and any species of the genera
Colpidium or Glaucoma. The separation of germ line and somatic genomes into two
nuclei in the ciliates offers an opportunity to scientists to probe into a
unique genetic system. Tetrahymena thermophilia has been the most intensely
studied ciliate in this respect and the little we know of the mechanisms
involved with the breakdown of the micro- or germ line nucleus to form the
macro- or somatic nucleus has resulted from studies of this organism. The
suggestion that other species may have different operating mechanisms is an
exciting one and one that should be pursued.