* 8718280
* Star Clusters and Stellar Populations in Nearby Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/1988,09/01/1989
* Carol Christian, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Pol C. Delosreyes
* 09/01/1989
* USD 17,000.00

The study of stellar clusters in the galaxy M33 has provided much information
concerning the stellar cluster system itself, chemical evolution of the disk and
some kinematics. This survey will be extended to deeper limits taking advantage
of the quality of observing conditions on Mauna Kea, Hawaii. Deep luminosity
functions of clusters will be obtained as clues to the formation and cluster
dissolution processes occurring in M33. The wavelength range will be extended to
the Ultraviolet (UV) band and to the near infrared (IR) wavelength using arrays
to obtain improved reddening, age and metallicity estimates for a larger sample
of clusters. The region of the brightest open clusters in the disk will be
probed. High spatial resolution cameras will be used to resolve the fields at
the best quality offered at ground-based facilities. Spectroscopy will be used
to study the kinematics of the cluster system and to calibrate the metallicity
estimates. The stellar content of M33 will be examined as well, using the same
data taken to survey the clusters. The variation of the stellar population from
place to place in the disk will be investigated. Coupled with the metallicity
gradient seen in M33 traced by HII regions and the clusters, the age-metallicity
and population variations across the disk will be unveiled. The proximity and
inclination of M33 allows optimal sampling of parameters that provide
constraints for galactic structure and evolution theories, in contrast to
studies of M31 and the Galaxy which are severely restricted by extinction. The
M33 samples will be compared to data for the Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC) and
Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) to understand how much of stellar and cluster
evolution is determined by the parent galaxy. Continuing the M33 study to
fainter magnitudes achievable from the ground permits a smooth transition from
the "brighter" surveys (V=14-20) currently published to fields selected for
Hubble Space Telescope (HST). The ground based studies will be used to choose
the "most profitable" fields for space observations. Stars in other galaxies,
sampled at only the brightest fraction of the population, will be measured using
existing data. Blue, violet, ultraviolet, red and infrared protometry will be
obtained. Characterization of the properties of the stellar content of Local
Group galaxies, as they vary within each galaxy and from galaxy to galaxy, will
be used to understand the integrated properties of more distant systems.