* 8718899
* ROW:  Computer Simulations for the Aggregation of           Associating Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1991
* Anna Balazs, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/1991
* USD 56,700.00

The objective of the project is to study the aggregation of associating polymers
through computer simulations and theoretical modeling. The processes to be
examined are the aggregation of ionomers in solution, mesophase formation in
liquid crystalline polymers and the formation of reverse micelles and
microemulsions. The unique properties of these systems make them important
materials in such fields as oil recovery, lubrication, corrosion control and
electronics, as well as having pharmaceutical applications in the areas of drug
delivery and controlled release. All the materials above derive their unusual
characteristics from the fact that they are composed of molecules that interact
in solution and associate into various well-defined aggregates. The purpose of
this study is to understand how the geometry of the associating molecules
determines the structures that are formed. In order to study how the size and
shape of an aggregate evolves and is affected by various parameters, the
computer simulations developed to study diffusion-limited aggregation (DLA) will
be used. By understanding the factors that influence the microstructure (the
aggregate), it is hoped that we can govern their morphology and in turn control
the macroscopic properties of these materials. Thus, the results will be
generated with the goal that they can be used in tailoring new materials for a
variety of technological applications.