* 8718377
* Determinants and Consequences of Social Structure in a      Neotropical Primate
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1988,08/31/1990
* John Robinson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 08/31/1990
* USD 38,987.00

This grant permits Dr. Robinson to continue his study of wedge- capped capuchin
monkeys (Cebus olivaceus). For the past eleven years Dr. Robinson and his
colleagues have collected data - some with NSF support - on groups of capuchin
monkeys which inhabit the dry tropical forest of central Venezuela. Over a two
year period Dr. Robinson and a student will collect a wide range of data on four
of these monkey groups. Because of past research all individuals have been
identified and their maternal geneologies are well known. The team will continue
to collect demographic data and monitor reproductive success, mortality patterns
and dispersal of individuals among the groups. They will also focus on social
interactions and note both positive behaviors (such as social grooming) as well
as antagonistic actions (threats, chases etc). They will also note relationships
between individual animals and determine the extent to which actual genetic
relatedness serves to explain observed variation. The goal of the research is to
understand the factors which determine capuchin social structure. This
particular field situation is an interesting one because the four groups under
study vary greatly in size and a protocol of between group comparison offers a
potentially valuable approach. As a species wedge-capped capuchins are
interesting because they provide a unique comparison with similar studies of Old
World species. Like them, it is arboreal and groups have a single breeding male.
However its demographic patterns are strikingly different: mortality rates are
low, fecundity rates high, sexual maturation is very delayed in males and
patterns of dispersal ensure significant inbreeding. This research is important
because it will increase our understanding of how social groups are organized
and maintained. Scientists have proposed a number of theories: some are based on
demographic factors, others on kinship and genetics. Cross species comparison
offers a powerful tool to approach this question and it is within this context
that the significance of Dr. Robinson's work lies. Also, it is only through long
term multi-generational studies that such factors are most clearly revealed and
it is important to continue Dr. Robinson's longitudinal work. Many tropical
primate species are endangered and it is important to do such research now.