* 8718434
* Super-Realtime Dynamic Simulation of Multiple-Chain Robotic Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1989
* David Orin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1989
* USD 29,860.00

Dynamic simulation of multi-chain robotic systems, such as multiple manipulators
for multilegged vehicles, is computationally complex involving a large number of
repetitive matrix inversions and trigonometric function evaluations. "Super-
realtime" computational rates for simulation (planning seconds of motion in
milliseconds) are needed for predicting the response of the system in order to
determine the coordination/control strategies to ensure safety and stability
while optimizing the planned trajectory. It is believed that parallel algorithms
for the dynamical equations can be developed which will significantly speed up
simulation so that realtime prediction of system response will be possible. The
Electrical Engineering Department of the Ohio State University will be
purchasing a 32-node suitable for developing parallel algorithms. In fact, the
dynamical equations in the recursive doubling form may map directly onto the
hypercube. The dynamical equations are known, but the hypercube is a new
computational system for which only limited software is available. This
Expedited Award for Novel Research will take full advantage for this new
parallel computer to test the viability of parallel algorithms for realtime
system simulation. The institutional support is adequate and the PI is well
qualified, I recommend support.