* 8718633
* Single Ion Channels from Teleost Intestinal Epithelium
* BIO,DCB
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1991
* Charles Fourtner, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 11/30/1991
* USD 186,800.00

The intestinal epithelium of vertebrates serves an important barrier function
controlling the movement of ions, nutrients, and water into the animal. The
major objective of the proposed project is to determine the mechanisms by which
specific ion channels in the intestinal epithelium contribute to the
transepithelial chemical and electrical potential profiles which serve as the
driving forces for absorption of ions and nutrients. These specific ion channels
located in the apical (luminal) and basolateral (blood side) cell membranes,
together with ion transporters and the resistance properties of the paracellular
pathway between intestinal epithelial cells are the bases of the transepithelial
potential profiles. Hormonal and pharmacological agents can alter transport
processes through effects directly or indirectly on membrane channels and
carriers. Using intracellular microelectrode, patch clamp and reconstituted
membrane vesicle techniques, we will examine the voltage- and chemical-
dependence of these specific ion channels in the teleost, goby, intestine. These
biophysical and physiological investigations will increase understanding of the
role of the intestine in fluid and electrolyte balance. The intestine of
vertebrate animals serves not only to absorb nutrients from food, but also to
regulate salt and water balance. This is particularly clear in seawater-adapted
fishes in which there is a tendency for body water to be lost and salts gained
from the salty environment. The goby is a small fish that has the physiological
ability to adapt to a wide range of salt concentrations in its environment, and
therefore is a very useful organism in which to study the ion transport
mechanisms underlying the regulation of salt and water balance. Much has been
learned about the transport of salts across the whole intestine of this
interesting fish, but the detailed pathways and mechanisms of regulation of
passage of ions across the membranes of this tissue have not yet been worked
out. This study will apply the latest methods of patch clamp electrical
recording in combination with biochemical analysis of the intracellular effects
of hormones that affect ion channels involved in salt transport. The results of
this research will contribute significantly to our understanding of the
physiological function of intestinal cells.