* 8718254
* The Cultural Meaning of Cultural Difference
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Catherine Lutz, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1991
* USD 41,209.00

In this project, two anthropologists will interview a sample of middle-class
Americans about their perceptions of cultural differences. The research
objective is to describe the models used to understand and explain diferences
between themselves and people living beyond US borders - people commonly defined
as "Non-Western", underdeveloped or "Third World". The methods used to analyze
this cultural idea system will include the examination of photographic images of
Asians, Africans, and Latin Americans found in popular magazines; these pictures
will be treated both as sources of information for magazine readers and as
cultural artifacts reflecting the beliefs of the publishing society. The project
will also interview a sample of individuals intensively on their ideas about
foreigners. A cultural model of ethnocentrism will be created from these sources
of information. This project is important because it will help us understand
ethnocentrism as it exists in the USA. This country has always been described as
less knowledgeable about foreigners than any other major Western nation. As the
world economic situation changes and US citizens have to accomodate to more
powerful foreign nations, we need to understand our own perceptions and
reactions to them. This research will advance this understanding.