* 8718672
* Effects of Major Histocompatibility Complex Under Conditionsof Species Endangerment
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1988,03/31/1992
* Worthie Briles, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 03/31/1992
* USD 234,600.00

The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) of mammals and birds is known to
exert a major influence on both humoral and cellular immune responses. In nearly
all species adequately investigated, the MHC is characterized by a high degree
of polymorphism. In random breeding populations, most individuals would be
heterozygous for MHC haplotypes and could thus benefit from the dominant
expression of immune response genes in both of the haplotypes present. A
homozygous individual, on the other hand, could benefit only from effects of the
single haplotype. Thus, maximum immune response capabilities of a wild
population would be favored by the continued segregation of a large number of
diversified haplotypes. The primary objective of the proposed research is to
determine the relative fitness of individuals homozygous versus those
heterozygous for MHC haplotypes in species experiencing severe reduction in
population size (endangerment). Because of the impracticality of subjecting
individual members of an endangered species to the rigors of a full
immunogenetic analysis, a wild species with declining population size that is
also available from game farms, the ring- necked pheasant, has been selected as
the primary experimental animal. Present knowledge and expertise gained from
previous work with the twelve known alloantigen systems of the chicken should
permit identification of corresponding or similar systems, including the MHC, in
the pheasant and, to the extent possible in truely endangered avian species of
special interest such as various species of cranes. The alloantisera produced in
blood- typed chicken stocks will serve as serological probes in the
identification of alloantigen systems in the other avian species. As haplotypes
are determined for the MHC, pedigreed family groups of pheasants showing genetic
segregation will be used in collaborative physiological, developmental, and
disease exposure studies to investigate the specific effects of particular
haplotypes in homozygous and heterozygous individuals. Much progress has been
made in understanding the cellular and structural basis for the immune functions
of the MHC in the mouse and human. Considerable evidence indicates that the MHC
of the chicken influences several fitness traits such as hatchability of fertile
eggs, growth rate, and survival in juvenile and /or adult periods of the life
cycle. As yet, however, there is no clear understanding of the adaptive function
of the MHC in wild populations. The ring-necked pheasant is a species living in
the wild that can readily be used to investigate the role of the MHC in
survival. From the apparent universal presence of an MHC in all vertebrate
species and the essential similarities in immune function across species so far
investigated, it is highly likely that a knowledge of the essential function of
the MHC in the adaptability of a wild species will be important in genetic
planning for preservation of endangered species.