* 8718632
* Mutational Analysis of the Biological Function of HMG       Proteins
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1988,03/31/1992
* David Kolodrubetz, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 03/31/1992
* USD 298,000.00

The role of the histones in chromatin structure is understood, but the function
of most non-histone, chromatin- associated proteins, including the intensively
investigated HMG (High Mobility Group) proteins, is unclear. We have cloned the
genes for several HMG-like proteins from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
thus affording us the opportunity to use a combination of genetic and
biochemical approaches to determine, for the first time, the biological function
for chromatin-associated HMG-like proteins. To generate conditionally lethal
mutations in the HMG-like proteins, cellular HMG-like genes will be replaced
with cloned HMG-like genes mutagenized in vitro. All of the mutants will be
biochemically analyzed for changes in RNA, DNA and protein synthesis as well as
for changes in chromatin structure. The results of these experiments will define
the in vivo function of each HMG-like protein. A future direction of this
research is in vitro studies of the mechanisms of HMG-like protein function
using the wild type and mutant proteins. Thus, a non-denaturing purification
scheme using chromatographic procedures, including immunoaffinity columns, will
be developed. Finally, to begin to establish the interactions of HMG-like
proteins with other chromatin proteins, extragenic suppressors of the mutants in
HMG-like proteins will be isolated. The proposed experiments will increase our
comprehension of the eukaryotic chromosome.