* 8718088
* REU:  Patch Size, Herbivory, and Secondary Succession:  An  Experimental Study
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Michael Gaines, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 06/30/1991
* USD 270,750.00

The study of secondary succession in old fields has largely emphasized the
causal role of life history strategies and interspecific competition. Yet the
rate or pattern of succession may be influenced by the size of the area
undergoing succession and herbivory. Given that herbivory is important, the
intensity of herbivory should also vary systematically with successional patch
size. A conceptual model will be tested which predicts that given a trade-off
between colonizing and competitive abilities, succession should be slower on
small patches and that mammal herbivores should be less abundant and diverse on
small patches, and biased toward small-bodied species. The experimental study
will use an archipelago of successional patches in eastern Kansas. The patches
span two orders of magnitude in area and are kept isolated through regular
mowing. Immigration, population growth or decline, spatial patterns, and species
turnover for plants and small mammals will be documented. The effects of small
mammals on plant succession will be gauged using exclosures. Patch size may also
indirectly affect plant and animal succession through effects on resource
availability (e.g., small patches are relatively more wind-exposed and may be
drier than large patches). The availability of water and nitrogen in the system
will be monitored.