* 8718263
* Bioorganic Studies of Retinal Proteins in Halobacterium     halobium (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Koji Nakanishi, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 07/31/1991
* USD 273,655.00

Pigments found in the membranes of certain bacteria are of a chemical nature
surprisingly like that of pigments employed in the chemistry of vision in
animals. The bacterial pigments clearly have a much different function than do
the corresponding pigments found in the human eye. However, some of the
fundemental reactions in both systems are very similar in nature. This project
in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is designed to investigate
the basic chemistry of the biological function of these bacterial pigments. At
least three membrane proteins possessing retinal as the chromophore have been
isolated from the ancient bacterium Halobacterium halobium: bacteriorhodopsin
(bR) which pumps protons across the membrane, halorhodopsin (hR) which
translocates chloride ions across the membrane, and sensory rhodopsin (sR) which
is responsible for the phototactic behavior of H. halobium. Because the bacteria
are grown in concentrated sodium chloride solution without much fear of
contamination, and because the above-mentioned pigments are among the simplest
of membrane proteins, they are ideally suited for studying membrane related
phenomena. The pigments are thus attracting wide interest from the various
scientific disciplines. The objective is to investigate the mechanism of the
pigment functions on a molecular structural basis, the approach being studies on
pigment analogs that have been incorporated with various synthetic retinals
and/or labeled amino acids. The main targets are: (i) determination of the
tertiary structure of bR by photoaffinity labeling and other means; (ii)
delineation of structural factors of the chromophoric moiety required for proton
pumping in bR; and (iii) clarification of the sequence of events occurring
within bR leading to the transfer of protons. Related studies with sR and hR
will also be performed. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) difference
spectroscopy as well as other spectroscopic techniques will be used. Such
studies will contribute to our understanding of membrane transport, a central
but little understood theme.