* 8718801
* Fort Monmouth Interaction: Fabrication and Characterization of Real-Space Transfer Dual Switching Field-Effect Using    III-V Modulation-Doped Heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1989
* Mukunda Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Queen
* 10/31/1989
* USD 30,000.00

This research proposal is concerned with the device design, device material
optimization, and fabrication and characterization of a novel FET structure
based on real-space transfer of 2-D electrons within a quantum well. The
research will be carried out under mutually agreed collaborative arrangements
between the PSU Center for Electronic Materials and Devices (CEMD), and the
Electronic Technology and Devices Laboratory (ETDL), US Army Research and
Development Command, Ft. Monmouth, NJ. This effort will be under the newly
established NSF and US Army Joint Research Program involving universities and US
Army Research Laboratories. A PSU graduate assistant working under the principal
investigator will be given access to the extensive microelectronics facilities
that exist at the ETDL where device grade materials growth and processing for
device fabrication will be carried out jointly by him and the ETDL technical and
scientific staff. The research effort will involve optimization of the MBE-grown
AlGaAs/GaAs heterostructure III-V material for the proposed real-space transfer
FET structure, fabrication of the test device structures, their electrical
characterization for determination of performance limitation, and
interpretations of measured characteristics through theoretical modeling. The
first year study will be conducted based on a test structure that has evolved as
a result of a one-year NSF grant under its "Expedited Award for Novel Concepts"
program. The results of the first year study will be translated into an improved
version of the novel device structure and its characteristics will be
investigated. The emphasis of this study will be on the practical usefulness of
the fabricated test device structures in high speed III- V switching integrated
circuits.