* 8718224
* Signal Reception, Transduction and Amplification ControllingLarval Metamorphosis: Purification and Characterization of the Receptors and Transducers
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Aileen Morse, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 07/31/1991
* USD 327,800.00

The proposed research is a direct continuation of an ongoing, NSF supported
project, using the larvae of Haliotis rufescens (gastropod mollusc) as a model
for experimental analysis of the mechanisms by which cells and organisms
recognize and transduce exogenous chemical signals. With previous support it has
been determined that these larvae require the receptor-mediated recognition of
an exogenous GABA-mimetic oligopeptide (or GABA analogs) to induce
metamorphosis; that the receptors (R1) involved in this signal-recognition are
located on cilia that can be conveniently purified in quantities sufficient for
biochemical analyses; that these receptors are subject to a ligand- induced
down-regulation; and that the receptor-mediated signal is transduced by a
cascade involving adenyl cyclase, activation of a protein kinase, and the
opening of membrane channels for chloride ions. It has also been found that
responsiveness to R1 receptor activation can be amplified 1,000-fold by a second
group of signal molecules (diamino acids) that bind to independent receptors
(R2) also present on the purified cilia. This signal amplification that results
from R2 receptor binding is transduced by a separate pathway involving a G
protein, phospholipase, diacylglycerol and a separate protein kinase. The next
objectives of this study are to characterize further the cellular and molecular
mechanisms of action of the signal receptors, transducers, and the amplifier
described above. Specifically, it is proposed to: (1) purify (by affinity-
techniques) the R1 and R2 receptors, the receptor- bearing cells and/or cilia,
and the essential signal transduction components (including the targets of
protein phosphorylation) of both the morphogenetic and amplifier pathways; (2)
analyze the mechanisms of R1 and R2 receptor interaction with, and responses to,
the cognate signal molecules in vitro; (3) resolve, reconstitute, and analyze in
vitro the receptors and signal transduction elements essential for the function
of both pathways, to determine their mechanisms of action at the molecular
level; and (4) determine the molecular mechanism and the cellular level of
interaction (i.e., signal amplification) of the morphogenetic and amplifier
pathways, through analyses to be performed both in vitro and in vivo. This
research will provide the most complete picture yet available of the molecular
and cellular mechanisms by which chemical signals from the environment are
recognized and transduced, and the mechanisms by which these processes are
regulated, to contol the metamorphosis of marine invertebrate larvae. The
results of these investigations also will provide new, basic information on the
mechanisms of action and evolution of chemical signal receptors and their
associated signal transducers and regulatory pathways, as well as the mechanisms
by which these control physiological and behavioral processes, and
responsiveness to stimuli. This information should be applicable to a wide
variety of hormonal and other signal- and receptor-dependent systems.