* 8718005
* Recovery of Stream Ecosystems from Insecticide Treatment andDrought
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Keller Suberkropp, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 02/29/1992
* USD 347,647.00

Organic matter and nutrient dynamics in small mountain streams at the Coweeta
Hydrologic Laboratory in western North Carolina, will be studied. Two factors
controlling these dynamics will be considered - invertebrate consumer (i.e.
leafshredding aquatic insects) activity and drought. Leaf-shredding aquatic
insects are hypothesized to be major processors of organic matter and nutrients
in small streams. This hypothesis will be tested by comparing organic matter and
nutrient dynamics in unmanipulated streams with those in streams from which
aquatic insects have been removed with insecticides. Part-way through the study
period the insecticide treatment will be halted and the relationship between the
recovery of the invertebrate consumer community and changes in organic matter
and nutrient dynamics in these streams will be followed. Drought conditions have
prevailed at the Coweeta Hydrologic Laboratory since 1984, and data have been
taken over this period on stream organic matter and nutrient dynamics. Continued
studies of these dynamics will further document the small-stream ecosystem
responses to drought conditions; and if the hydrologic regime should return to
"normal," the studies would document recovery of these systems from drought.
This research is important since very little information exists on the effects
of drought on organic matter and nutrient dynamics in streams. The studies will
be conducted using well-proven laboratory and field techniques. Dr. Wallace and
his colleagues, Drs. Webster and Suberkropp, have good research records and the
institutional support for the work is of high quality.