* 8718027
* Prediction of Sorption and Diffusion in Zeolite Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Alexis Bell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1989
* USD 54,096.00

This is an exploratory study of the phenomena of sorption and diffusion of
hydrocarbons in pentasil zeolites. It is undertaken as a first step towards the
development of reliable methods for the quantitative prediction of these
phenomena from microscopic structure and chemical constitution. The systems
methane/silicalite and butane/silicalite are investigated in depth, as test
cases. Powerful computational techniques (evaluation of configurational
integrals, molecular dynamics, grand canonical ensemble Monte Carlo) are
employed to simulate these systems at an atomistic level, deduce equilibrium
sorption isotherms and self-diffusion coefficients, and extend the fundamental
understanding of underlying molecular mechanisms far beyond its present status.
Theoretical predictions will be checked against available experimental evidence.
In addition, an experimental effort will be initiated for the preparation of
well characterized, large crystal silicalite samples and the direct measurement
of sorption and diffusion by gravimetric techniques. The molecular simulation
methods developed in this preliminary study are quite general. Once their
predictive power is established in well defined test systems, their application
to a wide variety of zeolites and sorbates will be straightforward. The long
range objective of this research is to arrive at a self- consistent microscopic
picture of sorption and diffusion, useful for the molecular engineering design
of zeolite systems for separations and catalytic applications.