* 8718443
* Intracellular Transport and Secretion of Proteins in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Russell Jones, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/1991
* USD 268,200.00

This research includes experiments aimed at understanding the intracellular
transport and secretion of enzymes from aleurone cells of barley (Hordeum
vulgare L. cv Himalaya). Because of their unique properties, isolated aleurone
protoplasts have been exploited for studies of protein secretion. The response
of protoplasts isolated from barley aleurone to gibberellic acid and calcium is
qualitatively similar to that of isolated aleurone layers. Using protoplasts
this lab has shown that precursor forms of the low isoelectric point (low-pI)
group of a-amylase isozymes are covalently modified to the secreted forms of the
enzyme. This modification results in the lowering of isozyme pI without
significantly affecting the molecular weight of the protein. Results to date
show that these isozymes are not modified by glycosylation, phosphorylation or
sulfation. Rather the data indicate a form of posttranslational modification of
secreted proteins involving side-chain acylation. Radiolabel from ?14C!acetate
is specifically incorporated into secreted forms of low-pI a-amylase. The
precursor of the secreted protein is not labeled, so acetate is not incorporated
into a-amylase via its metabolism into amino acids or sugars. Amino-terminal
acetylation of high-pI a-amylase is also ruled out since these proteins are end-
blocked. Experiments are designed to investigate the precise nature of a-amylase
acylation and the possible function of this covalent modification. Experiments
with Xenopus oocytes that provide information on the role of protein acylation
in secretion are also being conducted. The secretion of macromolecules to the
cell exterior is a fundamental process of higher plant and animal cells. This
process is particularly important in plant seeds when stored food reserves are
mobilized during germination. Our knowledge of intracellular transport of the
enzymes involved is incomplete. This research addresses this knowledge gap.***//