* 8718019
* Microbial Degradation of Detrital Lignocelluloses in Marine Environments:  Production and Fate of Particulate and       Dissolved Degradation Products
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Robert Hodson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1991
* USD 277,805.00

Microbial Degradation of Detrital Lignocelluloses in Marine Environments:
Production and Fate of Particulate and Dissolved Degradation Products. Hodson
will continue his studies on the microbial transformations and fate of
lignocellulose in marine waters and sediments. Lignocellulose is a major
component of coastal and estuarine marine plants and resulting decomposition
products. Thus, it represents a potentially major source of carbon to the marine
food web. However, lignocellulose is highly refractory to microbial degradation
and indigestible to most animals. Microbial transformations to partial
degradation products or microbial biomass or both is required before carbon from
this abundant polymer can enter the food webs. Hodson has developed several new
methods for preparing and following the microbial transformations of
specifically radiolabeled lignocelluloses from native marine plants in salt
marshes and tropical mangrove swamps. His studies have revealed basic
differences in the fate of lignocellulose in marine and terrestrial/freshwater
environments, and he and his colleagues have accumulated basic data on rates of
lignocellulose mineralization under areobic and anaerobic conditions, and on the
relative efficiencies with which bacteria in several marine environments utilize
carbon derived from lignocellulose. The present study will employ new
methodologies for following lignin and lignocellulose transformations in marine
environments and expand the research to examine the rates of production,
efficiencies of bacterial utilization, and rates of turnover of dissolved
organic compounds derived from the degradation of particulate detrital
lignocelluloses. The principal investigator will use a time-series approach to
expand his data set to include changes in biodegradability, rates of
solubilization, and rates of incorporation into microbial biomass of
lignocellulosic detritus from salt marsh and mangrove marine environments over
periods ranging from one month to several years. This information will enable
the accurate prediction of the persistence of lignocellulosic detrital material
and its importance in the marine food web.