* 8718752
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Project:  Polymer  Solution Thermodynamics (with International Cooperation)
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Ronald Danner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 12/31/1990
* USD 134,670.00

The objective of this research program is to obtain experimental data on the
behavior of mixtures of polymers and solvents and to develop methods to
correlate and predict this behavior. In order to obtain a predictive method, a
new group-contribution equation of state is to be developed based either on the
Sanchez-Lacombe lattice-hole theory or the generalized Van der Waals partition
function approach. In addition, the effects of polydispersion are to be taken
into account. A computer database is being created on available literature data
and the new experimental data obtained in this program. Data are being collected
on binary interactions by use of inverse gas chromatography and piezoelectric
sorption techniques and on ternary systems by the study of liquid-liquid
equilibria using size exclusion chromatography for analysis. Experimental
measurements will be taken over a wide range of solvent concentrations with a
carefully selected set of carefully prepared monodispersed polymers, which in a
number of cases will be provided by the industrial DIPPR sponsors. The PIs have
established close collaboration with the workers in the polymer laboratory at
the Technical University of Denmark. This carefully built network of theoretical
insights, experimental apparatus, practical objectives, industrial consultation,
and international cooperation provides a unique opportunity to launch a new and
vigorous attack on the serious problems relating to polymer solutions.