* 8718042
* Metabolic Compartmentation of Vertebrate Glutamine          Synthetase
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1993
* James Campbell, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 09/30/1993
* USD 479,500.00

The overall goal of this project is an elucidation of the possible molecular
events that led to the mitchondrial compartmentation of glutamine synthetase in
liver tissue during vertebrate evolution. This localization of the enzyme
allowed for the development of uricoteley as a major kind of excretory nitrogen
metabolism. Most mitochondrial proteins are coded for in the nucleus, translated
in cytosol, and targeted to mitochondria by N-terminal signal sequences. The
larger size of the pre-enzyme allows it to be distinguished from the mature
enzyme. We have shown this to probably be true for elasmobranch liver
mitochondrial glutamine synthetase and we now intend to characterize the import
of the pre-enzyme by elasmobranch liver mitochondria in vivo and in vitro. We
have also found that in birds and alligators there is no detectable size
difference between the nascent and mature glutamine synthetase peptide in liver,
despite its mitochondrial matrix localization in tissue. In order to determine
if there is an internal targeting sequence in the avian enzyme, we will clone
and sequence glutamine synthetase mRNA cDNA from both liver and brain. The
enzyme remains in the cytosol in the latter tissue so a comparison of the
deduced amino acid sequences for the two should give some clue as to the nature
and location of the signal sequence used for import of the liver enzyme. We also
will obtain the deduced sequences for elasmobranch and possibly tortoise pre-
glutamine synthetase for comparative purposes. This comparison should give some
indication of the possible changes that have occured during evolution that led
from a classical presequence mechanism for targeting of the enzyme to liver
mitochondria in primitive vertebrates to whatever the mechanism used in higher
uricotelic vertebrates. This research on the molecular mechanisms of how enzymes
are targeted to specific cell compartments is significant to cell biology and
biochemistry. The regulation of enzyme activity is a key question for
understanding metabolism.//