* 8718208
* Processing of Mono- and Multi-layer Thin Films of ConductingSurface Active Polymers
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Michael Rubner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1991
* USD 215,244.00

The objective of this project is to utilize the Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) film
balance technique to process electroactive polymers into thin film forms with
well defined molecular structures and novel electrical and optical properties.
In order to accomplish this, surface active monomers containing polymerizable
pyrrole head groups will be manipulated into mono- and multi-layer thin films
using the LB technique and subsequently converted into electrically conductive
multi-layer assemblies. In addition, solvent-soluble, electrically- conductive
polypyrroles and polythiophenes that satisfy the structural requirements for LB
manipulation will be synthesized and fabricated into mono- and multi-layer thin
films. The inability to fabricate large area thin films of electroactive
polymers with controllable thickness has been one of the major stumbling blocks
to the successful utilization of these materials. Using the techniques developed
in this project, it will be possible for the first time to prepare structurally
well-defined thin polymer films in which an electrically conductive polymer
chain is separated by insulating regions of known dimensions and orientation.
The electrical and optical properties of these films will be evaluated in order
to determine the influence of molecular superstructure on the transport behavior
of these highly anisotropic organizations.