* 8718417
* Novel Processes and Materials for Infrared NonLinear Optics
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1988,05/31/1991
* Peter Wolff, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 05/31/1991
* USD 304,816.00

The PI's of this proposal have recently demonstrated a record, room temperature
optical nonlinearity with picosecond response time in mercury telluride. They
propose to continue their study of nonlinear optical processes in semiconductor,
with the specific goal of achieving even larger and faster optical
nonlinearities for applications such as signal processing and far infrared
generation. Their effort will combine theory and experiment. The experiments
will involve nonlinear optical mixing with carbon dioxide lasers. The following
projects are proposed: 1. Study the effect of band structure tailoring in
superlattices. Our theories have shown that electronic processes in
superlattices can exhibit large nonlinear optical effects. 2. Explore hybrid
optical electrical processes, especially effects near the thresholds of the Gunn
instability an impact ionization. An initial experiment has demonstrated
optically triggered flip-flop in germanium. 3. Continue our work on zerogap
semiconductors, including far infrared generation and optimization of the large
optical nonlinearity. 4. Continue studies of nonlinear optical effects due to
impurity levels in semiconductors. 5. Use nonlinear optical methods to
characterize superlattice structures. Specifically, the characteristic
relaxation mechanisms of superlattices will be probed by four-wave mixing
experiments.