* 8718803
* Collaborative Research:  Genetic Structure of a Longleaf    Pine Population
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1991
* James Hamrick, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 08/31/1991
* USD 123,120.00

Hamrick and Platt propose to integrate a detailed ecological analysis of an old
growth stand of longleaf pine (Pinus palustris) with an equally detailed
description of its genetic structure. Starch gel electrophoresis will be used to
identify several enzyme genes which can be used as genetic markers in the study
of this population. Once the arrangement of genetic variation has been
described, Hamrick and Platt will use these genetic markers to study those
population parameters that interact to produce the genetic patterns observed. By
applying an analytical technique commonly referred to as paternity exclusion
analysis, they will measure pollen and seed movement within six localized areas.
They will also use genetic markers to assist in the identification of the
parents of seedlings and samplings. This information will be used to determine
whether there is a genetic component to mortality and survival. Upon the
successful completion of their research, Hamrick and Platt will produce a
detailed description of the factors which interact to shape the genetic and
ecological composition of the population. This research has several applied
aspects. Studies of gene movement by pollen and seeds will provide insights into
the size of an effective breeding unit. This information will be valuable for
the establishment of ecological preserves. Second, data obtained from this
natural old-growth stand can be compared to similar data taken from second
growth stands which have been managed in different ways. This will allow
foresters to understand how their management practices impact the genetic
composition of longleaf pine stands.