* 8718474
* A Methodological Innovation in Creating Representative      Samples of Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1987,10/31/1990
* Lynne Zucker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 10/31/1990
* USD 117,796.00

Attempts to generalize about organizations have been seriously hampered by the
absense of an organization data base, or even a sampling procedure, generally
recognized as valid, by which a representative sample of organizations could be
selected. One potentially promising approach to this sampling problem entails
selecting a representative sample of individuals, and asking them in some other
manner. This approach is promising because a great deal is known about how to
conduct sample surveys on populations of individuals. However, there is no known
certainty that a representative sample of individuals will yield a
representative sample of organizations. What is needed is some independently
generated distribution of organizations, believed to be representative of the
population of organizations, which can be used as a criterion to assess the
validity of the individual - produced distribution. Such a criterion may be
found in the files of the Internal Revenue Service. They may provide a
comprehensive--and potentially exhaustive -- listing of organizations against
which an individually - produced distribution of organiztions can be examined.
This study will examine an area that corresponds roughly with metropolitan Los
Angeles. A sample of nearly 1,000 individuals surveyed by telephone last Spring,
produced information on over 1,000 voluntary and work organizations. The
frequency with which different types of organizations appear in the tax-related
records of the Internal Revenue Service will be compared to the distribution
obtained from the greater Los Angeles survey. The significance of any observed
differences will be assessed using Chow tests.