* 8718393
* Workshop on "An Assessment of the Likelihood for Weediness  to Arise from the Release of Higher Plants Altered through  Recombinant DNA Genetics," Spokane, WA; October 11-14, 1987
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1987,11/30/1987
* Richard Mack, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 11/30/1987
* USD 16,598.00

A workshop will be convened near Washington State University, October 12-14,
1987 to assess the likelihood that new weedy forms of higher plants could arise
through techniques in recombinant DNA genetics. Each participant represents one
or more relevant disciplines in plant biology. The participating ecologists,
will characterize the life history and worldwide epidemiology of weeds that
cause great damage, especially plants that readily escape cultivation. The plant
geneticists and systematists will outline the precedents for the transfer of
genetic information among common cultivated plants and their weedy relatives.
Using common arable crop and forage species and their wild relatives, both these
groups of specialists will identify a tentative list of hypothetical phenotypes
that could be potentially damaging to the environment. To the extent proprietary
interests permit, the invited molecular biologists will outline traits that
could be imparted to these same common cultivated plants by recombinant DNA
genetics. Working together, the participants will have as one objective an
assessment of the potential for these hypothetical phenotypes to be produced
directly (or indirectly through subsequent gene transfer in the wild) by
recombinant DNA genetic techniques in higher plants in the next ten years. The
participants will also identify the information (e.g., experiments, compilations
of existing data on failure rates in plant introduction and agronomic field
trials) needed to strengthen their predictions. The outcome of the meeting will
be published for a wide scientific readership.