* 8718746
* Glutamate Receptor Regulation and Physiological Plasticity  in Mammalian Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1989
* Michel Baudry, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 08/31/1989
* USD 55,400.00

Elucidation of the biochemical mechanisms involved in the storage of
information in the nervous system is a fundamental problem in neurobiology.
Studies of the processes underlying the phenomenon of long-term potentiation
(LTP) of synaptic transmission at excitatory synapses elicited by brief bursts
of high frequency stimulation have identified several components postulated to
play a critical role in the way some patterns of electrical activity can alter
the efficacy of synaptic transmission. In particular, the properties of one
subclass of receptors for the acidic amino acid, L-glutamate, appear to be
responsible for the induction of LTP in some telencephalic pathways, while the
long-term changes in synaptic efficacy might depend on the activation of a
calcium-dependent protease (calpain) and the partial proteolysis of a
cytoskeletal protein, fodrin or brain spectrin. We have developed new techniques
to study both the recognition site and the functional properties of different
classes of glutamate receptors and have identified a number of regulatory
mechanisms that could underlie various types of physiological plasticity. More
specifically, we can now study the properties of the recognition sites for at
least 3 classes of glutamate receptors using binding techniques and various
radio- labeled 3H-ligands. The functional properties of the same receptors in
the same membrane fractions can also be studied following their reconstitution
in artificial lipid bilayers. The specific goals of the present proposal are to
i) determine the functional characteristics of adult glutamate receptors
reconstituted in artifical lipid bilayers; ii) determine the regulatory
mechanisms involved in glutamate receptor function using biochemical and
biophysical techniques; iii) study the possibility that local dendritic
synthesis of specific proteins is involved in the maintenance of LTP; and iv)
test the involvement of specific biochemical mechanisms in LTP and learning and
memory. It is our hope that these studies will provide a more detailed
description of the biochemical events occurring during learning as well as new
pharmacological tools to specifically manipulate these processes. ***//