* 8718028
* Hot-Drawn Fiber-Reinforced Thermoplastic Wire
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Richard Seymour, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* George F. Keyser
* 01/31/1990
* USD 35,999.00

The project deals with a novel process of producing fiber reinforced
thermoplastic wire. Such wires, in addition to achieving more flexibility in
manufacture and repair, provide improved fatigue strength, impact resistance and
resistance to chemical attack. The greatest barrier to the use of high strength
organic fiber reinforced plastic (FRP) wires in critical structural applications
is high cost and large uncertainties associated with the quality of the product.
Nearly 100% ultrasonic or other NDT is required to assure quality. In contrast,
metal wires are produced by the mile and accepted on the basis of simple tests
on a small sample. The quality of the metal wire is assured by closely
controlling the chemistry and by utilizing a very reproducible manufacturing
process. The PI proposes a similar concept for producing fiber reinforced wires.
The following procedure is used. Yarns of reinforced fibers and the matrix are
commingled in proper proportion to control the fiber/resin ratio. The mixture is
then heated close to the melting point of the matrix and pulled through a hot
die. The wire is cooled at a rate appropriate to achieving the desired degree of
crystallinity in the matrix. Wires produced by this method have many
applications. Chief among them are mooring lines for deep ocean arrays of
instruments.