* 8718149
* Identification and Role of Low Molecular Weight Organic     Acids in a Subalpine Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1993
* Randy Dahlgren, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 04/30/1993
* USD 323,594.00

The origin and identity of low molecular weight organic acids in soils will be
studied in coniferous ecosystems in the Pacific Northwest. These acids along
with fulvic acids may drive the soil formation process, podsolization, in these
ecosystems. Some of these acids may control the availability of Ca and Al to
plants from soil solution. The work could go a long way toward explaining the
tolerance of conifers to high Al soils and to the maintenance of available Ca in
the rhizosphere under these conditions. The work is also significant to
understanding what controls the concentrations of dissolved organic carbon and
Al that move from the soil to streams in the forested landscape. Three potential
sources of organic acids will be examined; root exudates, decaying organic
matter, and mycorrhizal fungi. Both field and laboratory studies of organic acid
sources will be undertaken. Field research will include comparison of organic
acids in soils of root-free and control plots. Soil solutions will be sampled by
lysimetry and extractions. A variety of state-of-the-art techniques will be used
to identify low molecular weight acids. These techniques include gas
chromatography, high pressure liquid chromatography and GC/MS. The forms in
which Al exist in the soil-root matrix will be determined using a special
application of electron microscopy. Dr. Ugolini has an outstanding research
record in this area. The institutional support available to him at the
University of Washington is first-rate.