* 8718856
* Analysis of Craniofacial Morphology and Development
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Steven Ward, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 09/30/1991
* USD 129,877.00

This grant provides the first of an expected two years of support. It allows
Dr. Ward and his collaborators to study skulls of fossil primates which date to
the Miocene period: from approximately 25 million to 4 million years ago. To
establish a comparative context research will also be conducted on collections
of living apes. Specimens from localities in East Africa, Europe, Southern and
East Asia will be comparatively evaluated for the presence or absence of a
number of features. These observations will be augmented by quantitative
stereometry which permits the analysis of complex anatomical surfaces. On the
basis of this and previous studies it should be possible to assign the major
Miocene samples to their appropriate groups and determine the relationship
between these and possible living descendents. Through analysis of fossil
remains, human ancestry can be traced back about 4 million years. The orangutan,
another of the hominoids can be traced back into the Miocene. The ancestry of
the African great apes - the gorilla and chimpanzee - is unknown. In the last
several years a large number of Miocene hominoid fossils have been recovered and
these indicate that these large bodied primates were present in many parts of
the Old World. It is also clear that they belong to a number of species. However
scientists still cannot agree how many species are present or how they relate
(if at all) to modern species. Dr. Ward's analysis should help to answer this
question. This research is important because increases our understanding of the
development of both our own and closely related species and will give us insight
into the processes which have shaped this development over time. Fossils, often
recovered at great expense, only achieve their full worth when analyzed and
understood. Dr. Ward's research will make a significant contribution towards
this end.