* 8718741
* Structure, Regulation and Mechanism of the Action of        Oxidizing Enzyme
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Rona Ramsay, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 06/30/1991
* USD 218,800.00

The primary sequence of the cytochrome subunit of the flavocytochrome p-cresol
methylhydroxylase has been determined, as has the sequence of the first 52 amino
acids of the flavoprotein subunit. X-ray crystallographic data at 3 A resolution
have been fitted to these data and much of the tertiary structure has been
unravelled. The rest of the sequence is being determined by DNA sequencing. The
reversible dissociation of the flavocytochrome into subunits has been
extensively investigated, as has its kinetic mechanism, using flash photolysis,
stopped-flow, and steady- state kinetic methods. The reaction sequence catalyzed
by the enzyme has been shown to include a vinyl derivative. The biochemical
events underlying the neurotoxicity of MPTP, a contaminant in an illicit
meperidine analog, has been determined and in vivo toxicity correlated with
enzymological data. A new metabolite carrier which pumps MPP+, the oxidation
product of MPTP, into the mitochondrial matrix, has been discovered and
partially characterized. Extensive kinetic studies have been completed on
salicylate hydroxylase, using a novel procedure to isolate the enzyme. The
kinetic and molecular characteristics of an "inner" and an "outer" carnitine
acyltransferase have been compared and peroxisomes shown to be the likely source
of the the outer enzyme.