* 8718558
* Motivational Foundations of Behavioral Confirmation
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Mark Snyder, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 12/31/1991
* USD 244,925.00

This research is concerned with the processes by which one individuals's
preconceived beliefs and expectations about another person influence the
dynamics and outcomes of social interaction between them. Previous research has
demonstrated that an individual (typically referred to in such research as the
"perceiver"), having adopted initially erroneous beliefs about another person
(referred to as the "target"), will act on these beliefs in ways that cause the
behavior of the target to confirm the perceiver's initial beliefs. Such
phenomena are known as "behavioral confirmation" processes. Behavioral
confirmation processes are of concern to social and behavioral scientists
because they provide an opportunity to unravel the intertwining of processes of
thought and motivation in the context of ongoing social interaction and
interpersonal relationships. This research will explore the psychological and
motivational foundations of behavioral confirmation phenomena. The research will
be guided by a theoretical analysis of the social and psychological functions
that may be served by the activities of perceivers and targets in behavioral
confirmation sequences. This theoretical analysis focuses primarily on
motivations associated with acquiring social knowledge and those associated with
regulating social interactions. Empirical investigations, using procedures
specifically designed for this program of research, will be conducted to test
the implications of this theory for specifying when and why behavioral
confirmation will or will not occur in social interaction. Implications of these
theoretical and empirical inquiries, not only for understanding the nature of
behavioral confirmation but also for understanding the very nature of social
interaction and interpersonal relationships themselves, will be explored. The
Principal Investigator is a major contributor to work on this topic. His
paradigms have been adopted by other researchers.