* 8718536
* Tests of the Function of Kin Recognition in Anuran Amphibian Larvae
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Andrew Blaustein, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1990
* USD 61,188.00

It is becoming clear that many kinds of animals can distinguish between
relatives and unrelated individuals. Studies of kin recognition have emphasized
how the behavior develops and the sensory mechanisms used in recognition (i.e.,
visual, auditory, chemical cues). Although two basic functions of kin-
recognition behavior (inbreeding avoidance and ensuring that aid-giving behavior
is directed toward relatives) are recognized, empirical evidence as to the
significance of kin-recognition behavior is lacking. This is especially true for
amphibian larvae, which have been the subjects of extensive research on kin
recognition. Amphibian larvae are ideal subjects for studying kin-recognition
behavior because the behavior is easy to observe and to quantify, experimental
manipulation is possible, and detailed accounts of the natural history of the
species are available. Previous research on kin recognition in amphibian larvae
has provided important information on the roles of learning and heredity in the
development of the behavior. Furthermore, past research has revealed that
different species have different abilities to recognize kin. Dr. Blaustein's
research is designed to test hypotheses about the adaptive value of kin-
recognition behavior. This aspect of the kin-recognition phenomenon is the least
understood. Both theory and empirical evidence suggest that growth and
development may be influenced by the composition of the social group. Past
research has shown that growth and development of insects and mammals are
influenced by the genetic composition of the animals within a group. Therefore,
Dr. Blaustein will test the influence of the genetic group composition on growth
and development in Cascades frog tadpoles. This species has the most sensitive
kin- recognition system of any amphibian. Dr. Blaustein predicts that tadpoles
living in groups composed primarily of kin will grow and develop faster than
those in groups composed of kin and non-kin. This portion of the investigation
should greatly enhance our knowledge of the kin-recognition phenomenon in
general. Observations in nature and laboratory experiments illustrate that
predation is one important selective force in the formation of animal groups.
This seems to be especially true for tadpoles. Therefore, Dr. Blaustein will
conduct experiments dealing with the relationship between group formation and
kin-recognition. He predicts that tadpoles will form groups composed primarily
of kin because when they release a chemical alarm substance, the animals that
are warned are nearby relatives.