* 8718800
* Profit Sharing
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,06/01/1989
* Martin Weitzman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* jerry blackmon
* 06/01/1989
* USD 52,288.00

This research is directed at understanding better the nature,. functioning, and
significance of alternative compensation systems, especially profit sharing. The
potential importance of the topic stems from the idea that pay for performance
may ultimately influence macroeconomic and microeconomic outcomes--perhaps
especially as they relate to issues of international competitiveness. In this
connection, it is interesting to note that Japan, Korea, and Taiwan all have
significant bonus systems with strong profit.sharing overtones. At the present
stage, unfortunately, the promise of profit sharing remains largely hypothetical
because we do not yet understand nearly well enough the economic foundations for
preferring one payment system over another. The current research is primarily an
application of economic theory, which will improve understanding of important
aspects of profit sharing in four areas. The first application will calculate
the socially optimal degree of profit sharing by trading off income stability of
those already employed against losses due to unemployment risk. The second
application will calculate the effect of gain-sharing arrangements, which
introduce greater possibilities for flexibility or reversibility, on the
appropriate project-evaluation investment criteria that should be used for
public enterprises. A third application will investigate various conditions
under which profit sharing or pay for performance may influence work effort. The
fourth application contrasts the effects of wage and sharing systems on labor
market segmentation.