* 8718985
* Simulation Studies of Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1988,02/01/1991
* Malvin Kalos, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/01/1991
* USD 116,500.00

The investigation of quantum-mechanical many-body systems has been an important
focus of theoretical researchers in statistical physics. They use Green'
function Monte Carlo and path integral Monte Carlo to provide detailed
microscopic information about the properties of quantum systems, especially
quantum fluids and crystals. They will continue to study the structure of two-
and three- dimensional quantum fluids and solids and the nature of the melting-
freezing transition at T = 0 and above. They will emphasize the development of
improved solid trial wavefunctions. Studies of the changes in higher-order
correlation functions as the system freezes will be continued. They intend to
calculate properties such as elastic constants in two and three dimensions and
the role of topological defects in two dimensions. The computational results
will be interpreted with the help of empirical and of density-functional
theories. They will also attempt to construct phenomenological density matrices
to describe Bose fluids and to investigate pressure melting of Yukawa quantum
systems. Another new area will be the investigation into the properties of
inhomogeneous systems, including slabs with liquid-vapor interfaces, quantum
vortices, droplets having large angular momenta, impurities in liquid Helium 4,
and two-dimensional systems adsorbed on a substrate. Studies will be continued
of the effects of various proposed Helium-Helium potentials. //