* 8718682
* E. Coli Exonuclease VII
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1992
* John Chase, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1992
* USD 246,400.00

Exonuclease VII is a single stranded specific deoxynibonuclease which cna
degrade denatured DNA, single stranded regions extending from from the termini
of duplex DNA, or displaced single stranded regions. It is composed of two non-
identical subunits, the genes being in different regions of the chromosome. It
is proposed here to express and purify large quanties of the enzyme, study the
cellular regulation of its production, and examine the cellular effects of its
deficiency. The availability of large quantities of the enzyme will allow
detailed mechanistic and functional studies to begin. Having the cloned genes
which encode the two subunits makes possible studies of the transcriptional
regulation of the genes. The analysis of mutations may provide further insight
into the role the enzyme plays in cellular metabolism. Nucleases are among the
most abundant and diverse group of enzymes participating in nucleic acid
metabolism. It is perfectly obvious in paper models of many DNA and RNA
metabolic processes what a variety of functions these enzymes should do. In
actual fact, the cellular roles of only a few such enzymes are understood. E.
coli exonuclease VII is one that is not. Its enzymatic properties suggest it
will be an extremely useful reagent for the specific removal of single-stranded
termini from duplex DNA molecules. Dr. Chase was the discoverer of Exonuclease
VII and is certainly will prepared to reinitiate this study.