* 8718426
* A Comparative Study of the Response of Terrestrial          Ecosystems to Changes in the Global Environment
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1988,02/28/1993
* John Hobbie, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 02/28/1993
* USD 1,425,596.00

This project will investigate and contrast the likely responses of boreal
evergreen forests, temperate deciduous forests, and temperate grasslands to
changes in the global environmental over 1-50 years. The environmental changes
of interest include changes in the CO2 concentration of the atmosphere, changes
in global surface temperature, changes in atmospheric N deposition, and possibly
changes in moisture and cloudiness. "Process-functional" approach will be
utilized this research, as opposed to a "population-community" approach. The
focus is on ecosystem-level processes and functions such as gross and net
primary productivity, net ecosystem productivity, decomposition, and net
mineralization. Specifically, it is proposed to investigate and contrast: 1) how
the initial amounts and distributions of C, N, and P in these three different
ecosystem types affect the ecosystem-level responses to environmental change,
and 2) how the amounts, distributions, and flux rates of C, N, and P change in
response to changes in the environment. The analytical procedures developed here
should be applicable to other major terrestrial ecosystem types, as well. The
proposed research is important because it will help 1) to anticipate the
relative impacts of global change on various regions of the earth, 2) to
interpret changes in individual ecosystems as they arise, and 3) to better
understand the function of the individual ecosystems. The goal of comparing
ecosystem types requires that the "process- functional" aspects of different
ecosystems be analyzed from a common perspective and with identical units. To do
this a computer model will be developed that incorporates the important
components, processes, and linkages present in all terrestrial ecosystems. By
parameterizing this model for contrasting ecosystems, differences detected
between ecosystems can be more clearly attributed to the ecosystems themselves
and not to differences in the models used to describe them. The research team
for this project is excellent and brings a long history of productive
collaboration to bear upon the work. Institutional accommodations and facilities
are excellent.