* 8718264
* Interaction of Ventilation and Perfusion with Diffusion in  Cutaneous Gas Exchange
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Martin Feder, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 10/31/1991
* USD 236,293.00

The proposed research will continue an ongoing analysis of cutaneous gas
exchange in vertebrates and the means by which it may be regulated. One critical
question concerns how effective changes in blood flow can be in regulating
cutaneous gas exchange; resolution of this question requires a precise
distinction among the ways in which changes in bulk blood flow to the skin might
be manifested at the microcirculatory level. Variation in cutaneous
microcirculation, (2) tube hematocrit, (3), capillary recruitment, (4) the
spacing of recruited capillaries, and/or (5) spatial and temporal heterogeneity
in 1- 4. These five variables will first be quantified while oxygen uptake is
measured in an isolated perfused skin preparation; this preparation will yield
information on how experimental variation in these five variables is related to
the magnitude of cutaneous gas exchange. A complementary study will characterize
the five variables in vivo to determine how they actually vary in an intact
animal. Another critical question concerns the resistance of diffusion boundary
layers about skin in water: Is their resistance large, negligible, or somewhere
in between? A second series of experiments will directly examine the extent to
which oxygen diffusion boundary layers may limit cutaneous gas exchange with
animals of different flow regimes. In an experimental preparation, the absolute
and relative resistances of the skin and the oxygen diffusion boundary layer
will be quantified. These issues are important ones because, although skin is
one of the primary gas exchangers of vertebrates, our knowledge of cutaneous gas
exchange is as yet too sketchy to achieve a general and comprehensive
understanding of vertebrate gas exchange.