* 8719716
* Development of Cholinergic Efferents in the Cochlea
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1989
* Mark Emmerling, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 06/30/1989
* USD 80,000.00

The proper development of auditory function requires a complex interaction of
nerve cells within the central nervous system with sensory cells of the
peripheral organ. The cochlea is the peripheral sensory organ in the inner ear
which perceives mechanical vibratory impulses that are transferred as sound
stimuli by cochlear neurons, the spiral ganglion cells. The auditory impulses
reach the brainstem of the central nervous system via afferent fibers of the
auditory nerve. The brain stem in turn sends the efferent innervation to the
organ of Corti to provide the fine sound discrimination and to lower the noise
background. It is believed that efferent innervation modulates the sensitivity
of the sensory cells to sound by releasing the chemical, acetylcholine. Little
is known about the development of these cholinergic (acetylcholine-releasing)
efferents or their molecular properties. The P.I.s' research concerns the
development of the enzymes choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), and
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and its molecular forms, which respectively
synthesize and breakdown acetylcholine. Their data suggest that in the mouse the
cholinergic efferents are present throughout the organ of Corti at birth.
Postnatal increases in the levels of AChE molecular forms correspond to the time
of innervation of inner and outer hair cells. We propose to use biochemical,
histochemical and immunochemical techniques to study the amount and distribution
of cholinergic enzymes in the efferent fibers along the spiral and radial axes
of the developing organ. The goal of this work is to determine the effect the
normal developmental time course for the cholinergic innervation of the hair
cells has on the expression of synaptic and non-synaptic AChE molecular forms.
The research will determine the time when cholinergic efferents establish
contacts with their targets, the morpological and molecular nature of these
efferents along the cochlea, and indicate the cellular interactions necessary
for morphological and molecular synaptic differentiation to occur. The research
will help identify the causes and consequences of normal and abnormal auditory
development.