* 8719933
* Center of Plant Developmental Biology at University of      California, Berkeley
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1988,08/31/1994
* William Cande, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/1994
* USD 2,195,000.00

Dr. Michael Freeling and his colleagues at the University of California at
Berkeley will establish a Biological Research Center for Plant Developmental
Biology. The center will provide salaries and supplies for two technicians and
up to five graduate students, funds for a seminar program and modest funds for
research to be performed in the center members' own laboratories. The
technicians will develop new techniques and train others in their use.
Individual research programs will include studies of development of the corn
leaf ligule, the role of cytoplasmic structure in corn microsporogenesis,
microbe-plant interactions, root growth, embryogenesis by cultured cells, the
regulation of development by ethylene, and other aspects of plant gene
regulation. Travel funds will be used to support attendance at scientific
meetings by students and to bring approximately five outside speakers a year to
lecture on aspects of plant development. An annual center retreat is also
planned. The center's equipment and technical staff will be housed in a single
large laboratory in a new Plant Biology Building currently under construction.
This center, unique in its size and goals, will emphasize the application of
modern and classical techniques of genetics and cell biology to understanding
the development of a variety of specialized cells in corn and other plants. The
research will address questions which are unique to plant systems, or for which
plants provide particularly useful experimental models. Among others, these
include the study of the development of the leaf and of pollen. An important
focus of the center will be a training program that will support the recruitment
and training of graduate students and a seminar series. Besides increasing the
depth and sophistication of our understanding of plant development, the center
should play an significant role in training a new generation of plant
researchers in an area of emerging importance.