* 8719575
* Geographic Distribution of Hunters in Relation to           Ecological, Economic, and Social Factors
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1990
* David Wilkie, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1990
* USD 73,561.00

This award to the University of Utah will allow the investigator to do
ethnographic and ecological research in the Ituri tropical forest of Zaire. The
project will study pygmy hunter-gatherers to determine what cultural and
ecological factors have promoted the establishment and perpetuation of two
unique group-hunting strategies--bow and net hunting. The project will study the
geographic distribution of the two types of hunters in relation to forest
composition and the location and intensity of forest horticulture. The relative
efficiency of bow and net hunting will be compared in various types of forest
settings. The project will acquire field data which will be integrated with data
from remote sensing (LANDSAT) sources, to accurately measure the ecological
situation the hunters operate in. The focus will be to understand why net
hunting has replaced bow hunting in some but not all pygmy groups, and to
understand how each type of hunting fits into the environment. This research is
important because hunting groups have a uniquely intensive knowledge of the
forest environment. By studying the variation in their use of the various forest
environments, with the precise and copious data available from remote sensing
sources, the project will advance our knowledge of tropical hunting and of
tropical forests. Increased knowledge of how the tropical forest functions will
help us preserve it, in the long run.