* 8719872
* Transcriptional Control of the Preproenkephalin Gene
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Edmund La Gamma, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 02/29/1992
* USD 178,800.00

Adaptive responses to physiological stressors like hypoglycemia, hypotension,
and exposure to cold are mediated by changes in neuroendocrine activity. The
relationships between these environmental stimuli and cell responsiveness at the
molecular level are central to an understanding of biological adaption
throughout development and to mechanisms of phenotypic expression in maturity.
Many of these relationships require tissue- specific gene control in which
factors initiating transcription are critical determinants of physiological
function or of choices made during development. Indeed, in this context, the
next logical step in elucidating mechanisms of transcription control requires
identification and isolation of factors which bind to regulatory sequences of
DNA (i.e. at promoters or enhancer sites). Dr. La Gamma has identified a
transsynaptic mechanism through which co-localized preproenkephalin and
catecholamine transmitter genes (tyrosine hydroxylase) are related
differentially in the rat adrenal medulla. Dr. LaGamma proposes to conduct
experiments to describe an approach to identify and characterize putative
regulatory molecules in this native eukaryotic tissue. He will employ
transcription "run-off" assays, the DNA "shift" assay, and the exoIII protection
assay to identify transsynaptic regulatory proteins that alter expression of
enkephalin and tyrosine hydroxylase genes. Future work is planned to partially
purify adrenomedullary nuclear proteins in conditions where preproenkephalin
gene transcription is altered. Once purified and characterized, future work may
lead to the development of synthetic molecules in this and other systems that
can read large scale sequences of DNA and produce new research tools for use in
molecular biology, diagnosis of disease, and even new chemotherapeutic
strategies. In this way, the role of environmental stimuli on nervous system
function can begin to be explained or modified at the cellular and molecular
levels.