* 8719079
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Protein Interactions withGradient Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1992
* Joseph Andrade, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 06/30/1992
* USD 17,772.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Joseph D. Andrade, Department of
Bioengineering, University of Utah, to pursue with Dr. Hai Bang Lee, Polymer
Laboratory, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, for a period of 24
months, a program of cooperative research on protein interactions with gradient
surfaces. The collaborators will prepare and characterize samples which exhibit
a continuous range of surface properties and study the interactions of a set of
proteins with these surfaces. The U.S. team will prepare surfaces by a solution
process, while the Korean team will use a "dry" vacuum process. Both groups will
study surface characterization - the U.S. group studying protein adsorption, the
Korean group studying cell adhesion on surfaces before and after protein
treatment. Both group will work on data interpretation and hypothesis
refinement. Protein adsorption at solid-liquid interfaces is important in many
applications and industries, including separations, biotechnology, medical
devices, and diagnostic products. The collaborators are highly respected
scientists who have long been engaged in polymer research. The present project
will allow them to combine their talents in complimentary approaches to a study
of the research problem. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.