* 8719571
* Dissertation Research:  Impact of Differential Leaf         Decomposition Rates and Invertebrate Shredders on Stream    Nutrient Uptake Length
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Donna D'Angelo, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 12/31/1990
* USD 10,100.00

Nutrient uptake length, the distance traveled by a nutrient atom before being
biotically or abiotically removed from solution, provides an index of stream
retention and therefore has implications concerning production and efficiency.
Previous studies found an inverse relationship between quantity of course
particulate organic matter (CPOM) in the stream and nutrient uptake length. It
is hypothesized that in addition to CPOM quantity, microbial colonization
patterns and breakdown rates of CPOM are also important in regulating uptake
length. This hypothesis will be tested by constructing nine artificial streams
and conducting two 6-8 month long experiments. In experiment 1, three leaf types
with different microbial colonization patterns and breakdown rates will be used.
One leaf type will be placed in each stream (three replicates of each leaf type)
and nutrient uptake length will be measured biweekly for several months. In
experiment 2, a mixture of leaf types will be placed in each stream. Leaf
shredding invertebrates will be placed in some streams and excluded from others
to determine how shredding affects nutrient uptake through its impact on
microbial activity and breakdown rates. A lab experiment will be done concurrent
with field work to determine the relative importance of biotic and abiotic
uptake.