* 8719938
* Identification and Categorization of Multidimensional       Stimuli
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1992
* Robert Nosofsky, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 05/31/1992
* USD 150,039.00

This research will study how people learn to classify objects and how
categories are represented in memory. The research will be guided by the
continued development and testing of a mathematical model, the exemplar model,
formalizing the view that classification decisions are based on similarity
comparisons between presented objects and stored exemplars. The research will
involve the study of performance relations between categorization and other
choice tasks people are often asked to perform, including identification and
recognition. In the categorization task, people classify items into groups; in
the identification task, each item is assigned a unique response; in the
recognition task, people simply judge whether items are old or new. The exemplar
model and another class of model, rule- based classification models, make
different predictions about the relationships among results of experiments
involving the three choice tasks. Therefore, the experiments should help to
distinguish between these two kinds of theories. Theoretical research
accompanying the experimentation will be aimed at elucidating the nature of
stimulus bias and asymmetric similarity relations. The process of categorization
is among the most fundamental of mental activities. It allows people to bring
order and organization to their environment, and it is a building block of more
complex cognitive activities such as reasoning, thinking, and problem solving. A
clear understanding of the nature of categorization processes will be
instrumental in advancing our understanding of human thought.