* 8719881
* Learning and Memory in Aged Animals:  Functional Correlates Between Behavior and Identified Brain Regions
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Michela Gallagher, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 09/30/1991
* USD 161,552.00

Studies of learning and memory are often performed using young adult animals as
laboratory models of human learning. These investigations, however, do not
address one of the major factors influencing memory: Aging. Dr. Gallagher's
research focuses on providing a more complete description of learning ability in
animals toward the end of their normal lifespan. Rodents are the ideal subjects
in which to study age-related memory changes, because we can observe mild-to-
severe memory impairments over the relatively short period (in human terms) of
two to three years. In her previous work, Dr. Gallagher has developed a series
of memory tests which clearly expose performance differences between young and
aged animals. These tests, furthermore, are capable of distinguishing those
behaviors which depend upon the integrity of certain identified brain regions,
and those which do not. Dr. Gallagher will conduct several experiments to extend
these findings, and will begin examining the extent to which each of these
behavioral tasks depends upon a specific neurotransmitter system (acetylcholine)
being intact. Specifically, she will determine the relationship between changes
in behavioral capacities and the effects of training on acetylcholine function
in aged animals. These results will address the hypothesis that altered learning
and memory function in normal aging animals is associated with a change in the
functional status of the basal forebrain cholinergic system. Knowledge about
relationships between learning and memory and the status of a specific brain
system during aging will provide a more complete understanding of progressive
memorial deficits occurring over the lifespan.