* 8719642
* Metallic Tubular Energy Dissipators in Frames Subjected     To Cyclic Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* John Carney, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* William Hakala
* 01/31/1989
* USD 30,000.00

This grant is made under "Expedited Awards for Novel Research" to explore the
feasibility of using metallic tubes as cyclic energy dissipators in building
frames to dissipate most of the energy associated with severe lateral loading
conditions. An experimental and an analytical phase will be included. During the
experimental phase of this research, scale model frames will be prepared and
subjected to cyclic loading conditions. The frames and energy dissipating tubes
will be instrumented with strain gages to measure levels of strains as functions
of time. The primary objective of the frame experiments will be to track the
yielding and energy dissipation characteristics of the metallic tubes when they
are attached to frames subjected to lateral loading conditions. The goal will be
to develop structural framing systems possessing the following two
characteristics: 1) Yielding/energy dissipation occurs in the tubes long before
any plastic deformations are initiated in the primary structural members of the
frame. 2) Yielding the energy dissipating tubes is not accompanied by a
significant reduction in lateral stiffness of the frame. The analytical phase of
this task will involve the development and verification of computer software
(ABAQUS) to predict the dynamic response of frames equipped with tubular energy
dissipators under cyclic loading. If feasible, a structural arrangement could
result in load carrying main structural members remaining in the elastic ranges,
thereby eliminating major damage from occurring to the building.