* 8719147
* The USAC Aeroseophysical Survey of the Basins Surrounding   the Antarctic Peninsula
* O/D,OPP
* 12/15/1987,11/30/1990
* Dennis Hayes, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Continuing grant
* Mary Campbell
* 11/30/1990
* USD 414,777.00

This project is the final year of a three-year airborne geophysical survey to
obtain magnetic and gravimetric data within the continental margins and basins
surrounding the Antarctic Peninsula. The project is a joint effort between the
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory and the Naval Research Laboratory, which
will provide an instrumented P-3 aircraft in support of the project. The present
project is based on prior work in the 1985/86 and the 1986/87 austral summer
seasons, in which about 150,000 km of geophysical data was obtained in a series
of flights covering much of the previously unsurveyed western Weddell Sea Basin
and the Bransfield Strait. Preliminary results from that field work have defined
a fossil subduction zone bordering the Powell Basin, a magnetic anomaly typical
of an ocean-continent transition extending from Jurassic volcanic sequences on
the Lassiter Coast, and a symmetric anomaly pattern in the Bransfield Strait.
The present field work will concentrate on acquiring magnetic data in the Scotia
Basin, and carrying out a magnetic and gravity survey of the western
Bellingshausen margin. The airborne surveys have been designed to produce an
efficient and rapid geomagnetic picture of the peninsular sector and its eastern
and western margins. Much of this area is normally covered by ice and is
inaccessible to ships, therefore the project will provide data that could not
otherwise be obtained. The NRL P-3 is specifically designed to support
geophysical research and is an excellent long-range platform for this project.
Results from this work will improve our understanding of the relative motions of
tectonic plates and the interpretation of the geology of the Antarctic
Peninsula, and provide constraints on the time of opening of the Drake Passage
and the evolution of southern ocean circulation patterns.