* 8719615
* Paramutation of the Maize R Gene
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Jerry Kermicle, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 10/31/1991
* USD 269,506.00

Most colored-seed alleles of the maize R gene are metastable. Pigmentation is
reduced heritably by heterozygosity with certain alleles (paramutation) and
increased heritably in still other combinations. The changes are cumulative over
generations. Exploratory tests using restriction enzymes whose action is
sensitive to cytosine methylation indicate hypermethylation in the R region of
DNA from paramutant R alleles. We propose to characterize this change in the
least complex alleles that undergo paramutation, utilizing a graded series of
pigmentation levels that includes enhanced as well as reduced states. Other
phenomena of R action to be characterized in terms of DNA modification include:
a marked influence of alkylating agents on R paramutation, differences in R
pigmentation level following transmission through pollen and ovule, and the
dependence of paramutation of R plant pigmentation on presence of seed-color
component in the allelic complex. Components responsible for inducing
paramutation that have been mapped genetically in the R- stippled allele are to
be characterized molecularly. Paramutation is a genetic phenomena for which
there is as yet no molecular explanation. In this system the best understood
example of paramutation in any organism, indications are that methylation of the
DNA is involved. Results from this study should provide further insight into the
mechanisms involved in gene expression and may enhance commercial applications
of genetic engineering.