* 8719361
* Hormonal and Environmental Influences on Maternal Behavior
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1991
* Jill Schneider, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1991
* USD 90,000.00

These experiments are designed to explore the exact routes by which hormones
have their effects on behavior. We know that the hormones associated with
reproduction have profound effects on the behavior of humans and other animals.
Dr. Schneider will work with steroid hormones that are produced during pregnancy
and have measurable effects on the maternal behavior of the female during
pregnancy and after the birth of her offspring. Dr. Schneider will use house
mice for this project because during pregnancy the female typically increases
the size of her nest in preparation for the birth of her offspring. This
increase in nesting behavior can be mimicked in a nonpregnant female by
injecting her with the pregnancy steroid, progesterone. Dr. Schneider believes
that progesterone changes the mother's behavior by way of brain mechanisms that
are also involved in the regulation of body temperature. (House mice give birth
all year round, even during cold winters, and their young are born without the
ability to maintain their own body temperature.) To unravel the connection
between the regulation of body temperature and the control of maternal behavior,
Dr. Schneider will (1) measure nesting, maternal care, and body temperature in
mice that have progesterone implants in very precise brain areas to show where
there may be overlap among the brain mechanisms controlling maternal behavior
and temperature regulation, and (2) test the effects of a variety of steroids in
these brain sites to see if the same ones influence both maternal nesting and
body temperature. Dr. Schneider will also measure the levels of steroids in the
blood to find out if the action of progesterone on the brain changes the
secretion of naturally occurring steroids from the ovaries or adrenal glands.
Dr. Schneider's research will help to show how hormones prepare the mother for
the birth and care of her offspring. More generally, these studies may provide a
better understanding of the mechanisms by which steroid hormones (commonly
prescribed for a variety of reasons: birth control, infertility, menopause,
allergies) produce their primary and side effects on human behavior and
physiology.