* 8719621
* Actin May Be Involved in the Structural Basis of Tactile    Learning and Memory in Octopus
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1989
* J. David Robertson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1989
* USD 20,000.00

Dr. J. David Robertson and his colleagues intend to investigate the process of
learning and memory using Octopus vulgaris. They hypothesize that active
extension of filopodia-like cytoplasmic processes analogous to microspikes of
neuronal growth cones is a primary event in learning and memory. In Octopus
brain the posterior buccal lobe is essential for tactile learning and memory.
Dr. Robertson expects actin contractility to be essential to learning and
memory. Cytochalasin B disrupts actin causing filopodia to collapse reversibly
in growth cones; the same should happen in brain tissue. Dr. Robertson has
tested this hypothesis by injecting cytochalasin B into the posterior buccal
lobes of the brain of Octopus. As predicted, the cytochalasin B prevents tactile
learning reversibly without affecting memories previously consolidated or
affecting visual learning and memory. Dr. Robertson will test the hypothesis
through investigation of the posterior buccal lobe by electron mycroscopy to
enumerate filopodia-like cytoplasmic processes in synaptic regions of normal and
cytochalasin B-injected neuropils. He shall record electrically from neurons in
posterior buccal brain slices and microinject them with fluorescent dyes and
horseradish peroxidase for study by epifluorescence light microscopy. Dr.
Robertson also plans to study the distribution of brain actin by using myosin S1
decoration and by determining the distribution of radioactively labeled
cytochalasin B using autoradiography.