* 8719723
* Heuristic Appraisal
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1990
* Thomas Nickles, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 06/30/1990
* USD 18,000.00

Heuristic appraisal (HA) is the evaluation of the promise and expected
fertility of a theory, research program, proposal, instrument, or technique, its
ability to handle difficulties blocking progress and to generate interesting new
questions for research. HA is critical to understanding the behavior of
scientific researchers at all stages of research, from initial problem-finding
to the post-acceptance assessment of a theory as a basis for further research.
To working scientists the future prospects of a theory under consideration as a
locus of research- -its problem-solving potential--is often more important than
its track record of empirical success. HA informs funding decisions and, in a
larger context, technology assessment, public-policy decisions, and future
studies. HA is fundamental to the "economy of research" in all senses of that
phrase and hence should be a central topic for methodologies of science,
engineering, and technology. Yet philosophers of science have largely ignored
the topic. How are heuristic assessments made? What are the dimensions and
criteria of assessment? How might these differ in weight at different stages of
research? How does HA relate to epistemic appraisal? Dr. Nickles' project will
address these questions, answer philosophical objections to a full-scale study
of HA, critique the few extant treatments, and locate and explore sources of
documentary evidence of HA within working science (e.g., recent research
proposals and peer commentaries). This study promises to be of great value both
for philosophy of science and for science policy.