* 8719913
* Evolution of Sex Differences in Spatial Ability
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1989
* Steven Gaulin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1989
* USD 9,972.00

In both humans and laboratory animals, males typically perform better than
females on tasks that involve spatial thinking. Previous work in this field has
tried to explain how sex differences in spatial ability occur during the
lifetimes of males and females by focusing on the relatively immediate effects
of sex hormones, brain organization and differential experience. Until now, the
evolutionary and developmental components of this difference have received
little attention. Dr. Gaulin has developed the ingenious hypothesis that sex
differences in spatial ability have been favored by the evolutionary process.
Dr. Gaulin proposes that evolution fosters spatial ability more strongly for
more mobile animals: To orient successfully, an animal with a large home range
needs more spatial skill than does an animal with a smaller range. To test this
imaginative idea, he has chosen several closely related species of wild rodents
which differ primarily in range size, and in reproductive strategies. Some
species are polygamous, others monogamous. He has found that polygamous species
have larger home ranges than members of closely related, but monogamous,
species. Dr. Gaulin predicts that in monogamous species, where males and females
have similar range sizes, no differences in spatial abilities will be found.
Conversely, in the polygamous species, where males have much larger range sizes
than do females, he predicts that these males will perform better in his
laboratory tasks than do the females. Dr. Gaulin is combining both field and
laboratory work to address this important question. Home ranges of individual
male and female voles are measured using radio-telemetry, by fitting individual
animals with miniaturized radio transmitters and following their movements for
several weeks. Following the field work, he recaptures these same animals and
measures their maze- learning ability in the laboratory. The current grant
support is allowing him to continue these studies, originally funded by NSF
grant BNS 85-08436. The results of these ongoing studies will contribute
information of fundamental importance to ecology and to learning theory, and may
eventually enhance our knowledge of factors that influence learning ability in
humans.