* 8719315
* Neural Circuitry for Polarized-Light Perception
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Nicholas Strausfeld, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Comer
* 04/30/1992
* USD 198,800.00

Dr. Nicholas Strausfeld is an extremely gifted scientist who has been gathering
a volume of information on the organization of the insect brain. His previous
work has focused on the neuroanatomy and functional organization of the brain
and thoracic nervous system of dipterous insects, in particular the blowfly. In
his new research program he shall exploit a cardinal feature of arthropod
brains: namely, the presence of a manageable number of large nerve cells with
characteristic forms, which are readily identifiable in all individuals of a
species and which can be unambiguously related to specific motor neuron pools
innervating identified muscles used in a specified locomotor function. The
ultimate goal of this new line of research is to resolve the functional
organization of neurons that mediate polarized-light orientation. To this end
the project is restricted to the analysis of clearly defined and
neuroanatomically identifiable sensory systems leading to identified motor
neurons and muscles. The physiological studies are specifically designed to test
the activities of premotor descending neurons in response to polarized light in
the context of other visual and mechanical cues, such as would normally be
encountered. The research will test current hypotheses concerning polarized-
light-sensitive networks. This work is important because it seeks to
functionally detail a complete neuronal circuit from sensory input to muscle
movement, a circuit in which the anatomy of the neurons has already been
beautifully described.