* 8719960
* The Compilation of Routine Design Knowledge
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1991
* David Brown, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Senior Program Assistant
* 07/31/1991
* USD 193,706.00

This project will investigate how a design task becomes routine. As a designer
continues to solve similar problems the knowledge is transformed, or compiled,
to produce more routine problem-solving. A language called the Design
Specialists and Plans Language (DSPL) has been developed that can express a
designer's knowledge of how to solve a routine problem. It has been used to
build several design expert systems. DSPL recognizes that routine design
problem-solving involves a variety of types of knowledge, such as plans,
Redesigners, and tasks, each with a well defined role. This project will be
based around the DSPL language. The underlying methodology of the project is to
ask the question "Where did that come from?" of every type of knowledge in a
routine design system. This research starts with existing well-compiled routine
design knowledge, and is interested in small, recent transformations. For
example, a plan in DSPL was probably produced by the method of instantiating a
plan scheme. The investigators ignore the fact that it was originally the result
of some planning activity. For each type of knowledge the investigators identify
one or more such methods, and produce implementations of them. The methods will
be studied individually, and then with interesting interactions.