* 8719234
* ROW:  Pattern and Consequence of Converging Somatosensory   Inputs in Superior Colliculus
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Helen Clemo, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Avijit Chaudhuri
* 06/30/1992
* USD 256,951.00

The superior colliculus is a structure in the midbrain thought to mediate
attention and orienting responses. This structure integrates visual, auditory
and tactile sensory information that comes from lower relay centers (ascending)
and from the cerebral cortex (descending). A single sensory nerve cell (neuron)
often is functionally characterized by the properties of its "receptive field,"
which is the set of criteria for location, shape, movement or other aspects of a
stimulus that cause the cell to respond. For a higher-order sensory neuron, this
receptive field may be built up from the receptive fields of many separate
sensory neurons that send processes to converge on that neuron. Within the
superior colliculus, it is unknown which incoming (afferent) fibers converge on
individual neurons, which properties of the receptive field depend on which
afferents, and which receptive field properties of the output neurons are most
directly involved in behavior. This project examines input to cells in the
superior colliculus from neurons of the somatosensory system, responsive to
touch on the face, limbs, or body surface. Preliminary studies show that
somatosensory neurons in the superior colliculus receive both ascending and
descending inputs. Electrophysiological stimulation and recording techniques
will be used to identify the patterns of convergence of these different inputs
on the collicular neurons, to determine correlations between inputs and
receptive field properties, and determine which collicular neurons send output
to the brain and spinal cord. This work exploits the superior colliculus as a
model with a large base of information about its structure and function, to
understand how the nervous system builds particular sensory receptive fields
from convergent individual sensory inputs.