* 8719728
* Chemical and Electrochemical Generation of Novel Anions and Dianions of Arene and Olefincarbonylmetal Complexes.  New   Organic Synthetic Methodologies
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Reuben Rieke, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas C. Farrar
* 07/31/1991
* USD 247,384.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports research
of Prof. Reuben Rieke, University of Nebraska, which is concerned with new
chemical reactions of mono- and biscarbonylmetal complexes of arenes and arene-
substituted olefins. Of particular interest will be analysis of the reactions of
the complex dianions with a variety of electrophiles, because these hold the
potential for evolving into useful new synthetic methodologies for complex
organic synthesis. The studies on bis-complexes will concentrate on biphenyl and
other conjugated diarene systems. The conjugated bis-complexes show the unusual
reduction characteristics of one electron per chromium tricarbonyl unit, to give
stable dianions. Reaction with primary halides gives high yields to only the
ortho product. The mechanistic origins of this regioselectivity will be
determined and its utility in new synthetic methodologies will be explored. New
mixed metal bis-complex systems of arene-substituted olefins will also be
prepared, which should lead to stable dianions upon reduction. The reactions of
these dianions with electrophiles offer opportunities for control of
regioselectivity between the arene and olefin portions of the molecule. A
variety of electrochemical and stereochemical techniques will be used to probe
the reaction mechanisms of these reactions.