* 8719325
* RUI: Influence of Environmental Factors on Migratory        Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1988,03/31/1989
* Mary Anne Sydlik, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 03/31/1989
* USD 26,602.00

Orientation and migration are essential components of most animals' life-
history patterns, permitting them to find and exploit favorable environmental
conditions, locate and capture prey, and engage in reproductive and other social
activities. An individual's ability to produce precisely timed movements
coordinated with peak environmental and social conditions must depend heavily on
its capacity to process and respond to relevant sensory information from both
its internal and external environment. Dr. Sydlik will examine the role of local
environmental factors in the migratory movements of horseshoe crabs. These
animals are ideal for such a study because (1) major environmental factors
(lunar and tidal cycles, time of day) that influence the timing of their
migrations are known, (2) large numbers of animals migrate repeatedly over short
distances, ensuring availability for study, (3) we have extensive knowledge of
their sensory systems, and (4) Dr. Sydlik's preliminary work indicates that
ultrasonic tracking can be used to collect precise data on the timing and paths
taken into and away from shore during migration. Data from ultrasonic and
environmental transmitters carried by the animals, and from a submerged stand-
alone environmental- monitoring unit, will be collected and processed by
computers housed in a van located near the shore. Using these data, Dr. Sydlik
will evaluate the influences of water depth, surge direction, salinity,
temperature, pressure, and flow rate over the animals' shells in stimulating and
directing the migratory behavior of these long-lived marine invertebrates.