* 8719230
* Comparative Studies of Primate Vocal Communication
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Sarah Gouzoules, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 04/30/1991
* USD 104,000.00

In this decade, research has revealed rudimentary but intriguing similarities
between certain aspects of human language and the vocal communication of monkeys
living in social groups. There are parallels in categorical perception of
primate calls and speech, in some of the functions of calls and words, and even
in the neural structures involved in the control and production of speech and
monkey calls. Several recent studies have suggested that there may be
developmental affinities as well. For example, infants and juveniles apparently
require experience for both production and proper contextual usage of calls that
effectively represent objects or events in their external environments.
Complexity in the vocal communication of macaque monkeys is the theme of
research by Drs. Harold and Sarah Gouzoules. In previous work on two species of
macaques, the Gouzouleses found that acoustically distinct types of recruitment
screams are associated with specific features of the situation (e.g., the
relative dominance rank of an opponent and the severity of the attack) and
appear to provide allies with information pertinent to decisions about
intervention tactics. The Gouzouleses now are investigating the acquisition of
communicative competence by young macaques and the question of species
differences in the acoustic features of calls used in similar contexts.
Vocalizations and concomitant behavioral data will be collected on three groups
of monkeys (representing three macaque species) maintained in large outdoor
enclosures at the Yerkes Regional Primate Research Center of Emory University.
The Gouzouleses' novel approach to the analysis of the developmental
modification of vocal behavior employs a multivariate statistical technique
(discriminant analysis) and a battery of two dozen acoustic measurements to
assess differences between adults, juveniles, and infants.