* 8719171
* Production in Prehistory: A Conference to be held April 5-9, l988 in Charleston, South Carolina
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1989
* Margaret Conkey, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* name not available
* 07/31/1989
* USD 6,150.00

This grant permits Drs. Gero and Conkey to convene a group of 18 established
reseachers for a five day conference: "Women and Production in Prehistory."
Fifteen of the participants will present substantive research papers and the
remaining three will serve as discussants. The specific topics include: the
allocation of gender roles in subsistence production; the organization of labor
for commodity production; gender related factors in spatial differention of
labor and the relationships in prehistory of gender and status. The conference
will be held in a locale which allows for focused interaction among the
participants. This conference is important because it should provide a new and
more balanced insight into prehistoric social organization and how
archaeologists can work to understand it. Traditionally, and probably because
the majority of practicing archaeologists are men, women have been relatively
invisible and there has been little consideration of the roles which they played
in prehistory. This conference will not only help to right this bias but also
try to plot out a future research agenda. This project is important not only for
what it shall reveal about the past but also for what it will tell us about how
archaeologists work. An examination of this kind teaches much about implicit,
usually unconscious, assumptions which archaeologists hold when they conduct
research. The contribution thus will be methodological as well as substantive.