* 8719665
* Collaborative Research:  Early State Formation Processes:   The Aztec City-State of Otumba, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Thomas Charlton, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 09/30/1990
* USD 40,000.00

In a collaborative research project Dr. Thomas Charlton and Dr. Deborah Nichols
will conduct archaeological research at the Aztec site of Otumba which is
located in the Teotihuacan Valley, Mexico. One season of fieldwork will be
followed by a year of analysis. The Otumba city-state includes a large central
"city" area and smaller surrounding "rural" sites. The investigators will
conduct a systematic surface survey and sampling of the city area to collect
artifactual samples in order to understand how the site developed over time.
They will then repeat the process at ca. three rural sites to determine the
degree of economic interaction between them and the center. They will then
conduct excavations at the center to learn how the city functioned economically
and how it related to other similar city-states. Since the Aztec practiced
irrigation agriculture, Drs. Charlton and Nichols will excavate the canal system
to reconstruct its morphology, development and its importance for agricultural
production. At the time Columbus discovered the New World, the Aztec had
established a large, complex and centrally administered empire. While historical
accounts provide some insight into how this empire functioned, archaeologists
have argued about the processes which led to its development. This research
should help to answer the question and provide more general insight into how
complex societies arise.