* 8719317
* Regulation of Muscle Glycogenolytic Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Ronald Edstrom, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/1992
* USD 150,000.00

This project supports development of a series of in vitro models of the
glycogenolytic complex with increasing degree of organization. The models will
be based on the known interactions of the enzymes involved in the regulation of
glycogenolysis. The models will be expressed mathematically and experimentally
tested using assemblies of purified enzymes and other cellular components.
Models to be tested are mixtures of phosphorylase kinase and phosphatase; this
mixture of enzymes with added regulatory proteins, and complexes of enzymes with
particulate glycogen. The models will be evaluated for sensitivity amplification
to the signals of effectors, energy consumption of regulatory processes, and
their relationship to glycogen particles isolated from muscle which contain the
enzymes of glycogen metabolism and regulation. Glycogen is the storage site for
sugar in the liver and muscle. Breakdown of glycogen provides energy for
activity and metabolism and regulates blood sugar levels. Biochemists study
glycogen breakdown because it illustrates several important principles. It
occurs by more than one pathway, it is hormonally regulated, and defects lead to
human diseases. Current dogma holds that glycogen particles are not multi-enzyme
complexes, i.e., have enzymes present in specified ratios. This project uses
experimental and mathematic means to test this idea.