* 8719149
* Adrenal Medullary Enkephalin-Containing Peptides
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Steven Wilson, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Stacy Springer
* 09/30/1991
* USD 182,800.00

Although the amino acid sequence and the identities of many processing products
of proenkephalin are known, little information is available on the rates of
proenkephalin synthesis and degradation or on the details of proenkephalin
processing and storage. The first aim of this project is to determine the rates
of proenkephalin synthesis and degradation. Bovine adrenal medullary chromaffin
cells will be incubated with radiolabeled amino acids, and their incorporation
into enkephalin sequences in the various proenkephalin fragments will be
determined following fractionation by high performance liquid chromatography.
The second aim is to determine the pathway of proenkephalin processing. Pulse-
chase radiolabeling of enkephalin sequences within chromaffin cell proenkephalin
will be used to study this pathway. The third aim is to determine the second
messenger(s) responsible for regulation of proenkephalin synthesis and
processing. The roles of calcium, cyclic AMP, and other agents, including
glucocorticiods, will be evaluated. The forth aim is to determine the
relationship between proenkephalin and chromaffin vesicle synthesis. Vesicles
from radiolabeled chromaffin cells will be subjected to density gradient
centrifugation; fractions will be analyzed for newly synthesized enkephalin
sequences and other vesicle components. These studies will elucidate the basic
mechanisms of neurotransmitter-hormone synthesis and storage.