* 8719049
* Hydrogen Cycling and Its Relationship to Carbon             Remineralization in Anoxic Marine Environments
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1989
* Mary Scranton, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/1989
* USD 65,166.00

Hydrogen is a Key intermediate in the anaerobic diagenesis of organic carbon.
Hydrogen partial pressures are important in controlling fermentation pathways,
and theoretical arguments suggest hydrogen production rates are high. In
addition, competition for hydrogen can be instrumental in determining the
relative importance of sulfate reduction and methanogenesis (and possibly iron
reduction) in sediments. H2 is also an important precursor for methane in
methanogenic sediments (both freshwater and marine). However, relatively few
data are available which permit detailed discussion of the relationship between
hy>rogen geochemistry and carbon diagenesis in natural environments. Scranton
has studied the distribution and cycling of hydrogen and acetate in anaerobic
sediments for several years and has found that hydrogen turnover in these
systems is very rapid. Production and consumption rates appear to be virtually
identical (no net release or uptake of hydrogen) and appear to be closely
coupled spatially (occurring in "clusters") in the sediments. Measured rates of
"apparent" hydrogen production, however, are much lower than would have been
predicted from acetate production rates measured simultaneously, suggesting that
artifacts may remain in the measurements of production rates. Scranton proposes
to estimate in situ hydrogen production rates using a new approach with very
thin layers of sediment, to determine the relationship between a number of fatty
acids and hydrogen concentrations in the sediments, and to extend our data set
to include the relatively simpler methanogenic systems.