* 8719027
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems in Partial DifferentialEquations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1990
* Roger Lewis, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 02/28/1990
* USD 55,000.00

Work will be done on problems arising in several areas of partial differential
equations. Efforts will be made to characterize the spectrum of an elliptic
differential operator, a fundamental question in both mathematics and physics.
Special attention will be given to multiparticle Schrodinger operators. In this
context, focus will be placed on predicting the finiteness or infiniteness of
bound states for N-body atomic Schrodinger operators using geometric methods.
These operators model an atom with an infinitely heavy nucleus and N - 1
electrons moving about the nucleus. Work will also be done investigating the
spectral and scattering theory for certain reduced wave equations which are
obtained from acoustic equations by separation the time variable. Emphasis will
be placed on wave equations with singular coefficients which are strongly
discontinuous or do not behave well at infinity. Applications of this research
may be made to the analysis of wave propagation such as occurs in acoustic
imaging. A third direction this work will take deals with the establishment of
the classical Muntz approximation theorem for sets of positive measure. The
approach to resolving this longstanding conjecture will use recent work relating
properties of an associated discontinuos coefficient wave equation boundary
value problem. A solution to this basic question will demonstrate that the so-
called bang-bang principle in the theory of time optimal control for the heat
equation is also valid.