* 8719889
* PLANNING GRANT FOR THE ANALYSIS OF DEMAND AND PRICING       OF COMPUTER SERVICES (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Jan Acton, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 12/31/1988
* USD 10,365.00

This research is to undertake a preliminary examination of the growing use of
NSF sponsored supercomputers and computers that may substitute for some or all
of their functions. The goal is to develop a research plan leading to a better
understanding of the determinants of demand for large-scale computing services
and better pricing structures to make the most efficient use of the services and
their alternatives. The researchers will review the extant literature on demand
and pricing of computer services, develop a conceptual model of demand for
supercomputing services, will develop pricing models appropriate to the use of
supercomputing services, meet with knowledgeable individuals, and develop a full
research plan. NSF has an interest in the pricing and demand for computers for
several reasons. First, NSF supports university-based supercomputer centers.
There soon may be demands for more computer time than these centers can supply
and some price or non-price rationing scheme will be needed. Second,
supercomputers may involve transferring large volumes of input or output between
remote users and a central computer, so network congestion and usage charges may
be significant. Third, NSF grants often include an element for computer usage;
so NSF has an added interest in efficient and equitable pricing policies for all
types of computer services.