* 8719164
* Rhesus Maternal Care in Relation to Population Growth, Awardin U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Rodney Johnson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1991
* USD 17,072.00

Description: This project supports Dr. Johnson for research work on rhesus
monkeys, with an Indian scientist, Dr. (Mrs.) Iqbal Malik, Institute of Home
Economics, University of Delhi, India. They plan to study the maternal
investment behavior and seek to identify the ecological and social factors,
producing variability in the length and frequency of the infants' nursing bouts.
Special attention will be paid to two factors; maternal time budgets and the
availability of solid foods accessible to young infants. The current prediction
is that mothers who allow infants to nurse more often or longer bouts delay the
reproduction cycle and thus permit these youngsters to grow relatively older by
the time they are weened. This is based on the assumption, known for human
mothers, that their is a strong correlation between frequent nursing bouts of
short duration and a prolonged lactational infertility. The research will be
carried over two birth seasons by observing the rhesus monkeys within a natural
free-ranging population in India. Scope: The two scientists have collaborated in
the past on research in this field. The proposed work is timely and is likely to
produce valuable results given the experience of the two collaborators in the
field and their past record of publications. The research plan includes
ecological and social influences on reproduction of primates and has important
applications in wildlife management and in human reproductive behavior.