* 8719594
* Characterization of Cardiac Adenosine Receptor Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Richard Green, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 02/29/1992
* USD 178,800.00

Cardiac function is controlled by neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, and drugs
that bind to specific receptors located on the cardiac membrane. These receptors
interact with various effector mechanisms to regulate cellular activity.
Adenosine is locally released in the heart and acts on specific extracellular,
membrane.bound receptors to cause decrease in the rate and force of contraction
of the heart. Furthermore, the rate of adenosine release in the myocardium is
increased during exercise, hypoxia/ischemia and in the failing heart. However,
little is known concerning the pharmacological and biochemical characteristics
of adenosine receptors and adenosine receptor: effector mechanisms in cardiac
cells. The long term goal of this project is to elucidate the mechanisms by
which activation of adenosine receptors lead to the regulation of cardiac
function so that pharmacological interventions affecting this system can
ultimately be used to modify cardiac function. There are two specific aims: (1)
Extensive pharmacological and biochemical experiments will be performed to
further characterize the adenosine receptor(s) in the heart. These experiments
will utilize three approaches: (a) ligand binding studies with both agonist and
antagonist radioligands; (b) photoaffinity labelling; and (c) affinity
chromatography and receptor purification. These experiments will determine if
more than one type of adenosine receptor exists in the heart and whether the
cardiac adenosine receptors are the same or different from adenosine receptors
in the CNS. (2) Additional experiments will determine which effector system(s)
is/are activated by cardiac adenosine receptors to result in the physiological
changes induced by activation of adenosine receptors. The mechanisms by which
cardiac receptors modulate cAMP levels in the heart will be probed and the
possibility that adenosine receptors couple to other effector systems will be
examined. The results are anticipated to provide fundamental insights to the
processes by which adenosine receptors control cardiac function.