* 8719835
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Multipole Matrix Element Zeroes in Resonances in Independent Particle Approximation
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Richard Pratt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 06/30/1991
* USD 19,990.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. James E. Bayfield and Dr. Richard H.
Pratt, Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, to pursue
with Dr. Sung Dahm Oh, Department of Physics, Sookmyung Women's University,
Seoul, Korea, for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative theoretical
research on multipole matrix element zeroes in resonances in independent
particle approximation. Specifically, the project will deal with theoretical
investigations of "Cooper Minima" and shape resonances, two main features which
distinguish radiation transitions in a screened atom from the simple point
Coulomb hydrogenic case. This project involves cooperative research of two
groups of investigators who have complementary skills and facilities. The key
collaborators are highly respected scientists who, for a number of years, have
cooperated in the field of the research. Their cooperation has been highly
successful and has resulted in several joint publications in refereed journals.
The proposed study of multipole matrix element zeroes and resonances will shed
light on the deviations from simple point Coulomb behavior in the case of
electronic screening. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.