* 8719488
* Cellular Mechanisms of Matching Between Fast and Slow       Motoneurons and Myotubes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1991
* Lynn Landmesser, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 07/31/1991
* USD 159,402.00

An important aspect of normal neuromuscular development is the matching of fast
and slow motoneurons with appropriate muscle fiber types, but the mechanisms
responsible for this matching are presently not understood. Embryonic chick is a
suitable system for the study of this problem, as the tissues involved are
easily manipulated. The time course of appropriate innervation will be
determined during embryonic development of chick hindlimb muscle. This will
determine if specificity occurs with initial innervation, or if appropriate
matching is produced by a rearrangement of neuromuscular connections. The
molecular mechanisms involved in the matching of neurons to specific muscle
fiber types will be investigated. An in-vitro model will be used to test the
preference of fast or slow motoneurons for outgrowth on substrates containing
fast or slow myotube membrane components. Also, since antigenic differences
between fast and slow myotube membranes may be surface components that are
recognized by motoneurons during innervation, polyclonal and monoclonal
antibodies will be raised against slow and fast muscle surface membrance
components. These antibodies can then be used to characterize molecular
differences between fast and slow muscle, and to interfere with the recognition
process during development in ovo. These studies will provide a fuller
understanding of the cellular and molecular events during normal selective
synaptogenesis.