* 8719771
* Acquisition of an Electron Microscope (Materials Research)
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1987,05/31/1989
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Yvette Jackson
* 05/31/1989
* USD 75,000.00

A transmission electron microscope for use in investigations of complex fluid
and polymer systems will be acquired. Novel freeze-fracture techniques used will
directly examine polyacrylamide gels, rod-coil transitions of polydiacetylene
solutions, and surfactant-oil-water microemulsions using electron microscopy.
Rapid freezing of these systems can preserve the microstructure without
artifact. The solidified fluid is fractured and coated with layers of platinum
and carbon to replicate the fracture surfaces. These replicas are then examined
in the electron microscope with molecular resolution. The replicas can also be
examined with the scanning tunneling microscope to assess three dimensional
contours with high resolu1tion. Individual polymer chains can be visualized with
unprecedented resolution and the distribution of interstitial fluid in gels can
be measured. For the first time, direct feedback about the influence of external
perturbations on the gel structure is possible. The three dimensional structure
of mid- range microemulsions consisting of equal volumes of oil and water
cosolubilized by surfactant can also be examined with molecular resolution.
Solution cast films of conducting polymer composites can be examined to
determine the nature of the composite and the morphology of the conducting
fraction. Biological and other non-conducting materials can be imaged
simultaneously with scanning tunneling and transmission electron microscopy.