* 8719758
* Signal Transduction in Cultured Neural Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1991
* Mark Rasenick, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 08/31/1991
* USD 193,224.00

Signal transduction within the central nervous system involves the recognition
of a neurotransmitter or neuromodulator by a specific receptor and the
subsequent activation (or inhibition) of a cellular event. These cellular events
(ion translocation, neurotransmitter release, etc.) are often mediated by second
messengers evoked as a result of receptor occupancy. Dr. Rasenick will determine
how a number of components within the neuron are integrated with respect to the
adenylate cyclase second messenger system. Cultured glial, neuronal or hybrid
cells will be permeabilized with saponin, and the components of the adenylate
cyclase system will be probed, in situ. Dr. Rasenick's laboratory has developed
an assay for adenylate cyclase (as opposed to cAMP accumulation) in
permeabilized cells; C6 NG.108.15 and NCB.20 cells will be used for the proposed
experiments. Initially, Dr. Rasenick will study the kinetics for the receptor
mediated activation of the adenylate cyclase system through the stimulatory GTP
binding protein (GNs). The agonist catalyzed activation of GNs will be studied
with a GTP.photoaffinity probe. This study also will examine the recently
discovered interaction between GNs and the inhibitory GTP binding protein (GNi)
both through kinetic experiments and by photoaffinity experiments. Dr. Rasenick
has demonstrated that GTP analogues may be exchanged between GNs and GNi (as
well as tubulin and GNi) in synaptic membranes; he further intends to examine
the possible role of receptors in the nucleotide exchange process. The
permeabilized cells provide the ideal milieu for such experiments; many of the
elements which may act in concert to modify receptor responsiveness are retained
in this system. As the saponin treated cells have holes sufficiently large to
allow the passage of proteins and Fab fragments, a variety of experiments to
probe the role of the cytoskeleton, as well as that of a newly discovered 32KDa
GTP binding protein, are planned. Lastly, effects of morphological
differentiation will be examined. This research provides the exciting
possibility to investigate the cellular response to neurotransmitters in a
environment resembling that of the intact neuron.