* 8719992
* Expansion of the Owens Valley Millimeter-Wave Array
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1994
* Nicholas Scoville, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Dickman
* 04/30/1994
* USD 2,000,000.00

This proposal requests partial support for expansion of the millimeter wave
interferometer at Owens Valley Radio Observatory to an array of six telescopes
with fifteen simultaneous baselines. The instrument is currently operating in
the 1.3 and 2.6 mm bands with three 10.4 m high accuracy telescopes equipped
with low noise SIS receivers. The interferometer has been used very successfully
for high resolution aperture synthesis mapping of the molecules in planetary
atmospheres, in the circumstellar envelopes of evolved stars, in local star
forming regions, and in nearby galaxies. The major element of this project is
the construction of three additional telescopes, each equipped with dual
frequency front end receivers. The digital spectroscopic correlator will be
expanded to handle 15 simultaneous baselines with up to 500 MHz bandwidth. The
proposed expansion will result in an order of magnitude increase in speed for
the array and similar increase in the dynamic range of the data through
implementation of self calibration procedures. The system will be extremely
versatile with the capability for mapping both primary millimeter bands, dual
polarization measurements and full imaging capability on all angular scales
greater than 1". The highest resolution will be similar to that of the best
optical imaging obtained with ground- based telescopes. It is proposed that the
three new telescopes be funded with equivalent contributions by Caltech, the
NSF, and the University of Toronto. The budget submitted here is for NSF support
of one of the three new telescopes with its associated electronics. The
instrument will be run as an open facility with extensive use by researchers
outside Caltech.