* 8719215
* Alkaline Volcanism in Magmatic Arcs:  Petrologic and        Volcanologic Investigations in the Tuxtla Volcanic Field,   Veracruz, Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Stephen Nelson, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 04/30/1991
* USD 78,100.00

This project is to determine the relationships between magmatic evolution and
tectonic history in the Tuxtla Volcanic Field, veracruz, Mexico, a magmatic arc
where both alkaline and calc- alkaline magma types have erupted. The PI will try
to determine the relationship between volcanism and tectonism by characterizing
the isotopic and trace element composition of the magmatic source, and
determining the age of initiation of volcanism and its relationship to tectonic
events occurring in the area at the time. The depth at which melting and
fractionation took place will also be studied, and the entire area will be
compared to other areas of the calc-alkaline Mexican Volcanic Belt. A volcanic
hazards assesment is also planned. Geologic mapping will be used to determine
stratigraphic relationships. Chemical and isotopic analyses will aid in
determining the characteristics of the magma source and its evolution through
time, and, combined with mineralogical analyses, will help unravel the chemical
evolution of the magmas and determine the temperatures and pressures involved in
magmatic evolution. Potassium-Argon and radiocarbon age dating of rocks will be
used to determine the age of initiation of volcanism, the rates of magmatic
evolution and the recent eruptive history. Completion of the project should give
a better understanding of the relationships between alkaline and calc-alkaline
magmatism and tectonism in the Mexican Volcanic Belt and elsewhere. In addition,
it will provide information critical to the well being of inhabitants of the
area in the event of future volcanic eruption.