* 8719003
* Opportunities in the Hydrologic Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Stephen Parker, National Research Council
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1990
* USD 80,000.00

WATER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY BOARD The National Research Council (NRC), through
its Water Science and Technology Board, will assess opportunities in the
hydrologic sciences. This is to include a review of the current status of the
subfields of hydrology and of their coupling with related geosciences and
biosciences, the identification of promising new frontiers and opportunities for
the hydrologic sciences to help improve water and environmental management, and
development of the appropriate framework for hydrologic education and research
(including funding needs). The study results from an increased awareness by the
hydrologic community of the growing need for fundamental advances in hydrologic
science to generate solutions to emerging complex problems of water technology,
and from the realization that the time has come for hydrology to take its place
as a science alongside the other established and recognized geosciences. The
study will assess our understanding of the natural reservoirs and fluxes
involved in the global hydrologic cycle. The focus will be on continental waters
and the natural processes driven by continental waters, such as erosion,
sedimentation, vegetation growth, and chemical weathering. Consideration of
oceanic, lacustrine, atmospheric, and cryospheric reservoirs will be limited to
their interfacial fluxes. The scales of concern will vary from the micro-
processes of the soil moisture to the global scale of hydroclimatological
change. The study will be carried out by a specially appointed multidisciplinary
committee of approximately 16 scientists representing fields ranging from
hydrology, geomorphology, geochemistry, and hydrogeology to meteorology,
hydroclimatology, and ecosystem science. It is expected that the effort will
result in an important reference work on opportunities in the hydrologic
sciences. This publication will be of guidance value to science policy makers
and government managers--of cultural importance to scientists, educators, and
students--and of interest to the informed lay public. The document will transmit
the flavor and importance of the hydrologic sciences, identify the needed
improvements thereto, and contribute ultimately to improved management of water
and the natural environment.