* 8719537
* Approval Voting: Empirical Effects and Theoretical          Extensions
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Steven Brams, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1991
* USD 49,853.00

Approval voting is a system in which voters can vote for as many candidates as
they like, or approve of, in a multicandidate election. Each candidate approved
of by a voter receives one vote, and the candidate with the most votes wins.
Approval voting has a number of advantages over plurality voting, and plurality
voting with a runoff, as well as ranking systems such as the Borda count and the
Hare system of single transferable vote. Approval voting has been used in
universities, professional societies (e.g., the Econometric Society), internal
elections of political parties in some states, and the United Nations Security
Council to elect a Secretary General. Approval voting ballot data from the
Institute of Management Science (TIMS), with about 6,000 members, were recently
analyzed and provided important tests of several theoretical propositions. Data
from the 1987 elections of the Mathematical Association of America (MAA), with
about 26,000 members, and the 1988 elections of the American Statistical
Association (ASA), with about 15,000 members, and the Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), with about 280,000 members, will be available
for analysis and provide additional bases for analyzing patterns of support of
candidates under approval voting. The analysis of these data should shed
considerable light on how approval voting might work in public elections. For
example, is it likely to elect so.called Condorcet candidates .. those who, if
they exist, can defeat every other candidate in pairwise contests . . as it has
consistently done in private elections. The use of approval voting in public
elections has not gone without controversy and has been debated in numerous
scholarly journals. Nevertheless, bills to enact approval voting have been
introduced in several states; in 1987, an approval voting bill was passed by the
North Dakota Senate by a vote of 34.16 but failed in the House. In this project
the empirical analysis of the MAA, ASA, and IEEE approval voting ballot data
will be vital in assessing the use and practicality of approval voting in public
elections, as will data collected in the 1988 National Election Survey that will
include an approval voting item. Further, an extension of approval voting to
party.list systems using proportional representation (PR) in Parliamentary
democracies will be analyzed. In particular, models to assess whether approval
voting might encourage parties to split up in a PR system wil be investigated in
order to evaluate the feasibility of marrying approval voting and PR using the
combination in parliamentary elections. This research will contribute not only
to the social choice literature but also indicate if there are any serious
limitations to using approval voting to elect legislators in parliamentary
democracies.