* 8719972
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Correlation and Significance of    Super Bounding Surfaces in Eolian Sandstones:  Jurassic PageSandstone, Colorado Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Gary Kocurek, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 07/31/1990
* USD 50,000.00

Studies of eolian deposits have been severely handicapped by the lack of tools
for internal correlation. However, recent recognition of unconformities within
eolian units (termed super bounding surfaces) allows local and regional
correlation, and the recognition of distinct genetic sequences composing eolian
units. These unconformities represent hiatuses in sand-sea development and
result from climatic, tectonic, and eustatic events. It is proposed to apply
this new concept to a study of the Jurassic Page Sandstone on the Colorado
Plateau. This unit affords excellent, almost continuously exposed outcrops
across the entire breadth of the original Page sand sea into the laterally
adjacent Carmel marine formation. Work thus far has recognized several super
surfaces in the Page Sandstone. The genetic sequences that compose the Page
Sandstone are distinct. The proposed work consists of (1) identifying super
surfaces within the Page, (2) carefully correlating these through a series of
closely spaced stratigraphic sections into the Carmel Formation, (3) describing
and interpreting genetic sequences bounded by the surfaces, and (4) addressing
the causes of the super-surface development and pulses of sandsea formation. The
significance of this work is that is is a pioneer study developing the tools of
super bounding surfaces for understanding laterally extensive, thick eolian
sequences. It is believed that these unconformable surfaces can be of tremendous
value in understanding the genetic history of eolian units, and potentially of
utility in correlation of eolian units.