* 8719196
* Research in Geometric Modelling
* CSE,EIA
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Herbert Voelcker, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Michael Foster
* 09/30/1991
* USD 623,225.00

This research is in the area of geometrical modelling. It is organized into
three categories of projects. The largest is a collaborative effort centered on
a VLSI raycasting engine that should improve dramatically the performance of
solid modelling systems. An NSF-funded team at Duke University will supply
experimental prototypes of the special purpose computer; Cornell will create and
operate appropriate test beds for production automation applications and will
study a range of issues bearing on the integration of the computer into systems
and on new applications and extensions of the technology. A second category of
theory-and-algorithm projects will emphasize research on active-zone algorithms,
spatial sweeping domain extensions and other geometric modelling problems. The
third category of projects is exploratory in character and includes the
management of complexity and modelling support for mechanical design. The
principal investigator is a capable researcher and has done pioneering work in
solid modelling. The funding of this project will make possible the testing of
the raycasting machine designed at Duke University by an expert user, as well as
providing the environment for new research in solid modelling. Approximately
half of the project relates to the testing and evaluating the performance of the
ray- casting machine and is funded by the Experimental Systems Program, Division
of Microelectronic Information Processing Systems (MIPS), and the other half of
the project relates to new work in solid modelling and is funded by the Division
of Design, Manufacturing, and Computer- Integrated Engineering (DMCE).