* 8719931
* The Coastal Effects of Tsunamis:  A Study of Overland Flow  and Its Interaction with Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Fredric Raichlen, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 09/30/1991
* USD 281,163.00

This research program is investigating the coastal effects of tsunamis (seismic
sea waves), including the inundation of coastal areas and the interaction of
overland flows with constructed facilities. Most tsunamis are generated by sea
floor uplift or underwater landslides resulting from an earthquake. Unlike an
earthquake, a tsunami can cause severe damage and loss of life several thousand
miles from the source of the earthquake. For example, Hilo, Hawaii has been
devastated by earthquakes occurring along the Aleutian chain in Alaska, and
along the subduction zone off the Chilean coast. One of the most devastating
tsunamis experienced in Japan resulted from the 1960 Chilean earthquake. The
magnitude (height) of tsunamis at particular locations is difficult to predict,
so that the actual height may be much less than expected. Also, the effect of a
tsunami of known height in causing damage to coastal structures is virtually
unknown. Most of the research undertaken has been for specific sites: little
generic research has been performed although these research topics are basic to
the understanding of the coastal effect of tsunamis. Professor Raichlen is
investigating these subjects both analytically and experimentally. These
pioneering studies are expected to contribute significantly to the understanding
of the coastal effect of tsunamis.