* 8719855
* Study of the Time-to-Degree by Doctorates in Science        and Engineering
* O/D,OPA
* 09/15/1987,05/31/1989
* Alan Fechter, National Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Barbara A. Brooks
* 05/31/1989
* USD 82,200.00

The Office of Scientific and Engineering Personnel (OSEP) of the National
Research Council proposes to undertake a study to identify and explore the key
factors that explain the length of time from the receipt of the baccalaureate to
completion of the research doctorate. Given known demographic trends and the
dramatic increase expected in the number of job openings in the academic sector
in the late 1990s it may be necessary for federal policy makers to find ways to
generate an increase in the supply of new doctorates. One possible way to do
this is by reversing the trend toward longer completion times. Historically,
length of time has differed across doctoral fields and within these fields time-
to-degree has been rising. Yet, little is known about why these differences
arise, how important the trends may be as determinants of doctorate production,
and whether these trends can be altered. A major output of the proposed study is
a time series data base for the period 1967-1986 for each of eleven science and
engineering fields. This data base will be used to test a model to determine the
effects of market forces, demographic and institutional factors, and federal and
other sources of financial aid. They will also provide some insight into the
question of whether the quality of the baccalaureate and doctorate granting
departments of students affects their length of time to completion.