* 8719760
* Collaborative Research: The Origin and Magmatic Development of the Central San Juan Volcanic Field
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* John Stormer, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 06/30/1991
* USD 64,900.00

Eight large volume (100-300 km3) ash-flow tuffs wee erupted from a series of
nested calderas in the central San Juan Volcanic Field during a period of less
than 2 million years during the late Oligocene (26-28M. years). These ash flows
and the intercalated volcanic and shallow plutonic rocks represent a series of
stages in the development of a large silicic magmatic system, perhaps a
batholith, in the crust of this region. Two ash-flow tuffs have been studied in
detail and work on the other units is in progress. It has been possible to
estimate temperature, pressure, and depth, as well as water, oxygen, sulfur, and
halogen fugacities in the developing magmas using analyses of the phenocryst
minerals. Numerical modeling has also been carried out. There appear to be three
major magma types found in this region. The ash-flow tuffs were produced as a
result of giant eruptions of a magnitude not observed in historic times. A
careful study of these large volume volcanic products will enable comparison
with plutonic systems of comperable size. The andesitic magmas apparently are
closely connected both geochemically and thermally with the development of the
silicic ash flows This work will continue the study of these rock units, and
should contribute to the knowledge of explosive volcanic phenomena, geothermal
energy, certain ore deposits and, more generally, processes operating in the
continental crust.