* 8719100
* Multi-Dimensional Computation of Electronic Properties of   Semiconductor Microstructures of High Performance           Heterojunction Devices
* ENG,EET
* 03/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Jean-Pierre Leburton, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* George K. Lea
* 02/29/1992
* USD 400,541.00

It is usual to define the electronic properties of microstructure of solid state
devices in relation to the degree of freedom of mobile charge carriers, i. e.
simple layered structures are referred as 2- dimensional (2D) systems, double
confined structures or quantum wires and quantum balls are defined as 1-D and
0-D systems respectively. In general, these systems are referred to as Ultra-Low
Dimensional Systems (ULDS). Current technology is based on the 2-D systems.
However, advances in high resolution fine line lithography and crystal growth
techniques indicate that microstructure on the scale of quantum wires and balls
may be possible. The potential use of the artificial materials with 1-D or 0-D
microstructures for computer memory and ultra-high device integration is
considerable. Efficient device simulation algorithms are necessary for modeling
the properties of the microstructure and indispensable to the introduction of
this next generation of VLSI technology. This research project addresses the
development of a robust, fast, and flexible algorithm to determine the relevant
physical and microstructure parameters for optimal design and performance of
devices of the Ultra-low Dimensional Systems. A team of young investigators
composed of device physicists, numerical analyst, and computer scientist will be
formed as an interdisciplinary group.