* 8719870
* Norms and the Perception of Events
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Alfred Fregly, Department of Air Force Office of Scientific Research
* Interagency Agreement
* Jasmine Young
* 09/30/1991
* USD 100,000.00

This action provides funds to the Air Force Office of Scientific Research for
NSF's share of this jointly funded research project, the principal investigator
of which is Dr. Daniel Kahneman of the Psychology Department of the University
of California-Berkeley. The research will study (1) the development of
expectations about objects that are observed on repeated occasions, and (2) the
rules that govern the norms and standards to which people compare objects and
events, for example in judging that a duck is large, or that an athlete moves
awkwardly. The research will employ a new experimental paradigm, the mini-event
paradigm. Observers facing a computer or TV screen will be exposed to a series
of mini-events, in which one or two small objects are seen in motion for 5-10
seconds. The same "individual" objects will reappear periodically in a series of
episodes. The behavior of individual objects will not be strictly repetitive,
but each one will show some consistency, allowing observers to form distinct
impressions of each individual object. Observers will rate each event on a scale
of surprise, from "highly surprising" to "completely unsurprising". Following a
series of mini-events, observers will be shown test events, and will compare
each test event to a designated standard, for example "evaluate how fast each
object moves, relative to the speed with which objects of the same color moved
in the first series of events". The surprise measure will provide a direct
measure of the development of expectations, and, in properly designed series of
mini-events, answers to questions such as the following: (i) How quickly do
expectations develop? (ii) What are the long-term effects on expectations of a
single instance of a behavior that is highly unusual for a particular object?
Will a recurrence of that behavior after a long interval be judged relatively
unsurprising? (iii) When one object behaves in a new way, how does this affect
the norms and expectations for the behavior of other objects? The comparative
judgments that will be obtained at the end of the session require the observer
to form a representation of a collection of instances specified by the
experimenter. These judgments are similar to those commonly made in everyday
life, in which people are asked to think about arbitrary categories, for
example, to answer a question about the friendliness of neighbors on the other
side of the street, or about the size of their dogs. The experiments will
explore the rules that determine which instances come to mind when we try to
construct such categories. The experiments will also provide another measure of
spontaneous categorization. The expectation is that observers will be fastest
and most accurate when they are asked to relate a test event to its "natural"
category, the one to which it would have been spontaneously assigned.