* 8719295
* Effects of Trigeminal Damage Upon Somatosensory Thalamus
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1989
* Gary Belford, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 06/30/1989
* USD 67,077.00

Recovery of function after nervous system damage is an issue of considerable
medical and social importance. That the central somatosensory system undergoes
reorganization following damage has been well established. However, the extent
and nature of such "recovery" has been and continues to be the subject of some
controversy. Further, there has been considerable argument regarding the
potential anatomical substrates underlying the functional reorganization that
has been observed after somatosensory system lesions. This research project will
address these issues by examining functional and anatomical reorganization
within a relatively simple central somatosensory structure, the ventral
posteriomedial nucleus (VPM) of the thalamus. Recently the P.I.'s found that
this nucleus undergoes functional reorganization after damage to its chief
input. Normally, neurons in VPM receive their main input from the principal
trigeminal nucleus (PrV) of the brainstem and are responsive to stimulation of 1
or 2 large facial whiskers. However, ablation of the adult PrV markedly alters
the responses of VPM cells. They become sensitive to 6 or more whiskers and
dependent upon input from subnucleus interpolaris (SpVi) of the spinal
trigeminal nucleus. The major objective of the proposed research is to define
the structural substrate underlying this functional reorganization. The
operating hypothesis is that normally one input to a somatosensory structure
plays the most significant role in determining its organizational features
(i.e., somatotopic representation and receptive field properties of individual
cells), but that removal of this input may permit expression of very different
neuronal responses and topography which are attributable to ancillary or
redundant afferents to that nucleus. The P.I.'s also hypothesize that
reorganization in the target structure will differ depending on whether the
major input is removed during the course of development or after its completion.
This research is likely to yield new insights into the plastic capabilities of
the central nervous system in response to damage both in the adult and
developing animal.