* 8719292
* Subjective Versus Objective Perception in Risk-Sensitive    Foraging
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1988,01/01/1990
* Leslie Real, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 01/01/1990
* USD 37,091.00

Decisions often must be made when the outcome of the decision process is not
known but can be specified by some probability of occurring. The analysis of
decision-making under such conditions of uncertainty has become a major focus of
research in animal behavior. The decision process is influenced by two factors:
the benefit to the organism from a particular outcome (say, a certain quantity
of food) and the probability of that outcome. Most research to date has examined
the manner in which organisms assess and weigh benefits, but little attention
has been paid to how organisms assess and construct probabilities. A
considerable amount of empirical evidence suggests that people systematically
make biased estimates of probabilities. We consistently believe that low-
probability events are more likely and high-probability events are less likely
to occur than they actually are. People seem to homogenize probabilities, making
all events seem more equally likely than they actually are. Dr. Real's research
will determine the degree to which animals (in this case, white-footed deer
mice) show the same kind of bias in their assessment of probabilities. Such
systematic bias would have profound consequences for our ability to interpret
experiments on behavior. Dr. Real has developed a means of independently
establishing the organism's subjective perception of probabilities. By allowing
mice to choose over different experimentally derived probabilities, he can
construct the subjective probability that accounts for the pattern of observed
choice behavior. In this way he can partition the dual factors influencing
decision-making. He may also be able to say something about the common cognitive
structures that constrain behavioral choices in humans and animals.