* 8719558
* Control of Gene Expression in the Biosynthesis of           Mitochondrial Ribosomes
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1992
* Thomas Mason, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 05/31/1992
* USD 307,300.00

Eukaryotic cells maintain distinct organellar and cytoplasmic systems of protein
synthesis, and there appears to be very overlap between the gene familes that
specify the components of the two systems. The genes for components of the
organellar translation systems are divided between two genetic systems. For the
mitochondrial translation system of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the rRNAs, tRNAs
and one ribosomal protein are specified by the mitochondrial genome, and over
100 additional proteins are encoded by nuclear genes. Combined molecular
biological and genetic approach is being taken to identify and characterize
nuclear genes in yeast that encode components of the mitochondrial protein
synthetic machinery. These genes are being cloned by immunological screening of
a yeast genomic library constructed in the gtll phage expression vector and by
genetic complementation of temperature-sensitive mutants that are defective in
mitochondrial protein synthesis. The cloned genes, combined with specific
immunological probes, provide the tools to systematically study the structure,
function, and regulation of a unique set of translational components. Studies
thus far have been focussed on three genes, each of which appears to be subject
to different modes of regulation. Of particular interest are two genes that are
regulated posttranscriptionally. A major part of this proposal is devoted to the
critical evaluation of the possibility that these genes are subject to unique
forms of translational control. How different genomes in the same cell
communicate is still a genetic mystery. The results of this study should give
greater insight into that process.