* 8719950
* Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Surface Problems (Materials Research)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1990
* Ivan Schuller, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1990
* USD 17,436.00

This award supports a cooperative research program involving Professor Ivan K.
Schuller of the University of California, San Diego, and Professor Ricardo
Ramirez of the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, in Santiago. The project
involves use of modern computational techniques to study a variety of problems
in the fields of thin film and surface physics, including the epitaxial growth
of different crystal types (face centered cubic (fcc) and body centered cubic
(bcc)), and the energetics and kinetics of hydrogen absorption on the surfaces
of transition metals. The equation of motion of the surface of an epitaxially
growing system will be solved using the computational technique of Molecular
Dynamics (MD). The epitaxial system will consist of a literal model of the top
few atomic layers of a bcc substrate and the related potential distributions,
combined with a model of the growing fcc layers. Particular attention will be
paid to the effect of the starting orientation on the final results. The
hydrogen-surface behavior problem will be approached by setting up a model of a
stable fcc crystal which will be given a surface potential distribution
approximating that of nickel. A single hydrogen atom will then be allowed to
interact with this crystal via a suitably chosen potential and the MD of the
combined system will be analyzed to study diffusion properties, the energy
distributions at subsurface sites, and kinetics. This study represents an
application of computer modeling, in particular the Molecular Dynamics method,
to a class of important problems in condensed matter physics. The simulation of
epitaxial crystal growth could have important implications, for example, in the
production of new semiconductor materials and devices, yet theoretical
approaches to this problem have been sparse. Each of the investigators brings
complementary strength to this research, with experimental and simulation
expertise from the U.S. and theoretical expertise from Chile. Numerical
calculations will be performed in both the U.S. and Chile, with elements of
computer codes developed jointly. The problems to be studied are of considerable
scientific and technological importance, and the simulation results should be
useful as tests for theories and guidelines for future experimentation.