* 8719309
* Differences in Intake Promoting Ability Among Diets
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Israel Ramirez, Monell Chemical Senses Center
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1991
* USD 242,474.00

Animals that are fed different, nutritionally adequate, diets often grow at
different rates. This is commonly attributed to differences in diet palatability
(taste and smell), but there is no evidence substantiating this idea. An
alternative hypothesis is that diets that promote overeating do so by minimizing
the osmotic pressure (pressure exerted by dissolved substances) in the digestive
tract following a meal. Dr. Ramirez will test these explanations in a series of
experiments, most of which focus on the overeating induced by feeding liquid
diets. The relative palatability of several diets will be compared with their
ability to stimulate food intake. In another experiment, the palatability of
liquid and solid diets will be altered by the addition of palatable and
unpalatable flavors. The ability of the flavored diets to alter caloric intake
will then be determined. The role of the pressure exerted by dissolved
substances in the digestive tract will be examined by measuring it in rats that
have ingested either liquid or solid meals. This pressure will also be
manipulated by providing rats with foods that exert different osmotic pressures
and forcing the animals to drink extra water with their meals. Additional
experiments will examine the suggestion that young and mature rats respond
differently to liquid diets. These studies will provide information concerning
the basic mechanisms controlling food intake and how different foods influence
these mechanisms. This in turn may provide practical insights into how to
modulate domestic-animal growth and human appetite.