* 8719784
* Fault-Tolerant Systems Analysis:  Techniques for Model      Generation and Solutions
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1990
* Joanne Dugan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 04/30/1990
* USD 44,936.00

Problems arising during the analysis of fault tolerant systems can be broadly
classified into those relating to model construction and those relating to model
solution. This research is developing new analytical techniques that will aid in
the solution of both types of problems, by investigating the use of two
different modeling languages, fault trees and extended stochastic Petri Nets.
Fault trees have been traditionally used to assess the reliability and failure
modes of life critical systems, but are severely limited in the ability to model
the dynamic behavior intrinsic to fault tolerant systems. The methodology under
development will address this limitation by defining new solution methods that
allow the consideration of such dynamic behavior within the fault tree model.
Thus, a modeler may take advantage of fault trees' concise representation that
eases the model construction task, without experiencing the limitation in
modeling power that is associated with traditional fault tree models. Extended
stochastic Petri net (ESPN) models are able to model behavior that is
intrinsically concurrent, asynchronous and nondeterministic, and thus are also a
valuable model construction tool. An ESPN model can be used to capture the
dynamic behavior that is absent from the fault three model. The behavioral
decomposition technique is then used to combine the models together. Also, the
development of DEEP (the Duke ESPN Evaluation Package) which addresses both the
construction of a valid ESPN model as well as its solution, will enable more
general use of the ESPN modeling language.