* 8719070
* The Stable Isotope and Minor Element Geochemistry of Iron   (III) Oxide Rocks and Minerals
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Crayton Yapp, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1990
* USD 90,158.00

Recent work in this laboratory has shown that the common mineral goethite is an
important new low temperature oxygen isotope geothermometer in combination with
silica, carbonate or phosphate. A potentially important development in these
studies has been the discovery of a CO2 component in natural goethites that
might serve as a quantitative indicator of CO2 partial pressures. The proposed
studies include experiments to calibrate the temperature dependence of the
hematite-water oxygen isotope fractionation, substantiation of the goethite-
water oxygen isotope curve, and further investigation of the CO2 component in
goethite as a possible indicator of ancient P(CO2) values. Additional efforts
will include infrared work to study both the amounts and chemical speciation of
the CO2 in goethite. This knowledge will be applied to Phanerozoic oolitic
hematitic and goethitic ironstones representing ore-grade concentrations of
chemically precipitated, oxidized iron which formed during two extended "pulses"
in the Phanerozoic. These pulses generally coincided with periods of high
eustatic sea level, flooded continents, and rapid rates of sea-floor spreading.
The study should yield information on surface or near-surface temperatures,
water-rock interactions and possibly CO2 partial pressures in the local
environment. More generally, such data could provide insight into plaeoclimate
and possible secular variations in seawater 0-18/0-16 ratios at a time when
there was continental glaciation in the southern hemisphere, thus increasing our
knowledge of conditions during an interval of considerable interest in the
Phanerozoic.