* 8719779
* The Description Implementation and Performance Evaluation ofDiscrete Event Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Pravin Varaiya, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1991
* USD 335,890.00

There is a growing need for new classes of models for systems constructed from
modules of interacting discrete events such as manufacturing systems,
communication networks or computer operating systems. Such models are also
needed for systems described by continuous variables supervised by computer-
based controllers which alter their actions when they are triggered by certain
discrete events. These models are called discrete event models or DEMs. This
proposal introduces a new class of discrete event models called Finitely
Recursive Processes (FRP). These models are motivated by problems in supervisory
control while some of the formal structure is based on Hoare's Communicating
Sequential Processes. PI proposes research in four directions. First,
consolidate and extend the descriptive power of FRPs. This research is
relatively straightforward since his work so far has concentrated on the
descriptive power of FRPs. Second, investigate how FRPs can be used to assist in
the implementation of supervisory control. He proposes to develop a LISP-based
scheme for doing this, Third, extend FRPs so that they can be used for the
performance evaluation of discrete event systems. This will require embedding
FRPs in a real-time environment. For this purpose, he proposes to augment the
fundamental notions of events and processes in FRPs with real-time attributes
following the work of Knuth on attribute grammars. Fourth, develop a supervisory
control for a complex, real-world application.