* 8719894
* Influence of Magma Properties on the Dynamics of Explosive  Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Steven Carey, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 09/30/1990
* USD 118,000.00

Collaborative studies in physical volcanology and experimental petrology on
products of explosive eruptions of El Chichon (1982) and Vesuvius (79 AD) have
elucidated the dependence of eruption processes on magma properties. Variation
in mass eruption rate during the 79 A.D. Vesuvius eruption produced complex
compositional gradients in the erupted products, as two contrasting magmas were
mixed during withdrawal from the chamber. The extent of mixing is closely linked
to mass eruption rate, as proposed on theoretical grounds for compositionally-
stratified reservoirs, and demonstrates that geochemical gradients in volcanic
deposits can only be interpreted in conjunction with information about eruption
dynamics. Modelling of the Vesuvius and El Chichon sequences using
petrologically-inferred intensive parameters has shown that the evolution of
eruptive processes is consistent with current models of eruption column behavior
and that differences between events at the two centers can be attributed to
contrasting volatile contents, crystallinity and viscosity of their respective
magmas. New techniques in physical volcanology have now provided the means to
calculate the intensity (mass eruption rate) of recent and ancient explosive
eruptions. Analysis of the available global data base on intensity and magnitude
(total volume of erupted magma) of explosive eruptions reveals a close
correlation, suggesting a dependence of intensity on magnitude and in turn, on
reservoir size. Eruptions with intensities in excess of 2x10-8 kg/s are
invariably associated with major pyroclastic flow generation and caldera
collapse. A correlation also exists between the runout distance of pyroclastic
flows and the intensity of the preceding plinian phase. The predictive power of
these observations is of great significance to volcanic hazards studies. This
project will continue work in physical volcanology and experimental petrology
and apply the results of previous studies to an investigation of intensity,
magnitude, and magmatic composition of ancient explosive eruptions from the
Cascade Range of the U. S. The study should contribute to an understanding of
eruptive processes, magma evolution and hazards assessment of this region.