* 8720382
* Single Molecule Detection of Fluorescent Probes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Richard Mathies, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 02/28/1991
* USD 55,000.00

This research will focus on the development of a novel and ultrasensitive
apparatus for the detection of fluorescent probes. A detection system will be
constructed that is sensitive enough to observe the fluorescence emitted by
individual fluorophores. The new concept of single molecule counting or gating
will be used to provide the necessary discrimination against Raleigh, Raman and
detector background. To develop this detection system and to demonstrate the
detection of individual fluorescent molecules in solution, the laser excited
fluorescence from fluorophores in a flowing sample system will be studied. In
the second part of this project, two-dimensional laser scanner systems will be
constructed, utilizing this detection system, which will obtain images of the
location of individual fluorophores on substrates such as slides, gels and
films. The concepts of auto and cross correlation of multiple images will be
used to provide further discrimination against spatially random background.
Initial experiments on individual fluorophores and on fluorescent labeled
antibodies or fluorescent beads in thin films will be used to demonstrate the
imaging technique. Feasibility experiments exploring the sensitivity of this new
technique for finding labeled protein or DNA bands on gels or fluorescent
antibody conjugates with bacteria will be performed. The improved analytical
sensitivity that will be provided by this methodology will be particularly
valuable because it will increase the speed and sensitivity with which
immunofluorescence assays and fluorescence-detected DNA sequencing gels can be
performed. Significant future applications may include immunofluorescence
detection of individual cell surface receptors or markers and the location of
DNA probes on chromosomes. The detection of individual cell receptors or markers
by fluorescent labeling will enable investigators of cellular and molecular
processes to understand these processes more accurately. The complex molecular
makeup of cells leads to difficulties identifying a specific molecule separately
from a background of many different molecules. Detection improvement will
benefit many areas of biology such as cell physiology, neurobiology, and
biophysical cytology.