* 8720401
* Pulsed Laser Desorption in Supersonic Beam Spectroscopy/    Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1988,11/30/1991
* David Lubman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Vickie Lewis
* 11/30/1991
* USD 232,440.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfields of laser spectroscopy and mass spectrometry. The thrust of this
experimental activity is the development of new, highly selective methods of
analysis for nonvolatile, thermally labile molecules, primarily biologically
interesting ones. To accomplish this end, neutral molecules are desorbed from
surfaces into the gas phase whereupon they are cooled through supersonic jet
expansion which reduces their internal energy. Once cooled, these molecules
exhibit quite sharp-featured electronic spectra. These sharp features enable the
highly selective application of resonant two-photon ionization techniques which
are used to ionize these molecules for subsequent analysis by time-of-flight
mass spectrometry. This combination of laser desorption, supersonic jet
expansion, resonant two-photon ionization, and mass spectrometry affords a
sensitive, highly selective analytical tool for the qualitative and quantitative
characterization of a broad spectrum of samples. Whereas this hybrid approach
will be primarily focussed on the analysis of biomolecules of pharmaceutical and
clinical interest such as catecholamines, indolamines, and small polypeptides,
the results of this research are can be expected to impact broadly in the
chemical, biological, and materials sciences.