* 8720823
* Paleoenvironmental Analysis of the Yakataga Formation, Gulf of Alaska:  Towards a High-Resolution Neogene Record of     Northern Hemisphere Glacial and Climate History
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Martin Lagoe, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1990
* USD 92,822.00

This award is part of a joint research program between the University of Texas
at Austin and the University of Toronto. The overall objective of the research
is a detailed record of the physical sedimentology and micropaleontology of the
Yakataga Formation, Gulf of Alaska which can provide a high-resolution record of
late Cenozoic glacial and climatic history for the northern hemisphere. In
addition it provides the opportunity to improve facies models of glacially
influence continental margin sedimentation. This award is to support the
paleonenvironmental analysis of the Yakataga Formation as based on the analysis
of foraminiferal biofacies. The proposed research will analyze samples from
detailed measured and logged sections in the Gulf of Alaska Tertiary Province.
This analysis will provide insights into climate history, paleobathymetry,
chronostratigraphy and water mass structure of the Gulf of Alaska during the
deposition of the glaciomarine Yakataga Formation. This paleoenvironmental
information will be combined with detailed lithofacies analyses to produce a
high-resolution record (on the order of 10 Ka) of late Miocene to Holocene
glacial history for the Gulf of Alaska. This record can then be compared with
detailed studies of coeval sections in the North Atlantic/Canadian Arctic to
document the differential histories of these two areas during the late Cenozoic.
The identified research is particularly timely given the proposed ODP drilling
in the north Pacific during ca. 1990.