* 8720157
* Regulation of Neural Specific Gene Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Ellen Berkowitz, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* None
* 02/29/1992
* USD 178,800.00

The beta-tubulin multigene family is regulated during rat brain development as
manifested by differential expression of at least three different genes.
Hybridization of 3'-untranslated region subclones of different beta-tubulin
cDNAs reveals that expression of two of these cDNAs is neural specific. RBT.1 is
expressed abundantly during early postnatal brain development. RBT.2 corresponds
to a mRNA which is prevalent between 7-15 days postnatal. A ubiquitous beta-
tubulin gene is expressed throughout development and in all tissues. Preliminary
studies in Dr. Berkowitz's laboratory have shown that this multigene family is
composed of 12-14 unique EcoRI DNA fragments. Each cDNA subclone hybridizes to a
subset of sequences within the family. At least one sequence within each subset
is DNAase I sensitive and is, therefore, tentatively identified as a
transcriptionally active gene. Dr. Berkowitz has isolated a genomic clone
corresponding to RBT.2 . Nuclease studies in her laboratory indicate that this
clone represents the transcriptionally active RBT.2 rather than its
transcriptionally inert pseudogene. Dr. Berkowitz now intends to evaluate
factors regulating the expression of this neural specific RBT.2 gene in rat
cerebellar cortex and proposes the following experiments: the genomic clone for
the pseudogene (and, if necessary, additional RBT.2 clones) will be isolated,
subcloned, and sequenced. Using these subclones, an analysis of potential
regulatory mechanisms will be performed, including mapping of hypersensitive
sites, studying nucleosome distribution, and identifying nuclear regulatory
factors. Additional studies on RBT.2 transcription and in situ hybridization
will allow Dr. Berkowitz to identify factors involved in modulation of RBT.2
expression during postnatal cerebellar development.