* 8720800
* The Political Economy of International Debt
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Kenneth Rogoff, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 11/30/1990
* USD 69,124.00

The lack of a supranational legal authority places important limitations on the
integration of world capital markets. The ongoing negotiations over debt
rescheduling between major Latin American debtors and their Western bank
creditors illustrate the kind of problems which can arise. Recently, there has
been considerable progress in understanding the economics of debt-restructuring
negotiations, and the first part of this project builds on that research. The
work will involve bargaining-theoretic approaches to analyzing implicit
sovereign debt-contracts. There will also be work attempting to compare
different assessments of the possible costs to a country of repudiating its
debt. Another part of the project involves developing a two-country, general-
equilibrium model of the bargaining over gains from trade in both goods and
financial assets. The analysis represents an attempt to provide a fully
specified model of country risk. The last part of this project deals with
exploring how electoral pressures within debtor countries can cause a cyclical,
over valuation of the real exchange rate, and over accumulation of foreign debt.
The starting point will be a recently developed framework for analyzing
political budget cycles. This research is important because it will provide a
better understanding of the economic relations between debtor and creditor
trading partners.