* 8720704
* Numerical Models for Melt Segregation
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1990
* Frank Richter, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 08/31/1990
* USD 116,503.00

This project addresses physical processes associated with melting and melt
segregation in the mantle, and how these processes affect the geochemical
properties of erupted lavas. It is a natural extension of earlier work on mantle
convection in that there is a wealth of geochemical data with which to constrain
and test various aspects of mantle dynamics, but in order to effectively use
this data one must first understand how melts relate to their mantle source both
physically and chemically. A two-dimensional finite element numerical code will
be used to study a hierarchy of two-phase flow models involving melting and melt
segregation: (i) Melt segregation and trace element fractionation from a
chemically uniform source with spatially variable degree of melting. The purpose
is to illustrate and understand the complexity, including time dependence, of
the trace element concentrations in the "melts" segregating from such a source.
(ii) Melt segregation and mixing from a source having heterogeneity in both
chemistry and degree of melting. This model will be applied to the time
dependent geochemical properties of lavas from Hawaii and also as a framework
for modeling melt segregation for a source with ubiquitous heterogeneities, as
seems to be required by the geochemistry of near-ridge seamounts. (iii) Models
for melting and melt migration under midocean ridges. This type of model will be
used to study the implications of crustal thickness and major element chemistry
being quite insensitive to spreading rate while the variability of trace element
ratios and isotopic ratios is related to the rate of spreading. The questions of
how much melt erupts as opposed to underplating the otherwise depleted
lithosphere is also considered.