* 8720345
* The Economics of Self-Selection
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* John Riley, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 06/30/1991
* USD 77,628.00

Over the last ten years there have been very significant advances in both the
theory of noncooperative games and in the application of the theory to explain
economic phenomena. The primary goal of this proposal is to develop better
theoretical insights into the role of institutions when individuals have
different information. An important subclass of institutional arrangements deal
with one.sided competition. In such "contests" agents compete with each other
for some form of invisible reward. This may take the form of a race for some
patentable process, bidding for a contract or spending by interest groups in the
pursuit of a political payoff. The first part of the research is concerned with
the development of a more basic model of this last activity. The objective is to
enhance our understanding of the relationship between the value of the political
prize (such as a franchise or tariff barrier) and the resources that agents are
willing to spend in pursuit of this prize. The second part of the project
involves extending the theory of auctions, in particular, further exploring the
properties of the common sealed high bid and open ascending bid auctions. The
final part of the research is to investigate the basic model of two.sided
competition with private information. To reveal private information, individuals
can undertake costly signalling activity. The goal of the project is to shed
light on the equilibrium of choice signals. There is now a considerable body of
research formally characterizing a "competitive" equilibrium in which
differences in product quality are only learned because sellers undertake some
activity which signals such differences. A difficult theoretical problem,
however, remains to be resolved when it is that the buyers must move first.