* 8720538
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on DNA Sequence Effects on  Open Complex Formation by RNA Polymerase
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1991
* M. Thomas Record, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1991
* USD 14,974.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. M. Thomas Record, Department of
Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, to pursue with Dr. Jung-Hye Roe, Department
of Microbiology, Seoul National University, for a period of 24 months, a program
of cooperative research on DNA sequence effects on open complex formation by RNA
polymerase. The effect of sequence variations near the transcriptional start
site on the rate of formation and dissociation of the open complex will be
studied. The three-step mechanism of open-complex formation, proposed by the
collaborators in previous research, will be examined in an attempt to identify
intermediate steps. In particular, the effects of sequence variations on the
rates of association and dissociation under various solution conditions will be
studied. In prokaryotes the extent and the timing of gene expression is
regulated primarily at the level of transcription initiation. Transcriptional
control requires the interaction of specific proteins with specific sites on
DNA. In the present research, site-specific mutagenesis of E. coli DNA will be
employed to study the effect of the _ ____ introduction of variant promoters on
the rates of formation and dissociation of open complexes of RNA polymerase
under different conditions of temperature, concentrations of cations and anions,
etc. Drs. Record and Roe are highly respected scientists who have successfully
collaborated previously in this field of research. This project is relevant to
the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and
engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.