* 8720654
* Gravity Study of the Rennick Graben and the Campbell Block  in Northern Victoria Land, and the Relation of the Rennick  Structure to Rifting Processes in the Ross Sea
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Juergen Kienle, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Campbell
* 12/31/1990
* USD 129,814.00

Northern Victoria Land offers the widest cross section of the Transantarctic
Mountains, a major mountain range that separates East and West Antarctica and
appears to be produced by extension and rift shoulder uplift rather than by
compression. An important graben structure, the Rennick Graben, in Northern
Victoria land may be an extension of the Terror Rift in the Ross Sea. Virtually
no land-based geophysical data exist for this important region. This
investigation will acquire and interpret gravity data over the Rennick Graben
structure and the Campbell Block, an apparently unbroken piece of continental
crust that separates the Rennick structure from the Terror Rift. The goals of
this work are to define the Rennick structure gravimetrically, to trace the
structure southward across the Campbell Block toward the Terror Rift, and to
study the isostatic compensation mechanism for the Rennick structure. This will
be a cooperative project with the Bundesanstalt fur Geowissenschaften, Federal
Republic of Germany, which will provide the logistics for this work during the
German Antarctic Northern Victoria Land Expedition (GANOVEX V) in the 1988/1989
field season. The Principal Investigator has been invited to lead the gravity
study as an invited U.S. participant of GANOVEX V. The gravity data would be
integrated with other geological, structural, magnetic and seismic refraction
studies of the GANOVEX V expedition in terms of the larger Transantarctic
Mountain problem and the nature of the mantle anomaly that might be the
underlying cause of the Transantarctic Rift System.