* 8720741
* Collective Choice and Producer Cartels
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1990
* Stephen Salant, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 04/30/1990
* USD 44,833.00

Agricultural marketing boards, producer cartels, international commodity
organizations, and prorationing boards typically restrict output based on a
committee decision. The decision is generally the result of a vote. The behavior
of such organizations obviously has important economic consequences.
Nonetheless, the voting aspect of the decision making has previously received no
attention from the economics profession.The purpose of this investigation is to
develop models which will permit a better understanding of the decisions such
organizations will make. In their prior research the investigators developed a
number of propositions concerning agricultural marketing boards. The same
propositions were then shown to hold for producer cartels provided members
differed only in size or capacity, not cost. In this research the investigators
reexamine the propositions when members may also differ in their costs. While
some of the earlier propositions remain true (even if their proofs must be
revised to incorporate new assumptions), several propositions are no longer
valid. For example, if cartel members differ only in size, the quota selected
will result in a lower price than the quota which maximizes profits. That is,
the aspect of marketing boards which is typically neglected makes them more
competitive than is commonly supposed. However, if cartel members have different
costs, it turns out that the result may be reversed: the quota voted for may be
even tighter than the quota which maximizes joint profits. The methodology of
this project is straight forward. The profits which each voter would receive in
the economic game which follows selection of any given quota are first deduced.
These "induced preferences "(equilibrium profits to each voter as a function of
the scalar quota) are then used to examine the equilibrium in the prior voting
game. The result is a joint political/economic equilibrium. Given exogenous data
on costs, demand, capacity, the voting rules, and the composition of the
committee, the model can be used to predict how each committee member will vote,
what quota will be selected, and what economic consequences will follow. From
the view point of economics, this research is valuable because it addresses an
important but overlooked aspect of volume restricting organizations. From the
viewpoint of voting theory in political science, the research is valuable and
important because a natural sufficiency condition for the existence of a
Condorcet point is proved which does not involve single peakedness of the
induced preferences. Finally, from a policy point of view the research leads to
revised assessments of the welfare losses from cartels and marketing boards.
Moreover, the model clarifies how political interventions can have economic
effects. Changes in the composition of the committee, the weights attached to
their votes, and other exogenous political factors induce economic consequences.