* 8720761
* Specification and Estimation of Technologies
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1990
* Robert Pollak, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 08/31/1990
* USD 27,000.00

This project examines three topics in production analysis. These are: returns-
to-scale and technical progress, the effects of imposing regularity conditions,
and direct estimation of production functions from data on inputs and output.
Empirical estimation of the returns-to-scale and changes in technical
proficiency have long been central questions in the analysis of production. Past
work has typically specified constant returns and technical progress due to the
inherent econometric tractability. This project extends that work by
incorporating production functions which are non-homothetic in returns and
technology, and are more realistic, general, and flexible. Investigation of the
imposition of regularity conditions at every point in the sample data addresses
an important but often neglected issue in empirical production analysis. The
theory underlying the economics of production assumes that the conditions of
monotonicity and convexity apply to every combination of inputs and output.
Empirical data often do not meet those conditions, and this project
systematically examines the effects of violating the regularity assumptions. The
comparison of direct estimation of production functions with the indirect method
makes a fundamental contribution in empirical econometrics. Estimating functions
directly has the advantage of not requiring data on factor prices nor does it
assume cost minimization. Estimating input demand systems with factor price data
is often econometrically intractable. This project addresses some important
problems in the economic analysis of production. Economic theory in regard to
production is quite well developed; indeed analyzing the interaction of
production and consumption has been a fundamental endeavor for many years. From
an empirical standpoint, however, the analytical techniques are much less
straightforward. Transferring the conditions imposed by economic theory into
empirical econometric analysis has proven to be quite difficult, and often
restricting assumptions about the data must be made to render empirical analysis
tractable. These distinctions between the theoretical models and the more
tractable but simpler empirical models are very important in that most decisions
made by production managers and policy makers are based on empirical analysis.
This work promises to provide insight into the importance of some often-used
empirical assumptions. By using various empirical specifications this project
examines the effects of some fundamental assumptions in production theory. These
are: 1) returns-to-scale, which is the manner in which product output changes
with respect to changes in inputs. Of particular importance is the assumption
that output will expand or contract in exact proportion to changes in input, 2)
regularity conditions, which imply that the theoretical properties of the
production function are met by all sample data values, 3) direct versus indirect
specification of the production function, the former specification incorporating
data on input and output quantities, the latter using only data on the prices of
inputs.