* 8720745
* Language, Scientific Change, and Shifting Modes of Discourse
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1988,07/31/1989
* James Bono, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 07/31/1989
* USD 25,000.00

Thomas Kuhn, in his famous Structure of Scientific Revolutions, argued that the
essential learning that goes on in science and that underlies scientific change
is perceptual and precedes interpretation. Dr. Bono argues that interpretation
of perception is critical as well, and one cannot understand interpretation
unless one recognizes the crucial ties of individual scientists to larger
communities of discourse and belief. These ties may be cultural, religious,
social or of some other sort; but they are reflected in the scientist's
attitudes toward and use of language in the description and interpretation of
these perceptions. This theory, if correct, more clearly shows how so-called
external factors like culture and religion directly affect the development of
science. If successful, therefore, this study promises to have a very
significant impact on the history and philosophy of science. Like Kuhn, Dr. Bono
is turning to the paradigm case of scientific change, the Scientific Revolution
of the 16th and 17th centuries, to see how changes in language and discourse
affected science. He seeks to relate changes in scientific thought from about
1500 to 1670 to the emergence of new assumptions and practices for interpreting
language, texts, and nature. These new principles of language emerged, Dr. Bono
argues, in response to new understandings of the relationship between the "Word
of God" and the "Languages of Man" fostered by Renaissance Humanism,
Neoplatonism and magic, and both the reformed and radical religions of
Protestantism. In other words, he argues that the new humanistic studies of the
Renaissance and new challenges to the doctrinal views of the Church in the
Reformation radically altered the attitudes of educated laymen towards the
status of language. The received writings from the ancients could no longer be
considered absolute but rather are contingent and must be compared to one's own
observation. It was this attitude which fostered the Scientific Revolution. In
order to demonstrate the relationship between science and changes in modes of
discourse and interpretation, Dr. Bono will try 1) to situate these new
"theories" of language within their wider cultural and religious setting; 2) to
show the consequences of specific assumptions about the nature of language for
the methodologies and ideas of scientists and physicians; and 3) to suggest how
assumptions about language link practioners of early modern science to non-
scientific communities and their discourses.