* 8720429
* Myosin Phosphorylation and Neurotransmitter Secretion
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Primal de Lanerolle, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 10/31/1991
* USD 178,336.00

Transmitter release and other secretory processes have been compared to muscle
contraction in that both processes are regulated by Ca2+ and depend upon
metabolic energy. Although secretion was thought initially to resemble the
contraction of skeletal muscle, recent experiments suggest that it may more
closely resemble smooth muscle contraction. Ca2+ is known to regulate smooth
muscle contraction through the activation of the Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent
enzyme myosin light chain kinase. The active enzyme phosphorylates smooth muscle
myosin, which results in a stimulation of the rate of ATP hydrolysis by actin
and myosin. In this study, knowledge of smooth muscle contraction will be used
as a basis to investigate the role of myosin phosphorylation in catecholamine
secretion. The studies will be performed on PC12 rat pheochromocytoma cells and
on bovine chromaffin cells. Myosin and myosin light chain kinase will be
purified from chromaffin cells, and the sites on myosin that are phosphorylated
by myosin light chain kinase and by protein kinase C will be identified.
Polyclonal antibodies against purified chromaffin cell myosin and myosin light
chain kinase will be raised and used in the following experiments: (1)
Antibodies will be used to correlate quantitatively myosin phosphorylation in
intact chromaffin cells with intracellular Ca2+ and with catecholamine secretion
in response to a variety of secretagogues; (2) They will be used to study the
sites on myosin that are phosphorylated in order to identify the kinases that
phosphorylate myosin in intact chromaffin cells; (3) Anti- myosin and anti-
myosin light chain kinase antibodies will be electroinjected into chromaffin
cells to study the effects of these antibodies on catecholamine secretion. These
experiments are designed to elucidate the role of site-specific myosin
phosphorylation in the regulation of neurotransmitter secretion. Moreover, by
simultaneously studying myosin phosphorylation, cell calcium and secretion,
these studies will provide important information on the physiology, pharmacology
and biochemistry of transmitter release.