* 8720314
* Finite Element Studies of the Nonlinear Behavior of Soft    Hydrated Tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 09/30/1988,08/31/1990
* Mark Shephard, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1990
* USD 175,000.00

This research deals with two important problems in computational engineering;
error estimation and adaptive grid control. In particular, the following areas
will be considered: Evaluate alternate hybrid/mixed finite element formulations
for the linear biphasic theory. Develop a two-dimensional triangular
axisymmetric elements for the linear biphasic weighted residual/penalty finite
element analysis and integrate this using the finite quadtree automatic mesh
generator with remeshing capabilities. Develop adaptive analysis capability for
two-dimensional problems based on initial error estimators and error indicators.
Evaluate the solution algorithm for selected axisymmetric problems and perform
error analysis for the linear biphasic theory. Develop a nonlinear biphasic
analysis including strain dependent permeability for axisymmetric problems. The
soft hydrated tissue is the biphasic medium where the algorithm will be tested.
This type of modelling will allow researchers to investigate physiologically
realistic loading and geometries in biomechanics of joints. One of the principal
investigators has been collaborating with the Orthopedic Research Laboratory at
Columbia University to delineate the lubrication mechanisms in synovial joints,
this computational effort will complement very nicely the biomechanics research.