* 8720651
* Time and Tectonism in the Late Jurassic and Early           Cretaceous:  Evidence from the Morrison and Cedar Mountain  Formations
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1988,03/31/1991
* Bart Kowallis, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 03/31/1991
* USD 62,000.00

The Morrison and Cedar Mountain Formations in the Colorado Plateau are key
units in understanding Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous tectonism in western
North America. In addition, these units contain a rich fossil record of Mesozoic
dinosaurs from numerous quarry sites in several states. The ages and time-
correlation of these formations are, however, still poorly understood. This
creates problems in understanding regional tectonics and in determining the
evolutionary trends of the dinosaurs. A threefold approach is proposed to
resolve these problems: 1) develop better techniques for regional correlation
using volcanic ashes (which are quite common in many stratigraphic sections
worldwide); 2) obtain new isotopic ages to resolve the problems of time and
correlation of the dinosaur-bearing strata; and 3) use the correlated ashes and
ages to determine the relationships between sedimentation, subsidence, and
tectonics for this period of time in the western United States. Samples will be
collected of ash beds for dating from sections both along and across the basin
in which these sediments were deposited. Fission track 40/39 Ar laser probe
techniques on single grains will be employed to avoid detrital contamination and
obtain realistic ages. Attempts will be made to correlate ash layers from one
section to another by examining zircon morphologies, inclusions, and uranium
distributions within the zircons, as well as by examining the trace element
chemistry of the ashes, mineralogy of the ashes, and any other distinguishing
feature we can find for each ash layer. Three of the sections to be studied are
located near dinosaur quarries so that the ages obtained can be used to resolve
long-standing controversies about the age of the fossils and the relationships
with other sections in western North America.