* 8720394
* Finite Rotations and Finite Elements of Thin Elastic Shells
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1991
* Laurence Jacobs, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 11/30/1991
* USD 108,084.00

The proposed investigation includes theoretical and computational studies. The
underlying concept was presented earlier by the author. The idea stems from the
geometrical nature of the deformations which often occur in thin shells, plates,
arches and beams; these deformations are usually characterized by small strains
but often accompanied by finite rotations. These features have far-reaching
consequences in the contemporary procedures for approximating such structures by
the method of finite elements. Since the strains are small, relative rotations
are small within elements. Consequently, one can describe the deformations of
the individual element by linear equations and, if the material is hookean, the
entire description of the element is given by linear equations. Then the
occurrence of finite rotations and the associated nonlinearities can be
introduced in the formation of the global matrix. The foregoing observations
suggest practical advantages in the application and formulation of the models
which are used to describe the thin structures and to predict their response.
However, many questions remain unanswered, questions about the accuracy of such
formulation, applicability of convergence criteria, and practical advantages and
disadvantages of such procedures. The purpose of the proposal is to seek the
answers by scrutinizing the theoretical bases, the alternative functionals,
stationary and/or extremal criteria. Recent formulations of the complementary
functionals provide means to that end. Computational programs for numerical and
symbolic investigations are other means for exploring and for testing the
practicality of the results.