* 8720082
* Center for Insect Science
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1988,05/31/1994
* John Law, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 05/31/1994
* USD 1,810,520.00

Dr. John Law and his colleagues at the University of Arizona will establish a
Biological Research Center for Insect Science (CIS). The CIS will aim research
at 1) discovering new aspects of insect biology that will aid in the design of
biorational methods for controlling insects; 2) development of model systems
using insects that will yield fundamental knowledge useful in the study of
mammalian systems; and 3) searching for new useful products and processes from
insects. Programs will include research, training, education and outreach, with
a strong emphasis on molecularly-oriented interdisciplinary research. The CIS
will sponsor meetings and symposia in insect science, and have strong
international linkages. An industrial associates program will facilitate
technology transfer. Individual projects will include research on insect:
cuticle structure and function, digestion and nutrition, proteins and hormones,
endocrine systems, reproductive systems and central nervous systems. Other
studies will focus on molecular, sensory, behavioral and ecological factors in
insect-plant interactions; insect communication and behavior; insecticide
action; caste differentiation in social insects; and insect population biology,
systematics and evolution. Through the results of its research and training
programs, the CIS should have a worldwide impact on fundamental and applied
biology. Insects share co-dominance of the biosphere with humans. The
relationship ranges from competitive to cooperative, as they compete for
resources, carry disease, pollinate plants, and process organic wastes. The
importance of understanding insect biology was brought out as some chemical
pesticides were abandoned for social and environmental concerns, and as the
effectiveness of others decreased when resistant strains developed. In fact,
much of our knowledge of insects derives from studies of one organism, the
common fruit fly Drosophila, which has been exploited for decades in the study
of genetics and animal development. The remarkable new experimental tools
provided by recent advances in biochemistry and molecular biology now allow new
approaches to the study of fundamental aspects of the biology of many other
insects. Besides contributing to the development of new agents and strategies
for pest control, such studies should provide a wealth of information on
genetics, social behavior, animal development, and nervous system function. To
this end, the CIS will provide multidisciplinary research and education programs
on insect science. This center will be built on a strong base of existing
faculty and will coordinate with an existing Biotechnology Center to expand
collaborative efforts in basic research, to train present and future scientists,
and, in collaboration with industry, to probe the potential uses of insects in
applied research.