* 8720456
* Vitamin Quackery: A History of Science in the               Marketplace
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1990
* Rima Apple, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 04/30/1990
* USD 25,000.00

Increasingly in the 20th century, science has assumed the role of a kind of
great legitimator. Advertisers note that a panel of scientists (or doctors)
recommend product x. Science is used to determine acceptable levels of toxins,
minimal levels of nutrients, safety standards in buildings to cite just a few
examples. This use of science assumes that a uniform agreement among scientists
exists. Yet scientists are frequently not univocal in their positions, and to
assume that it must be is a grave misunderstanding of the scientific process.
One need look only at the current controversy among scientists on the
feasibility of SDI to see how science may lead to fiercely held, yet differing
public policy decisions. Such disagreement among scientists led to the
termination of the science advisory apparatus during the Nixon administration
because of disagreements over the SST supersonic transport. It is important to
examine the role of science as a legitimator in our culture and to see how
interested parties use science to attack and to defend against charges. Dr.
Apple is examining just this question in the context of promotion of vitamins,
one of the most heavily advertized products in our contemporary world. From the
earliest years of vitamin research in the 1910's, these mysterious and elusive
food elements captured the attention of the public and spurred the development
of the vitamin industry. In 1933, the total retail value of vitamins sold in
drug stores amounted to about $500,000; by 1937, this figure had grown to
$41,800,000. Sales of nutritional supplements could exceed $10- billion by 1990.
A part of this growth has included nutrition quackery. Enthusiasts who embraced
and at times even created their own vitamins flourished. Through their
promotions, nutrition faddists and frauds helped popularize the discoveries of
scientific research, affecting the public's perceptions of good nutrition while
creating a demand for their products. Dr. Apple will use data on such products
and an estimate of the level of popular knowledge about vitamin research drawn
from contemporary publications. This information will be integrated with
information from the Federal Trade Commission and archival material from the
Food and Drug Administration and the American Medical Association. This study of
the claims and products of vitamin research and vitamin quackery will document
the use of science in the marketplace and help to clarify the complex and
shifting relationships between science and commerce in a rapidly changing
society.