* 8720931
* Collaborative Research on Continuing Research on            Establishment-Level Employment and Wage Dynamics in U.S.    Manufacturing Industries
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1988,08/31/1993
* John Haltiwanger, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1993
* USD 246,094.00

The birth, growth, decline, and death of business establishments is a prominent,
pervasive feature of market economies. The specialization of labor resources is
another prominent feature of market economies. Taken together, these two
observations point to the importance of the continuous reallocation of labor.
Despite these features of market economies, the role of establishment-labor
demand disturbances in the secular and cyclical behavior of the labor market
remains unexplored. In this regard, one key issue is whether fluctuations in
intrasectoral labor reallocation driven by establishment-level labor demand
disturbances explain large movements in sectoral and aggregate unemployment
rates. A second key issue is whether the concentration of employment losses
across establishments within a declining sector plays an important role in the
behavior of unemployment. The purpose of this project is to investigate these
two key issues by combining unemployment data from the Current Population Survey
with the newly-created Longitudinal Establishment Datafile (LED) for
manufacturing industries. The LED file provides longitudinal data for individual
establishments in U.S. manufacturing industries from 1972 to 1983, a period that
encompasses three recessions, two major oil price shocks, dramatic shifts in the
labor force shares and employment levels of many manufacturing industries, and
dramatic movements in unemployment rates. The matched data set well provide
researchers investigating a variety of questions about market behavior.