* 8720377
* A Study of the Abundance of the Atmospheric O2 Mole Fractionin Relationship to the Carbon Cycle and Air-Sea Exchange
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1988,04/30/1990
* Ralph Keeling, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 04/30/1990
* USD 149,943.00

There is scarcely a subject in biogeochemistry which is more fundamental, yet
so poorly understood, as the variability in atmospheric oxygen. Oxygen is an
essential element to global life cycles and is consumed by fossil fuel-burning
and deforestation; yet the changes in the atmospheric oxygen concentration which
must reflect these processes have never been detected. The difficulty is simply
that the appropriate technology has not been available for measuring the
expected variations in oxygen against the large oxygen background of air. Direct
measurements of changes in oxygen would substantially improve the framework for
studying the global carbon cycle and the perturbations due to human activities.
Specifically, measuring the presumed long term rate of decline in oxygen would
provide a basis for establishing the net annual global oxidation from which one
could construct accurate figures for the net sources and sinks of carbon from
fossil fuel burning and biospheric oxidation. This would provide objective
constraints on models of oceanic carbon dioxide uptake which are needed to
forecast future carbon dioxide levels and future climate. It would also provide
a better basis for understanding whether today's elevated carbon dioxide levels
are stimulating global net primary production. This project is designed to
investigate the atmospheric oxygen and carbon dioxide fraction in air samples
gathered from a series of stations around the world. The purpose of those
measurements is to correlate seasonal, latitudinal and secular trends in
atmospheric carbon dioxide with variations in oxygen. These data will provide
insights into changes in global biomass, and in ocean and land biological
productivities. Air samples will be taken in glass flasks and oxygen mole
fraction will be referenced to compressed air standards using a recently
developed interferometric oxygen analyzer. The measurements will be accompanied
by systematic studies of oxygen stability in glass flasks and high pressure
cylinders. Other work will include a laboratory feasibility study of obtaining
cryogenically extracted air samples from the stratosphere for oxygen analysis,
which would be of interest for determining recent oxygen depletion.