* 8720907
* Workshop on Features in Design and Manufacturing;           Los Angeles, California; February 1988
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/15/1987,09/30/1988
* George Stiny, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Clifton Leach
* 09/30/1988
* USD 46,863.00

This workshop will address the issue of features in design and manufacturing.
Features can be given to describe physical and functional aspects of designs or
can be extracted from designs to describe manufacturing processes. The
relationships among features, designs, and manufacturing will be described from
several points of view including 1) design generation, 2) product models, 3)
design databases, representation and display, 4) design analysis, 5)
manufacturing, and 6) process planning and assembly. The workshop will focus on
problems concerning the identification of features, their rigorous formal
characterization, and the application of these descriptions in computational
approaches to design and manufacturing. Current questions concerning the role
features play in the automation of design and manufacturing will be address and
directions for future research will be outlined. The workshop is especially
timely owing to a growing number of formal results in areas such as solid
modelling, databases, and grammatical techniques that suggest that design and
manufacturing can be approached computationally. It is felt that the goal of
automated design and manufacturing will be significantly advanced by bringing
together researchers with a formal point of view from different design and
manufacturing areas to share ideas. The workshop is planned for early 1988 at
the University of California Los Angeles.