* 8720414
* Regional Conference on the Role of Scientific and           Engineering Societies in Caribbean Development; San Juan,   Puerto Rico; December, 1987
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1987,11/30/1988
* James Rowe, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1988
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides partial support for a conference addressing the roles that
science and engineering societies in the Caribbean could play in improving the
application of S &amp; T to development needs in the region. The conference has
been organized jointly by the Center for Energy and Environment Research of the
University of Puerto Rico, the Caribbean Association of Universities and
Research Institutes, and other regional organizations, together with the Western
Hemisphere office of the AAAS. It is modeled after similar conferences held in
Africa and India in the past few years and builds on a worldwide United Nations
conference on the same subject held in 1983. The agenda is generally organized
to focus discussion on the status of the societies in the islands, ways in which
they could be strengthened, and ways in which they could assist their members to
apply their capabilities to the problems of development. Working Groups have
prepared action recommendations for the conference in the areas of
communication, education and natural resources. No single Caribbean nation has
the critical mass of scientists in all the fields necessary to address their
many technical development needs effectively. The small size of these countries
precludes their ever achieving such a critical mass. Strengthening communication
and concrete collaboration among the scientific communities of the islands,
including Puerto Rico, will strengthen their capabilities and infrastructure.
They will become better able to carry out relevant research and also better able
to collaborate effectively with the U.S. and other industrialed countries. This
conference is well designed to explore concrete ways to channel and link the
abilities of local scientists through regional networks.