* 8720472
* Ancient Earth-Sun-Moon Dynamics and Plate Movement          Information Preserved in Stromatolites
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1991
* James Vanyo, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 08/31/1991
* USD 118,549.00

Recent research as formulated a preliminary procedure, based on heliotropism in
Australian (Bitter Springs) columnar stromatolites, that has an exciting
potential for deducing ancient Earth-Sun-Moon dynamics and plate movements over
most of the Earth's existence. The heliotropic model is supported by
observations of heliotropism in present day stromatolites forming in the hot
springs at Yellowstone National Parks and in Shark Bay, Western Australia. There
is considerable evidence that stromatolite laminae (ancient and present) often
represent day- night sequences, which combined with observed sinusoidal columnar
growth patterns due to changing seasonal solar inclination (annual) provides
information of days per year, lunar distance, obliquity of the ecliptic, etc.
Preservation of the paleomagnetic field combined with the spin-axis north-south
direction of the heliotropically inclined columns provides information on
magnetic pole and continental plate locations and orientations. Useful
paleomagnetic fields have been observed in random selection of stromatolite
columns of various minerals and ages. Research objectives for the first year's
effort are: 1) conduct a literature and letter search to formalize locations and
geological ages of useful columnar stromatolites on each continent, 2) collect
specimens from a second site known to have columnar stromatolites with probably
utility (Tindir region, east-central Alaska), 3) perform laboratory analyses of
existing specimens from central Australia and specimens from the Tindir region
in Alaska, 4) monitor stromatolitic growth at Yellowstone as a function of
environmental factors. The second year will include analytical modeling of
geophysical parameters using stromatolitic evidence.