* 8720754
* Effects of Physical Properties Mechanical State on the      Deformation of Porous Sediments
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Daniel Karig, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 04/30/1991
* USD 140,000.00

The mechanical behavior of porous sediments is important for the understanding
of deformation in accretionary prisms, subsiding and spreading basins, and other
settings in which "soft" sediments are subjected to tectonic or gravitational
stresses. Unfortunately the relationships among physical properties, mechanical
state, and structural fabric for these sediments are very poorly known, which
has impeded the development of quantitative geomechanical models. A series of
mechanical tests have been made moderately porous (20-40%) silty clays (both
natural and artificially consolidated) that will allow us to correlate the
physical properties and mechanical state of these sediments with the structural
fabrics produced during deformation. We investigated strength surface for
laboratory consolidated sediments, as depicted in a 3-dimensional space of
effective mean stress, differential stress, and void ratio, at mean stresses
typical of geologic conditions in accretionary prisms. For natural sediments
from basinal sequences we measured in-situ strength and analyze the failure
fabrics produced during bedding parallel shortening. For the study of naturally
deformed sediments we have several samples from DSDP sites in the Nankai
accretionary prism. Structural fabric analyses included optical microscopy for
measurement of the overall and internal geometries of the failure zones,
microprobe studies for porosity variations, and x-ray pole figure goniometry for
fabric anisotropy and strain.