* 8720039
* A National Workshop on Seismogenesis in the Eastern United  States, held April 12-13, 1988, at the Illini Union of the  the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1989
* Wang-Ping Chen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Brooking
* 07/31/1989
* USD 30,000.00

This proposal seeks support to convene a national workshop on the origin of
destructive earthquakes in the eastern United States. The conference will
emphasize the discussion on several fundamental aspects regarding the tectonic
origin of intracontinental earthquakes, and on planning and coordination of
future research on intracontinental seismicity. Since plate tectonics does not
provide a useful framework for studying deformation in plate interiors,
intracratonic tectonism presents a major challenge for basic geosciences. The
occurrence of large intracontinental earthquakes also poses complex problems for
applied sciences in determining seismic risk and mitigating earthaquake hazard.
We submit that a conference on intracontinental seismicity is timely. Results
and ideas from diverse disciplines pertinent to this field of renewed interest
in geoscience need to be compared and tested. Outside of basic goescience,
groups which interact with this field such as users of the information (e.g.,
earthquake engineers), policy makers and funding agencies need to be made aware
of the latest results and the issues rising in this rapidly evolving field. We
propose to organize a conference to be held on April 12 and 13, 1988 at the
Illini Union of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The main purpose
of this conference will be to critically assess our current knowledge on
intracontinental seismicity. We plan to host about 40 scientists from diverse
fields pertinent to the study of seismicity in the eartern U.S., with emphasis
on earthquake seismology, solid-earth geophysics, structural geology, and
tectonics.