* 8720270
* Highly Stereoselective Construction of Carbon-Carbon Bonds  Using Phosphonyl and Phosphoramidite Auxiliaries            (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Slayton Evans, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 08/31/1991
* USD 221,422.00

This research is being supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program. The synthesis of the complex structures that occur in nature requires
the development of highly specific reactions. This work will produce new
reagents based on the unique reactivity produced by a phosphorous atom.
Investigations centering on (i) highly stereoselective Aldol reactions (both
acid and base-mediated) with alpha-acylphosphonate diesters, (ii) stereochemical
control of the Mukaiyama-Michael reaction, and (iii) the stereoselective
alkylations of chiral phosphoramidite homoenolate anion synthons are described.
The central feature of this three-part research program is the establishment of
a highly stereoselective methodology for construction of carbon-carbon bonds
within acyclic molecules. Both high diastereofacial and enantiofacial
selectivity is predicted based on the stereochemistry and steric bulk of the
auxiliary as well as intramolecular metal ion complexation ability.
Specifically, the metal anions of alpha-acyl-1,3,2-dioxaphosphonates are used to
control enolate geometry and diasteromer preference when alkylated. Introduction
of chirality into the 1,3,2-dioxaphosphonyl skeleton creates potential for
asymmetry transfer from the chiral auxiliary. Examination of transition state
models provide insight into factors likely to control diastereoselectivy.
Finally, condensation of chiral phosphoramidities derived from
(1S,2R)-(+)-ephedrine and (E)-3-phenylpropenal or crotonaldehyde provide
substrates suitable for chelation-controlled enantioselective alkylation of the
prochiral organometallic intermediate.