* 8720609
* Isotopic Studies of Crust-Mantle Evolution and Related      Magmatic Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1988,04/30/1989
* Donald DePaolo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 04/30/1989
* USD 89,100.00

Measurements of the isotopic composition of the elements Sr, Nd, Ca, and O, and
concentrations of Rb, Sr, Sm, Nd, K, Ca, and other major and trace elements will
be made on rocks and minerals in order to address problems pertaining to the
evolution and geochemical structure of the continental crust, the evolution of
magmas in the crust, and the isotopic evolution of the mantle in Precambrian
time. Particular problems that will be addressed are the composition of the
lower parts of the continental crust (with K-Ca isotopes in conjunction with Rb-
Sr, Sm-Nd, and O), the introduction and dispersal of contaminants into mafic
magma chambers and the implications for magma chamber convection and
crystallization modes, and the Sr isotopic evolution of the mantle in
Proterozoic time and its implications for continental lithosphere recycling and
models for crust-mantle evolution. Subjects of study will be island arc rocks
and systematic collections of granitic rocks from Precambrian terranes for the
K-Ca studies, the Stillwater and Muskox intrusions for the magma chamber
studies, and ca. 1.8 Gyr mafic and intermediate intrusive rocks from central
Arizona for the mantle evolution studies. This support is for a time period of
less than one year in order to complete ongoing activities prior to the
completion of a new laboratory at the University of California, Berkeley.