* 8720813
* The Stability and Surface Chemistry of Allophane and Imogolite
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1988,03/31/1991
* James Kittrick, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 03/31/1991
* USD 101,345.00

The objectives of this research are to establish the dependence of surface
characteristics on structural characteristics of synthetic allophane and
imogolite, determine the thermodynamic stability (metastability) of allophane
and imogolite and to initiate investigations comparing the surface and
structural characteristics and stability of synthetic and naturally-occurring
allophane and imogolite. The coordination of Al and the coordination environment
of Si will be determined by MAS-NMR and bulk composition by dissolution and by
energy-dispersive X-ray analysis. Surface acidity and charge characteristics
will be determined by potentiometric titration, ion retention, and
electrophoresis. Monovalent ions of the alkali and halide series will be used to
test models of ion selectivity and large organic cations will be used to test a
hypothesis that proposed unequal distribution of cations and ions between
surface and interior sites. We will initiate a comparison of surface and bulk
characteristics between the synthetic materials and their counterparts isolated
from soils and pumice deposits. Stability determinations on all materials will
be based on solubility experiments. Allophane and imogolite are noncrystalline
aluminosilicates which occur in a variety of soils. They are interesting from a
theoretical standpoint because they exhibit a wide range of composition while
maintaining some consistent and unique structural characteristics. From a
practical standpoint, their very high specific surface areas impart an influence
on soil properties in excess to what is expected from their mass. They are known
to influence water holding capacity, fertility, degradation or polymerization of
organic compounds, and transport of Al in soils. Potential applications of this
research may also extend to addressing problems in waste disposal, and rain and
pollution.