* 8720600
* Holism and Locality in Quantum Mechanics
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1988
* Allen Stairs, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 10/31/1988
* USD 9,000.00

Recent experimental and theoretical work on the violations of Bell's
inequalities suggests that we are now at a watershed in quantum theory. In spite
of this common perception, there is no clear consensus on the question of what
our understanding of the issues really amounts to, nor what questions remain to
be answered. In particular, there are two important tendencies which
increasingly occur in the literature: (i) to claim that violations of
inequalities need no explanation; or (ii) much remains to be explained though
there is disagreement about what sort of explanation might be appropriate. Dr.
Stairs supports an explanatory approach involving the notion of quantum holism.
Regardless of which position one takes, Dr. Stairs has found that both
approaches give rise to a curious puzzle. Jarrett's decomposition theorem shows
that the locality condition used in deriving the inequalities consists of two
independent components: "physical locality," which forbids faster than light
signalling; and "completeness" or "factorizability," which requires stochastic
independence of outcomes. It is generally agreed that violations of physical
locality would call for explanation in a way that violations of factorizability
may not. But both options (i) and (ii) seem unable to respect this distinction.
With support from this grant, Dr. Stairs will articulate this puzzle and
investigate the issues to which it gives rise. His aim is the further
articulation and defence of holism as a tool for understanding quantum
mechanics.