* 8720208
* Mathematical Sciences   Mathematics and Molecular Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1994
* Nicholas Cozzarelli, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 10/31/1994
* USD 2,031,188.00

This innovative project, based at the University of California, Berkeley,
involves a group of molecular biologists and mathematicians under the direction
of Dr. Nicholas Cozzarelli. The major focus of this project is to attack various
problems arising in the studies of DNA replication, supercoiling, protein
folding, mapping of genes that underlie quantitative traits, and pattern
recognition in protein sequences by using new mathematical methods from topology
and geometry. The question of exactly how DNA replicates, folds and unfolds, and
how geometric properties of large molecules are related to the sequences of
amino acids are among the major unsolved problems of molecular biology. The use
of new mathematical tools of differential geometry and knot invariants in the
study of these problems should make an impact on both molecular biology and
mathematics. There are two significant aspects of this project: to stimulate
creative interactions between mathematicians and molecular biologists and to
provide support for training and outreach on the interface of these two
scientific fields. A major portion of the funding for this program will support
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, thus providing new young scientists
trained in this area. Conferences and books are planned in order to disseminate
new results of this research.