* 8720387
* Stable Isotope Geochemistry of Quartz, Clay Minerals and    Zeolites Under Sedimentary/Diagenetic/Low Grade             Metamorphic Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Samuel Savin, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1991
* USD 171,030.00

Fundamental data on the oxygen isotopic behavior of sedimentary/diagenetic/low-
grade metamorphic silicate minerals (quartz, clays and zeolites) are needed. The
research includes calibration of mineral-water oxygen isotopic fractionations
for quartz and for zeolites and calibration of intracrystalline isotopic
fractionations in clays. It also includes research on techniques for the oxygen
isotopic analysis of zeolites and on the kinetics of isotopic exchange between
zeolites and water. The quartz-water oxygen isotope fractionation will be
calibrated at approximately 0, 25, 50 and 75 degrees C by growing quartz
crystals in aqueous solution under carefully controlled conditions. The results,
when combined with published fractionation data for 200 degrees C and above,
should yield reliable metamorphic temperature range. In addition to providing
information about quartz, the results will be useful in our attempts to estimate
other mineral-water isotopic fractionations. Studies aimed at measuring and
calibrating intra-crystalline isotopic fractionations in clays will be based
both on partial fluorination and on thermal dehydroxylation. This will permit an
estimate of both the temperature of the clay formation and the isotopic
composition of the clay-forming fluid. The ability to do this would be
especially useful in the isotopic study of sandstones, where cogenetic mineral
pairs are very rarely encountered. The proposed studies of the isotopic behavior
of zeolites will indicate the degree to which the isotopic compositions of
various minerals in this common diagenetic/low-grade-metamorphic group provide
useful information about the conditions of their formation and enhance
applications of oxygen isotope techniques to the understanding of low
temperature processes.