* 8720374
* Handbook on Risk Assessment
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1989
* John Cohrssen, Council on Environmental Quality
* Interagency Agreement
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 08/31/1989
* USD 136,000.00

The purpose of this grant is to provide partial support for the preparation of a
handbook on risk assessment for scientists and decision makers. The handbook is
being prepared by the Office of Environmental Quality with the assistance of one
or more contractors. The handbook will provide background on risk assessment and
its use in characterizing risks. The handbook will also include two appendices.
The first appendix will review the theoretical and methodological literature on
biotechnology risk assessment. The second appendix will review the theoretical
and methodological literature on ecological risk assessment. For purposes of
writing these appendices, expert papers will be commissioned and expert
workshops will be held. Despite the importance of risk assessment in decision
making, no attempt has been made to integrate knowledge from theoretical and
applied studies. This innovative project will review the risk assessment
literature in order to develop a comprehensive guide to recent developments in
risk assessment theory and methods. It is expected that the project will provide
important information both for individual research scientists and for government
research programs. Specifically, it is expected that the results of the study
will (l) contribute to the development of improved understanding of the role of
risk assessment in the decision making process; (2) identify gaps in scientific
knowledge and needs for research, and (3) provide critical access to information
on models and methods for addressing difficult and complex issues in risk
assessment and management.