* 8720861
* Enforcement of Operating Regulations at Nuclear Power Plants
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,02/28/1990
* Raymond Kopp, Resources For the Future Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 02/28/1990
* USD 40,000.00

In recent years research on enforcement and deterrence has turned from an
almost exclusive focus on policing and the criminal justice system to a
consideration of the enforcement practices in regulatory and administrative
agencies. As might be expected, the thrust of this work is directed to
understanding enforcement strategies, their variation, and the properties
associated with different patterns of compliance. In most of the work to date,
the level of enforcement effort has been treated as a given, despite theoretical
arguments that show the advantages of allowing enforcement intensity to vary in
response to rates of compliance and considerable casual observation suggesting
that enforcement agencies do indeed tailor their actions in light of the
behavior of the objects of the regulation. This effort by Dr. Harrington and
Kopp constitutes a significant step forward insofar as these investigators focus
their energy on enforcement as a dynamic and interactive process. The goal of
this project is to specify a simultaneous enforcement model, in which the
probability of compliance, the inspection frequency, and the penalties assessed
are determined endogenously, and apply it to examine the regulation of the
nation's operating nuclear power plants by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
(NRC). The model will not only permit consideration of the relationship between
enforcement and compliance, but also the effects of other variables of interest
on compliance, including technical variables such as plant size, utility-
specific variables such as financial, health, or nuclear experience, and
institutional variables. The data will come from NRC records on over 30,000
inspections that were conducted from 1976 to 1986, supplemented by data on
individual plants and their situations including their record of civil
penalties. Drs. Harrington and Kopp are testing their theory, developed in
previous research, that past compliance affects future enforcement more often
than not and is an adaptive process. This is a departure from most enforcement
work which continues to assume that enforcement variables are predetermined and
invariant over time. The research offers the prospect of empirical examination
of a more complex theoretical approach to enforcement and compliance which will
be an important scientific advance. In addition, the policy implications
regarding safety issues at nuclear power plants will be useful as well since
this project represents the first attempt to study the enforcement of NRC
regulations statistically.