* 8720970
* Stratigraphic and Structural Evolution of the Northwestern  Himalayan Foreland Basin, 12 MaBP to Present                                                                          >
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1990
* Douglas Burbank, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 06/30/1990
* USD 100,000.00

The northwest Himalayan molasse basin provides an excellent setting in which to
delineate the stratigraphic and structural evolution of a foreland basin in
collisional regime. Exposures are excellent, and because of the youthfulness of
the basin, the interrelationships between the sedimentary and tectonic record
are readily discernable. Magnetostratigraphic studies have provided reliable,
quantitative chronologies for over 40 individual sections across the Potwar
Plateau and adjacent regions. Until now the extraordinary potential for re-
creating a detailed history of basin development based on these chronologies has
remained largely untapped. We propose to utilize this temporal control to
reconstruct the depositional and structural history of the foreland basin at
discrete time intervals (~ every 1.5 Ma) from 12 Ma to present. We intend to
analyze 1) the development of the fluvial dispersal system through time, 2) the
geometric evolution of the basin as a response to imposed loads, and 3) the
history of structural disruption of the proximal foreland basin. Precise
chronologic constraints on the stratigraphic record are presently available and
provide an unparalleled opportunity to generate a detailed, time-controlled
regional synthesis of the dynamic evolution of the Himalayan foreland basin.
These data should produce quantitative and conceptual stratigraphic/structural
models that will serve as paradigms for the analysis of older, more dissected
basins.