* 8720284
* Phase Equilibrium Theory of Aqueous Two-Phase Extraction:   International Collaboration
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1988,03/31/1992
* Carol Hall, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/1992
* USD 45,000.00

The aim of this project is the development of a general, comprehensive theory,
based on statistical mechanics, of protein solubility in two- phase aqueous
polymer solutions containing either polyethylene glycol and dextran or
polyethylene glycol and salt. The objective is to predict free energies, aqueous
phase separations and protein partition coefficients for a model aqueous polymer
two-phase system as a function of a number of important parameters: protein and
polymer concentrations, protein and polymer molecular weights, protein charge,
pH, protein type, polymer type, salt type, ionic strength, temperature and the
binding energy of affinity ligands. The theory will be supported by a series of
experiments conducted in international collaboration with a world-renown expert
in aqueous two phase extraction, Prof. Dr. M. R. Kula of the Institute for
Enzyme Technology in Dusseldorf, Germany. The experiments will be performed both
in Dr. Kula's laboratory and in the North Carolina State University laboratory.
Despite the projected importance of aqueous two-phase extractive techniques for
future separations technology, no comprehensive theoretical framework exists for
predicting protein partitioning in these systems. This approach, which is based
in statistical mechanics, will allow one to investigate the relative importance
of excluded volume effects and electronic interactions and to predict values for
both protein partition coefficients and ion partition coefficients. The research
should provide insight into the molecular basis of protein partitioning and
yield a useful correlation of protein partition coefficients.