* 8720070
* ROW: Expression and Sorting of the Myelin Protein Po
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1988,01/01/1991
* Marie Filbin, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Stacy Springer
* 01/01/1991
* USD 133,400.00

The formation of myelin by the Schwann cell requires the precise organization
of a number of specific proteins. The long-term goals of this research are to
understand how the Schwann cell delivers these proteins to the correct surface
of the bipolar Schwann Cell. The immediate goals are to examine how the Schwann
cell regulates the expression of one such protein, Po glycoprotein, when the
external environment is changed. Because studies in vivo suggest that post-
translational control of Po expression is important, the role of the sugar
moieties in the expression of this glycoprotein will be investigated. To carry
out these studies an abundance of Po is required. This will be accomplished by
transfecting Schwann cells with the cDNA for Po followed by gene amplification.
Furthermore, the transfected Po will be distinguished from the endogenously
synthesized Po by attaching to the former an identifier/reporter peptide
sequence. To ensure that Po with the reporter peptide is expressed/sorted in the
same way as its endogenous counterpart, both will be characterized in
transfected Chinese Hamster Ovary cells, prior to the studies with Schwann
cells. Ultimately, the expression of Po-reporter will be monitored in Schwann
cells in relation to the addition of axolemma and/or extracellular matrix to the
culture before and after treatment specific inhibitors of glycosylation. Results
from these studies can then be applied directly to Schwann cells in vivo and
help elucidate the initial steps of myelinogenesis at the molecular level.