* 8720282
* Transport of Gases in Inert and Reactive Asymmetric         Membranes Fabricated by the Langmuir/Blodgett Technique
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Lawrence Coleman, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 12/31/1990
* USD 172,000.00

This research involves design, fabrication, and characterization of novel
systems of asymmetric membranes for gas separations. These inert and reactive
membranes will be created by the ordered deposition of polymeric monolayers via
the Langmuir/Blodgett (l/B) technique onto porous membranes. Reversible reactive
carriers will be incorporated into the ultrathin L/B films to increase the
transport of specific species. Ultrathin reactive asymmetric membranes do not
presently exist. The completed films will be structurally characterized by
infrared and far infrared spectroscopy. Mass transport studies will be performed
to determine the species selectivity; permeation properties will be correlated
with the spectroscopic structural studies to elucidate the transport mechanism
in both inert and reactive membranes. Two well characterized polymers will be
used for the L/B films: polyacrylates and polymethacrylates. The asymmetric
porous membranes are Gore-Tex and Celgard. Amines are incorporated into the
deposited L/B films for reactive (or facilitated) transport of acid gases
hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide). Gases to be studied for diffusivities are
helium, oxygen, nitrogen, methane, sulfur hexafluoride, hydrogen sulfide and
carbon dioxide. The design, fabrication, and structural and transport
characterization of asymmetric membranes produced using ultrathin ordered
polymeric films will have a significant impact on gas separation. The
opportunity exists to create membranes with high transport properties for
specific gas species while excluding transport of others. In particular, the
separation of acid gases from product gases is an important industrial
application. The research described in this proposal is a foundation toward the
development of molecular engineering approaches to the design and fabrication of
highly specific asymmetric membranes.