* 8720782
* Theories of the Firm
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Paul Milgrom, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1991
* USD 178,325.00

The project advances the frontiers of the economic theory of the firm. The
project can be divided into the following five sub-parts. First, the project
continues to determine just when long-term incentive contracts can be replaced
by a series of simpler short-term contracts. This is important because modern
economic organization theory rests on the hypothesis that organizations emerge
on account of the incompleteness of market contracts. Second, in modern
economies, much of the coordination between successive stages of production are
managed, rather than arranged more loosely through the price system. The project
analyzes the role played by non-price communications within a firm and between a
firm and its suppliers. Third, the project develops a theory of long-term
contracting as a way of avoiding the transaction costs associated with
negotiating efficiently short-term contracts period after period. Fourth, the
project expands the investigation of rent seeking to encompass both public and
private sector organizations. Property rights are emphasized. A person's
property rights to a desirable job, a house, or a favorable office location,
serve (among other functions) to limit the authority of others over that
property. Such rights will discourage person B from attempting to grab person
A's property and reduce A's need to protect the property, leaving more time
available for productive activities for both parties. This framework is used to
explore the failure of "zero base budgeting" systems, in which departments have
no property rights to their budgets but must justify every penny each year.
Fifth, the last topic is monitoring in infinitely repeated games ("supergames")
with incomplete information. Supergames are used to analyze the different kinds
of small scale interactions that arise on a frequent basis in firms and markets,
i.e., keeping promises and being helpful if one's partner does the same.