* 8720366
* RUI:  Arc-Continent Interaction and Evolution of the        Caribbean-South American Plate Boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1989
* Rudolph Torrini, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 03/31/1989
* USD 20,000.00

This project involves study of multichannel marine seismic profiles to resolve
the structural and tectonic history of the southern Lesser Antilles arc and
adjacent parts of the continental margin of South America. Objectives of the
study are the identification of terrane boundaries based on lateral discordance
and change in seismic character (amplitude, coherency, continuity) and velocity
of reflectors, and the identification of structures and determination of their
timing in layered sequences based on correlation with wells. The ultimate goal
is to interpret existing, newly obtained data, leading to an improved
understanding of: (1) arc-continent interaction processes leading to the
accretionary growth of continents, and (2) the structural and tectonic history
of the eastern reach of the Caribbean-South American boundary zone. Two
principal models have been proposed for the nature of the plate boundary: (A) a
margin-parallel, east-striking strike-slip boundary with large, distributed,
right-lateral (easterly) displacement of the southern Lesser Antilles, and (B)
an oblique collision zone with small easterly displacement of the southern
Lesser Antilles. A broad zone of deformation, perhaps hundereds of kilometers
wide, is postulated by both of the plate boundary models. Because such a
deformation zone is largely submerged, marine seismic profiles offer the only
means besides seismicity and potential field data to study its structure in the
offshore. The study may permit discrimination between the two aforementioned
models or lead to the development of a new alternative model.