* 8720461
* Conference on Honorifics to be held at Reed College, in     mid-April l988.
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1989
* John Haviland, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 08/31/1989
* USD 8,040.00

This is an award to provide airfare, meals, and lodging for twelve participants
at a conference on honorifics at Reed College. Participants, whose research
extends over syntax, semantics, morphology, pragmatics, sociolinguistics, and
the ethnography of speaking, will discuss the adequate description and the
theoretical significance of categories in language that express respect and
disrespect. Languages and language groups to be discussed include Japanese,
Chinese, Korean, Thai, Tibetan, Mesoamerican Indian languages, North American
Indian languages, African languages, languages of India, and Western European
languages. Languages express relative status of speaker and hearer and attitude
toward the topic of discussion in many ways such as the use of special
vocabulary, pronouns, affixes, or euphemisms and circulocutions. In some
languages the speaker is required to make choices and evaluations for every
utterance, while in others there are neutral ways of speaking that avoid
expression of relative status or attitude. Descriptions of languages often omit
this aspect of usage, since it has little to do with propositional content or
abstract grammaticality. However, a grammatical sentence is not necessarily an
appropriate sentence. Recently linguists have become concerned with cross-
linguistic studies of the mechanisms of polite speech.