* 8720608
* The Accleration and Transport of Particles Energized in     Solar Flares and in the Interplanetary Medium
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Glenn Mason, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 08/31/1991
* USD 208,540.00

Energetic particle studies can provide essential insights into many processes
of importance to solar-terrestrial physics. For example, the elemental
composition of solar energetic particles in large flares yields the composition
of the solar corona, and is systematically different from the photospheric
composition in a manner depending on the first ionization potential of the
element. This dependence is of key importance in understanding the transport of
heavy ions from the photosphere to the corona. As another example, particle
energization by shock waves occurs at many sites in the solar system including
the corona and the interplanetary medium, offering the opportunity to study
particle acceleration in regions with different sizes and time scales. As a
final example, the transport of energetic particles from the sun to the earth
through the turbulent interplanetary medium, and the transport of shock
accelerated particles give insights into the plasma properties of the solar wind
plasma under widely differing levels of turbulence. This NSF grant will take
advantage of the existing computers and program libraries, and large data sets
at the University of Maryland to investigate a number of solar and
interplanetary physics problems which in many cases can be best attacked using
statistical surveys and/or multi-spacecraft observations. The Maryland
instrument on IMP, ISEE, and Voyager used for this study is able to distinguish
different ionic species in low energy particle populations, making it possible
to investigate unique aspects of energetic particle phenomena. Specific studies
to be undertaken include: 1) Solar particle acceleration and transport in small,
impulsive solar flares will be investigated using a detailed particle transport.
2) Interplanetary shock acceleration processes will be studied using particle
composition information to compare the shock accelerated particle population
with candidate seed populations such as solar flare particles. 3) Upstream
diffusion coefficients in interplanetary shocks will be derived from particle
data using gradient techniques. 4) The radial evolution of shock accelerated
particle populations between 1 and 4-5 AU will be characterized. 5) Acceleration
processes in the interplanetary medium produce the Anomalous Cosmic Ray
component and accelerate ions in the turbulent regions near comets will be
probed.