* 8720267
* Expedited Award for Novel Research:  Enzyme Biocatalysis in Reverse Micelles:  Thermodynamic and Kinetic Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1989
* John Prausnitz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1989
* USD 30,000.00

The wider use of enzymes in organic syntheses, where their high degree of regio-
and stereo-selectivity is difficult to achieve with conventional catalysts, is
severely hampered by the low aqueous solubility of many substrates of interest.
The encapsulation of enzymes in reverse micelles, which provides a method for
stabilization of the enzyme, is a new and particularly promising approach for
biological synthesis or transformation of organic compounds in organic solvents.
This project concerns fundamental studies for the development of new bioreactors
employing such encapsulated enzymes. It includes a study of the effect of
encapsulation of dopamine beta- monooxygenase, a non-specific enzyme which
hydroxylates ring- substituted phenethylamines, alkenes, aldehydes, amides and
sulphides. The effect of micelle structure on the conformation of the enzyme is
studied by use of ESR and kinetic measurements. A molecular- thermodynamic
model, relating the properties of the aqueous miniphase to prevailing
conditions, is also developed. The use of reverse micelles to protect the enzyme
from the often denaturing influence of organic solvents is a new approach to
enzyme stabilization. Current research has focussed on the use of reverse
micelles for protein purification. The inner water pool of a reverse micelle can
solubilize large protein molecules and the micelle provides a large surface area
for transport of reactant and substrate to and from the enzyme. Little is
understood of the behavior of enzymes within such micelles or of how their
kinetic properties differ from enzymes in solution. The investigators create
micelles using non-polar surfactants, so that transport of polar organic
substrates can be enhanced by the addition of carrier molecules in the organic
phase, such as quaternary alkyl amines. There is current interest in describing
the behavior of water in reverse micelles from a phase equilibrium thermodynamic
viewpoint. Of even greater importance is the development of a molecular-
thermodynamic model to relate the properties of the aqueous miniphase to the
external conditions, so that a predictive model can be employed for bioreactor
design.