* 8720779
* Ichnofacies and Ichnofabric Analysis of Pelagic and         Hemipelagic Deposits (Upper Cretaceous-Tertiary),           South Island, New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Allan Ekdale, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 12/31/1990
* USD 82,000.00

The research proposed focuses on the ichnology of pelagic and hemipelagic
deposits in New Zealand. The scientific objectives involve the endobenthic
paleoecology, sedimentology and evironmental stratigraphy of pelagic and
hemipelagic deposits exposed in the northeastern part of the South Island of New
Zealand, as determined from biogenic sedimentary fabrics (ichnofabrics) and
characteristic trace fossil associations (ichnofacies). The study will focus on
fine-grained, deep-water marine carbonate, marl and clay units in the Amuri
Group (Upper Cretaceous to Upper Eocene in age). Particular emphasis will be on
endobenthic community paleoecology (i.e., tiering relationship of infaunal
animals deduced from composite ichnofabrics), ichnofacies relations (i.e., the
geologic significance of particular trace fossil assemblages that exemplify
certain sedimentologic regimes and depositional environments) and biogenic
controls on early diagenesis (e.g., preferential cementation phosphatization
and/or chertification of trace fossils). In addition, cyclic repetition of
certain ichnofacies (e.g., Thalassinoides-dominated, Zoophycos-dominated and/or
Chondrites-dominated zones) will be interpreted in relation to current ideas of
regional tectonism, global eustacy, and orbital forcing of worldwide atmospheric
and oceanographic events.