* 8720308
* Experimental Studies of Cluster-Size Distributions During   Colloidal Aggregation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Richard Cohen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Thomas
* 12/31/1990
* USD 132,800.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of colloidal aggregation. This research continues the Principal
Investigator's application of optical particle size pulse analysis to
characterize the kinetics of colloidal aggregation processes and the structure
of aggregates formed under different conditions. This method permits direct
testing of the fundamental theories of colloid flocculation. Two model systems
will be studied systematically: 1) salt-induced coagulation of colloidal
polystyrene microspheres; 2) antigen-antibody agglutination reactions. Temporal
evolution of the cluster-size distribution will be recorded as a function of
such factors as ionic strength and pH of the electrolyte solution in order to
test theories of irreversible aggregation. The particle size analyzer will be
improved to enable analysis of smaller particles than currently possible. In
addition, light will be collected not only at small angles but also at a range
of larger scattering angles. This will enable determination not only of the mass
but also the radius of gyration and hence the fractal dimensionality of the
clusters. The relation of cluster structure to cluster growth and cluster-size
distribution will be characterized. The aggregation of small particles to form
larger structures is of major importance in such diverse areas as air and water
pollution, materials processing, catalysis, medicine and biology. Both
experimental and theoretical studies are necessary to advance our understanding
of colloidal aggregation. Optical particle size pulse analysis enables direct
measurement of the particle size distribution and temporal evolution, and direct
testing of the fundamental theories of cluster growth.