* 8720832
* Earthquake Studies at Aswan Reservoir, Egypt
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* David Simpson, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1991
* USD 23,317.00

Abstract Narrative Description: This project supports the collaborative work by
Dr. David W. Simpson of Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, Columbia
University, New York, N.Y., and Dr. R.M. Kebeasy, Director General of Helwan
Institutue of Astronomy and Geophysics, Helwan Egypt in a continuation of
earthquake studies at Aswan, Egypt. The Aswan Dam and Lake Nasser in Upper Egypt
in November 1981 experienced an earthquake of the magnitude of 5.3, which became
the subject of extensive research due to the concern for the integrity of the
Dam. The recent African drought has lowered the water level in Lake Nasser by
20m with a lessening of levels of seismicity, but a series of earthquakes in
June 1987 indicates the reservoir is still effecting seismicity in the region.
Concerns exists about what will be the effect of the filling of Lake Nasser
following the ending of the drought. The studies seek to determine the
relationship between the hygrological conditions and seismicity in that region.
Scope: This project allows four young Egyptian scientists over the two year
period, who have done the seismology field work in the Aswan area, to come to
the United States to work in the Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory to assist
in the data reduction and complete research relevant to the Aswan project.
Having scientists working at Lamont, who are directly involved in data
collection and are familiar with the Aswan area will be of benefit to the
overall research effort and result. This interaction with U.S. scientists and
the training they will receive in the U.S. are objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program. This proposal is to be funded as follows:
INT-$19,817 and EAR-$3,500.