* 8721917
* Mathematical Sciences: Control Theory and Vector Field      Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Henry Hermes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1991
* USD 31,703.00

This project continues mathematical research into the modelling of physical
systems by differential equations containing free functions, the controls. One
means of analyzing such systems is the use of transforms, state feedback and
coordinate change for example, to reduce the system to a linear one. This
amounts to determining when a local basis of vector fields can be chosen which,
in proper local coordinates, is linear. Although this can rarely be expected,
the next most reasonable case would be bases which generate nilpotent or
solvable Lie algebras. The project will continue work towards this end. Best
results to date are possible when the free motion or uncontrolled part of the
system is not present. Otherwise, major obstacles are presented due, primarily,
to the large number of (inequivalent) nilpotent systems present even in low
dimensions. Another, equally important, question is that of determining
invariants of a system which will show whether or not related nilpotent or
solvable Lie algebras can be expected. A second line of investigation will focus
on certain transformations called contact maps. These are maps which are used to
characterize jets and jet bundles of functions defined on higher dimensional
Euclidean spaces. Differential operators may be defined in terms of jets and
contact transformations. They provide a method for prolonging solutions. The
basic problems faced in the development of this theory are two: a
characterization of self-maps of jet bundles which are contact transformations
and the construction of contact transformations which leave a given manifold
invariant. While there are several fundamental results related to these
questions due to Lie and Backlund, specific examples are needed. In addition,
constructive methods for obtaining contact tranformations need to be developed.
A final direction this research will follow concerns control system
linearization via an extended feedback group, specifically, canonical forms for
control systems which can be obtained via the feedback group will be sought.