* 8721921
* Collaborative Research in Maize Genetics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Shiaoman Chao, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 01/31/1992
* USD 625,714.00

David Hoisington and Ed Coe will receive funds to continue and expand
collaborative research aimed at producing an integrated physical and genetic map
of maize. They will use genetic mapping strategies of several types to identify
and correlate the positions of RFLP markers, cytological markers (knobs,
deletions, insertions and inversions), biochemical markers (mutations
responsible for isozymes) and other, conventional markers. Although a
substantial amount of positional information for these various types of markers
is now available, relatively little has been done to correlate the map of
cytological markers with that of the biochemical ones, the RFLP map with the
cytological map and so on. Particular focus is placed on the newly developed
technique of RFLP mapping because the map is not yet complete, and because no
single lab has yet assembled a complete set of RFLP marker DNAs that are
available to all researchers. Since the effort will require collaboration with
other corn geneticists, especially those skilled in the identification of
biochemical markers, small concurrent awards are being made to investigators at
Illinois State University, Iowa State and North Carolina State. These funds will
provide laboratory equipment that will facilitate analysis and comparison of
data developed in the separate labs and will insure that research materials
developed by each investigator will be readily accessible to all the
collaborators. Traditionally, techniques for genetic mapping have been a useful
tool for researchers interested in a variety of basic questions in biology as
well as for plant and animal breeders. The recent development of a powerful new
technique called RFLP mapping will have a significant effect on the ease with
which genetics can be brought to bear on both basic and applied problems.
However, it is important that the knowledge and tools of the more traditional
techniques be preserved and that they be integrated (or correlated) with the new
RFLP maps. This is particularly true in the case of corn, which has been the
subject of extensive genetic study. The proposed collaborative research will
accelerate the development of a complete RFLP map of corn and will insure that
the map is a tool available to all researchers and agronomists. Moreover, by
facilitating the integration of the RFLP data with that obtained with other
types of genetic markers, the research will insure that the RFLP map is of
maximum utility for those who need it.