* 8721371
* International Congress of Plant Physiology and Indo-U.S.    Workshop on Interfacing Biotechnology and Crop Stress,      New Delhi, India, Feb. 15-25, 1988, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1988,12/31/1988
* Jerry Eastin, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1988
* USD 39,000.00

Description: This project provides partial support for a U.S. delegation to
attend an international congress on plant physiology to be followed by an
Indo-U.S. Workshop on the application of biotechnology to problems of crop
stress. The congress includes four symposium topics: physiological basis of crop
yield, environmental stress, nutritional stress, and preharvest and post harvest
physiology and biochemistry. The workshop's aim is to focus cooperative projects
on overcoming physiological constraints to crop productivity, especially those
that are related to cold climate, arid lands or under saline conditions. Scope:
The U.S. participants in the Congress, of whom 13 are to be supported under this
project, are well known scientists in the specific areas of the conference,
namely plant physiology, crop production and biotechnology. Other speakers will
come from Canada, Australia as will as India. Indian plant scientists and
biotechnologists have accomplished major successes in improving their
agricultural output, but there is still great interest in India in combating the
devastating effects of droughts, and in expanding farming to marginal land and
adverse weather conditions. The same applies to certain region in the U.S. as
well as in many developing countries. The congress and the workshop will provide
a forum for the exchange of information and highlight specific research areas
likely to produce significant applicable results. There is strong likelihood of
increased research collaboration as a result of these meetings.