* 8721315
* High Resolution Secular Variation in Oxygen, Carbon,        Strontium Isotopic Composition
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Kyger Lohmann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1990
* USD 120,190.00

This research will document the magnitude, rates and relative timing of change
among numerous isotopic (18O, 13C, 87Sr/86Sr) and elemental (Li/A1) tracers
through the Devono-Carboniferous interval. This period in Earth's history, which
is marked by a dramatic shift in 18O and 13C of marine carbonates records either
a dramatic decrease in global surface temperature of 30-40 degree, or an
enrichment in 18O composition of seawater. Paired analysis of chemical tracers
will be performed on non-biological marine carbonates from Devono-Carboniferous
reefal sequences of the Dinant Synclinorium (Belgium) - Waulsortian Sequence of
Ireland and the time equivalent succession of the Alberta Basin to test the
hypothesis that a shift in ocean 18O composition was caused by an increase in
18O flux associated with enhanced hydrothermal alteration at submarine spreading
ridges. Analysis of 87Sr/86Sr variation will provide insight on relative
contributions from mantle versus crustal sources; Li/Al ratios will record the
increasing versus decreasing dominance of high temperature, hydrothermal
alteration versus low temperature submarine weathering of mantle-derived
basalts. Specific goals of the research include: (1) evaluation of correlations,
in time and magnitude, of variation among chemical tracers to determine whether
they are responding to a common geologic process; (2) determination of empirical
time constants of change in chemistry to constrain the magnitude of elemental
fluxes into an out of the ocean; and (3) quantitative modelling, based on
empirical relationships, to assess the role of seawater cycling through mid-
ocean ridge basalt in defining the 18O composition of the paleocean.