* 8721834
* U.S.- Turkish Cooperative Studies of Asymmetric Membranes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Anthony McHugh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 11/30/1991
* USD 7,440.00

Abstract Narrative Description: This project supports the participation of Dr.
Levent Yilmaz of the Chemical Engineering Faculty of the Middle East Technical
University in Ankara, Turkey, in a project directed by Dr. Anthony J. McHugh of
the Chemical Engineering Department at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. The research is in the area of polymer membrane formation, an area in
which Dr. McHugh is conducting extensive research under an NSF Grant from the
CBT Division. Dr. Yilmaz will be primarily involved in a number of mathematical
modeling aspects of the research, since he is currently one of the best
qualified scientists working on the modeling of membrane formations. New
membrane formation processes are relevant to the growth of the technological
base in Turkey and other developing countries, as they are proving to be more
energy efficient, cost effective alternatives to the traditional unit separation
processes. Scope: This project allows a bright young scientist from Turkey, who
recently obtained his doctorate in the U.S. to participate effectively in on-
going, United States based research of significant relevance to his country, to
other developing countries and to the U.S. This proposal's objectives meets the
Science in Developing Countries objectives very well.