* 8721929
* The Role of Nuclear Interaction in Muon Catalyzed Deuteron  and Tritium Fusion (Physics)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Chi Yu Hu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 01/31/1991
* USD 235,441.00

In the molecular ion (dtu-)+, the deuteron and tritium are confined by the muon
in a region small enough that fusion between the two nuclei can take place. A
large amount of energy is released as a result of this fusion process, thus
raising the possibility of using it for energy production. Theoretical studies
of this molecule have been extensive. But the effect of the nuclear force has
not been dealt with in satisfactory detail in current theoretical calculations,
due to lack of a proper computational framework. This research will develop a
better calculational method to handle these three-body systems, and to calculate
reliable fusion parameters. Accurate knowledge of these fusion parameters are
essential for the energy production process. The interactive portion consists of
counseling women students on career opportunities, as well as lectures and
summaries to be given on this topic at the host unviversity and at local high
schools. The purpose of these lectures will not be merely introducing and
stimulating interest in muon catalyzed fusion as a possible new energy source,
but emphasizing the importance of basic energy research for the long range
future. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the
disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.