* 8721813
* Mathematical Sciences: Differential Equations in the ComplexDomain and Nevanlinna Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1991
* Steven Bank, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1991
* USD 225,135.00

Work on this project will develop three lines of mathematical research. They
include investigations into growth, oscillation and other properties of
solutions of differential equations in the complex plane. Particular emphasis
will be placed on the determination of zero frequency and value distribution for
solutions of linear equations. Information regarding such characteristics are to
be read from the coefficients of the equation and their magnitude. In addition
to linear theory, studies will be made in estimating the growth of meromorphic
solutions of algebraic differential equations. Partial results have been
obtained for second-order equations but nothing to date has been tried in
obtaining uniform growth estimates for equations of higher order. A second line
of work will be concerned with problems in harmonic analysis, with particular
emphasis paid to the fine structure of absolutely convergent Fourier series.
This includes studies on sets where these series are restricted and the
classification of the resulting function spaces. Work will also be done on
problems related to removable sets for analytic functions. These are sets, which
can be deleted from the domain of an analytic function without changing the
uniqueness of the function nor its values, which can be recovered across the
removable set. The third thrust maintains continuing work on areas of harmonic
measure and parabolic potential theory. Applications of harmonic measure to
growth rates of analytic functions have grown sizeably in recent years because
of very sharp estimates developed from research of this type. In addition,
results on parabolic potential theory provide general information concerning
solutions of the heat equation by measurements of parabolic capacity.