* 8721764
* Avalanche Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor Logic:  A High Speed Differential Circuit
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Constantin Timoc, Spaceborne Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 11/30/1991
* USD 199,282.00

CMOS (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor) technology is in widespread use.
However, a problem with CMOS logic circuits is low speed of operation,
especially compared to competing (but less technically desirable) technologies
such as Emitter Coupled Logic. Speed of operation can be increased if the effect
of capacitances is minimized. In Phase I the principal investigator investigated
capacitance minimization by operating CMOS logic circuits with voltage swings as
small as reliability considerations (noise) will permit. He found a design
technique which limits noise generated by the logic circuit itself. The
objective of Phase II is to validate experimentally an innovative logic circuit
capable of operating several fold faster than conventional circuits. He will
layout, simulate, fabricate prototype chips, and measure the performance of a
conventional (Manchester) 16-bit adder and a novel CMOS Avalanche CMOS 16-bit
adder. Worst case propagation delay, cycle time and power dissipation will be
measured. It is anticipated that the Avalanche adder will be four times faster
than the conventional one. This proposal received high ratings on all SBIR Phase
II evaluation points, which are as follows. 1. Phase I objectives were met
completely with excellent results. 2. This design technique has technical
importance and is likely to be applicable to a variety of CMOS circuit designs.
3. Phase II objectives are appropriate and attainable. 4. Scientific and
engineering quality is high. 5. The principal investigator is highly qualified
to do the work, and he has made important contributions in the past. 6. The
budget is commensurate with thorough Phase II investigation. Successful research
by the principal investigator will result in high likelihood of a desirable
product, a significantly faster CMOS adder, as well as a practical design
technique for CMOS circuits.