* 8721277
* The Sealed-Bid Mechanism & Bargaining Under Incomplete      Information
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Andrew Schotter, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1990
* USD 82,634.00

The problem motivating this research is one of how to properly structure
bargaining under incomplete information. Such a problem arises naturally in the
context of the so-called "transfer price problem," i.e., the problem of
designing mechanisms for the pricing of goods and services that are transferred
from one division of a firm to another. A typical feature of this situation is
that the relevant data, e.g., the costs of the supplier division and the
benefits of the customer division, are not well known to the participants. For
example, it would be normal for the supplier's costs to be better known to the
supplier than the customer, and for the customer's benefits to be better known
to the customer than the supplier. This research project continues and extends
work undertaken previously by the two investigators on sealed-bid mechanisms for
bargaining. The sealed-bid procedure is one widely used method for structuring
bargaining under incomplete information because it has a simple linear
equilibrium with desirable welfare properties. Unfortunately, there are an
infinite number of other equilibria with welfare properties that range from
second-best optimal to zero. As a practical matter, this mechanism is not very
appealing, since there is no guarantee that the "good" equilibrium will be
picked out of the infinity of other equilibria that exist. The investigators
conducted the first controlled laboratory experiments on the sealed-bid
mechanism. They demonstrated that buyers and sellers bargaining under a sealed-
bid mechanism on average chose the simple, linear bidding strategies that
resulted in "good" equilibria. This project pursues a number of important
unresolved questions raised by these experiments. For instance, what exactly
account for the emergence of step-function-like bidding behavior as the horizon
of the experiment increases? How can we account for the asymmetrical behavior of
the buyers and sellers in these experiments? Why did unstructured face-to-face
bargaining perform better than all other forms of bargaining? Does "cheap talk,"
i.e., talk that does not have any binding impact on the eventual negotiations,
influence the outcome of the process? The project makes significant
methodological and substantive contributions to our understanding of bargaining
behavior. Methodologically, it demonstrates whether commonly used experimental
practices such as identifying buyers and sellers or repeating the experiment a
small number of times bias the results of bargaining experiments. Substantively,
it derives rigorously and tests experimentally for the presence of regularities
or "laws" in bidding behavior under incomplete information.