* 8721128
* Collaborative Research--Corporate Governance and Takeovers
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Artur Raviv, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1990
* USD 74,025.00

Recently the effect of corporate governance rules and the takeover process on
the welfare of investors in the companies involved, as well as on that of
society in general, has figured prominently in both academic and public debate.
Corporate governance rules affect the ease with which takeovers occur both
directly and indirectly through the availability and effectiveness of various
antitakeover devices. This project develops a powerful general theory of
corporate governance and corporate finance. The theory is used to derive new
insights into a number of important issues about corporate control and takeovers
that have been neglected by economists. The following specific questions are
addressed: Why do most corporate charters provide that control contests are
decided by a simple (50%) majority vote? Why are voting rights never attached to
bonds even though it has never been illegal to do so? Why are voting rights
generally not assigned to preferred stock? Why is the most prevalent assignment
of voting rights to common stock that of assigning votes proportional to the
cash flow claims? In particular, what are the welfare consequences of having
classes of common stock with disparate voting rights? How can one explain
simultaneously the design of the cash flow characteristics of a security and its
voting rights assignment? That is, can the commonly observed securities, common
stock with proportional votes and nonvoting bonds, be derived endogenously? What
are the implications for capital structure of investigating the above issues? In
particular, can an explanation of the design of securities and their voting
rights also explain observed capital structure regularities? Is mandatory
disclosure of intent to take over a firm optimal and, if so, at what point in
the takeover process? In particular, should the rule requiring disclosure after
accumulating a 5% equity stake be modified? Should incumbent management be
allowed, either by the corporate charter or by regulations, to hold voting
rights? Should corporations or regulatory agencies prohibit or encourage the use
of such antitakeover devices as targeted share repurchase (greenmail),
exclusionary tender offers, standstill agreements, poison pills, and golden
parachutes?