* 8721071
* Improving the Measurement of Political Trust: Assessing Dimensionality and External Validity
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Michael Weatherford, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli Jr.
* 08/31/1990
* USD 49,999.00

Declining trust in politicians and political institutions is one of the clearest
trends in American public opinion. Confidence in religious, educational and
other institutions has also waned, but emphasis has focused on political trust,
both because it may summarize a wide range of diffuse grievances and because it
might indicate increased potential for disruptive action, political violence and
instability. In spite of investigations by numerous scholars in collecting
longitudinal data on political trust over nearly three decades, there are
serious doubts about the contribution of the concept to explaining political
change. It is not clear what is measured by available indicators, and only weak
and inconsistent evidence links expressed political trust with other political
attitudes or with behavior. Research to date gives little guidance into whether
the fault lies with theories about political trust or with current indicators.
The goal of this research is to evaluate available longitudinal data, from the
National Election Studies and other national surveys, against several validity
criteria, and to derive proposals for selectively deleting and improving the
items that comprise this core component of the National Election Studies time
series. Criteria for construct validation include the relationships between
political trust and : a) other aspects of the global concept of political
alienation; b) representation, and especially the notions of fairness and
efficiency intrinsic to procedures for holding governments publicly accountable;
c) policy implementation, especially politicians claims that a few policy
failures can initiate a "spiral of distrust," with citizens refusing to comply
with new policies. Each criterion is specified as a distinctive covariance
structure model or family of models, and parameter estimates will allow
quantitative judgments of relative validity. Potential contributions of the
research are three-fold. First, it will foster better-informed decisions about
continuing or modifying data collection on political trust. Second, because the
concept of political trust is imbedded in theories about alienation and
political legitimacy, construct validation with multiple measures of multiple
concepts are not well developed, and this research will provide an arena for
formulating and testing procedures that adapt classical inference criteria to
covariance structure analysis.