* 8721864
* Complexing Effects of Forest Litter Ligands on Aluminum     Dissolved from Soil by Acid Deposition on Forested Drainage Basins
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1988,07/01/1988
* Garrison Sposito, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 07/01/1988
* USD 0.00

The objective of this project is to quantify and determine the stability of
aluminum-organic complexes that can occur in water draining from forested
drainage basins that are impacted by acid deposition. Water-soluble organic
compounds derived from forest canopy litter can play a critical role in the
mobilization of aluminum in forest soils, but relatively little is known
concerning their complexes with aluminum. In this project, a systematic
investigation of these complexes is being undertaken involving studies of the
acid-base chemistry of water-soluble forest leaf litter; studies of aluminum
complexes with leaf litter ligands using infrared, electron spin resonance, and
fluorescence excitation spectroscopy; comparative, quantitative studies of
aluminum-leaf litter complexes with compleximetric and fluorimetric methods, and
calculation of pH-independent stability constants for aluminum-leaf litter
ligand complexes. The chemical speciation of aluminum in natural waters has
emerged as a problem of critical importance because of the effect that acidic
deposition from atmospheric pollutants has on solution of aluminum compounds in
soil, and the impact of those compounds on water quality. This research may lead
to insights into how water may be decontaminated by proper engineering design
and management of drainage basins.