* 8721124
* Some Economic Consequences of Adverse Selection
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* John McMillan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1991
* USD 62,294.00

One party to an exchange often knows something relevant to the transaction that
the other party does not know. Such asymmetries of information are pervasive in
economic activity: for example, in the relationship between employer and
employee when the employee's effort cannot be monitored perfectly; between
insurer and insured; between the stockholders and the manager of a firm; between
a socialist firm and the central planner; or between buyer and seller when the
value of the item is uncertain. This situation is called adverse selection
because the asymmetries of information can lead to inefficient outcomes. This
project provides new insights into a number of difficult and as yet unresolved
aspects of adverse selection. The project consists of five parts. First, it
characterizes contracts for members of a team in the presence of both adverse
selection (each team member's ability is known only to himself) and moral hazard
(effort cannot be observed). Preliminary results show that an optimal contract
can be designed in which monitoring is not needed to prevent shirking by team
members. Further research determines the results when a number of crucial
simplifying assumptions are relaxed. Second, it analyzes bidder rings, the
efforts of bidders at repeat auctions to collude when bidders either can or
cannot make transfers among themselves. Bidders must overcome the asymmetric-
information problem of not knowing how much each other values the item. Third,
the project determines the best way of selling a unique item with a well-
defined value which no one knows (like mineral rights). Fourth, the project
studies auctions with decentralized information acquisition. Most auction theory
assumes that information is fixed, but, in practice, bidders can acquire more
costly information. For example, in mineral-rights bidding, geological surveys
can be done. Fifth, the project uses the tools developed in auction theory to
model the securities-market price-formation process. The effects of particular
market institutions like the dealership market and the clearing house are
determined.