* 8721874
* Workshop on Social Allocations being held at                Stanford University, Summer of 1988 and 1989
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Mordecai Kurz, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1990
* USD 147,620.00

The Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences (IMSSS) will hold
two month long workshops in the summer of 1988 and the summer of 1989 at
Stanford University in order to bring together for extended periods of work a
large number of the top senior and the most promising junior economic theorists.
During the IMSSS summer workshops an extensive number of formal seminars and
workshops provide the arena for a review and discussion of the work of each one
of the participants. The extensive interaction among the participants provides
the environment for generating new ideas which become the basis of their
creative work during the period that follows the workshop. In many instances the
discussion at the workshop provides an evaluation of "the state of the art" and
some workshop publications have been very influential in setting the stage for
the scientific developments to follow. The IMSSS selects basic "themes" which
unify most of the activities of each summer. In the summer of 1988, the two
central themes will be: (1) The Economics of Organization and (2) Learning and
Expectation Formation. Two one-day workshops will also be held on the economics
of organization and on positive political economy. The central themes for the
summer of 1989 will be selected in August 1988. Two themes will be selected from
the following: (1) Bounded Rationality, (2) Incomplete Markets and Macro-
economic Phenomena, (3) Contracts and (4) Alternative Theories of Unemployment.