* 8721016
* Composite Liquid Crystals
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1991
* William Doane, Jozef Stefan Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1991
* USD 0.00

The objective of this three-year renewal of a U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research
project in solid state physics between Robert Blinc of the Josef Stefan
Institute and William J. Doane of Kent State University is to study composite
liquid crystals and their interactions with surfaces. Previously the
investigators received support for their resesarch on chiral (or twisted) liquid
crystals, ferroelectric and lyotropic liquid crystals. In this new project the
work will be extended to include new composite liquid crystal materials:
ferroelectric crystal drops dispersed in polymers. The investigators lead two of
the three top research institutes in this field worldwide. Their past
collaboration has led to joint publications and most recently they applied for a
joint patent on their invention which is called "Low Loss Liquid Crystal
Modulator for Coloring and Shaping a Light Beam. This project was approved by
the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on Cooperation in Science and Technology and is
supported through a joint fund consisting of matching contributions from the
U.S. and Yugoslav governments. The U.S. contribution is provided annually by the
Department of State. No NSF funds are involved. The grants are composed
principally of Yugoslav dinars and made to the principal Yugoslav institute.
Grants include travel for U.S. scientists to Yugoslavia and a modest dollar
allowance for Yugoslav scientists' living expenses in the U.S.