* 8721712
* Tagged Fluorescent Aerosols for Use as Tracers of Dispersionand Removal Processes in Clouds, and for Laboratory Studies of Aerosol Coagulation Kinetics
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1988,05/15/1990
* Lee Harrison, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 05/15/1990
* USD 35,000.00

I. Introduction The efficiencies with which atmospheric aerosols are removed
form the air are not well known, either for wet or dry processes. Much effort
has been spent in modeling the probabilities that coagulating particles will
stick to one another, or to nascent cloud droplets or ice crystals, or to the
earth's diverse surfaces, as functions of particle type and size. This research
has the objective of designing a new tracer technology that detects and scales
individually tagged fluorescent aerosol particles. It has been demonstrated
large improvements in detection sensitivity and utility over previous techniques
using fluorescent tracers, and practical calibration for size-scaling by
fluorescent amplitudes. A dual-wavelength fluorescent-scattering optical
particle counter that can be optimized for low count rates, with capability for
in-flight measurements will be constructed as a part of this effort.
Additionally improved techniques for dispersing tagged aerosols, to determine
the effective ranges and times over which these particles can be detected, to
measure the frequency- and size-spectra of naturally occurring fluorescent
aerosols, and to measure the differential loss rated of hydrophobic and
hydrophilic fluorescent aerosols, both in laboratory environmental chambers and
in ambient clouds will be investigated.