* 8721839
* Static and Dynamic Pile Performance by Centrifuge Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* George Goble, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* MEHMET T. TUMAY
* 11/30/1991
* USD 150,508.00

The new geotechnical centrifuge at the University of Colorado- Boulder is the
first large (400 g-tons) centrifuge in the U.S. and is one of the few of this
size in the world. It is just now going through its acceptance tests and is
expected to be on line soon. This proposal represents the first major effort to
apply this new device to a major research problem. The problem of interest is
the driveability and subsequent load- settlement behavior of pile foundations.
This problem is a severe one in engineering practice. No fundamental analytical
methods exist for the solution of these problems. Laboratory model tests
performed at 1-g of acceleration have been shown not to describe field
conditions with acceptable accuracy. Full scale field tests with fully
instrumented piles have typically cost in excess of $100,000, with some costing
more than $1 million, per pile test. Thus, field programs involving a series of
tests are prohibitively expensive. In addition, field tests always suffer from
the fact that actual sites involve non-uniform soils, and the act of taking soil
samples changes the properties that are to be measured so the engineers are
always uncertain about actual field conditions around any given pile. Laboratory
model tests can be performed using soils of known physical properties but
simulation of the proper stress state requires either field-scale laboratory
testing or the use of a centrifuge to scale up gravitational accelerations, and
thus scale down the physical size of the system. The proposed research involves
two phases, viz., development of equipment for pile driving with the pile,
hammer, and soil all "in flight", to simulate field conditions, and then a
series of proof tests. Researchers will develop pile hammers that model full
scale field hammers properly, and will drive piles with the centrifuge running.
The piles and soil will both be instrumented to determine relevant conditions
developing during the time that stress waves are passing through the system
during driving. Efforts are planned to compare the results of these measurements
with a very restricted number of measurements involving full- scale piles in the
field. The intent of this research is to develop and proof-test the required
equipment, and to perform the research necessary initial tests to show that the
technique is a viable one for modelling actual field conditions. It is then
expected that substantial additional support will come from industry and mission
oriented government labs for support of research to develop better methods for
pile support of such structures as off shore oil structures, and bridges.