* 8721020
* Collaborative Research on Expensive Choices: The Effect of  Decision Making Costs on Political Outcomes
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Rick Wilson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/1990
* USD 53,730.00

This project investigates the way that costs to decision making affect
political choices. In all political settings there are costs to making a
decision. For example, in a legislative setting, such as Congress, members do
not settle on policies in the absence of costs. Proposed policies require
committee consideration, which in turn use committee staff resources and
committee members' time. Policies coming to the floor require debate, which in
turn takes up time from considering other proposals. Reconciling legislation
between the two Chambers also consumes staff resources and conference committee
members' time. In short, all legislation passing through Congress carries with
it a variety of costs to decision making. In this investigation the researchers
employ formal analytical models in order to investigate the effect of decision
costs on political decision making. They build on an important literature in
political science and economics that is concerned with understanding political
choices. The investigators regard costs to decision making as an important (and
ignored) piece of the puzzle for understanding political choices. The focus is
on three general types of costs: agenda access costs (costs associated with
proposing, amending or voting on an agenda); information costs (costs associated
with gathering or generating information about alternatives in the choice
process); and time costs (costs associated with the amount of time given over to
making political choices. Half of this project is devoted to developing
theoretical hypotheses which can then be tested in an empirical context. The
second half of this research is focused on empirical research. In order to
systematically test the theoretical hypotheses, the investigators utilize
laboratory experimental methods. These experiments involve small groups of
individuals making choices in a committee.like setting. Participants in these
experiments are seated at microcomputer terminals which are linked together in a
Local Area Network. All interaction between participants takes place over the
computer terminals, thus providing strong controls on participant behavior.
Participants are allowed to build an agenda across these proposals. Motivation
in the experiment is provided by paying individuals in cash for their choice.
The experiments are designed to test various attributes of decision costs that
are generated from the theoretical models. These models in turn provide strong
predictions for the experimental results This research provides important
insights into a neglected area of political decision making. Rather than relying
simply on theoretical models of behavior in a political context, this research
also provides empirical test of the models. At the completion of this research
we can expect rich theoretical models which have been verified in an
experimental setting.