* 8721771
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential       Equations from Hydrodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1988,04/30/1991
* Robert E Turner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 04/30/1991
* USD 51,074.00

Work to be done on this project will concentrate on nonlinear problems arising
in hydrodynamics. Particular emphasis will be placed on the propagation of waves
in stratified media. These waves, arising from density stratification due to
changes in salinity or temperature have been investigated analytically for
several decades. Much of the internal wave phenomena which has been observed
experimentally, remains to be clarified. Mathematical models for stratified wave
motion are given by nonlinear partial differential equations for the
pseudostream function. Computing this, together with the wave speed, is one of
the primary goals of the project. Current work has focused on equations with
smooth densities in which there is a gradual density change in an ocean
thermocline. In cases where there are abrupt changes, work will proceed on the
question of how much streamlines steepen along solution branches. Other work has
considered surges in two-fluid systems. No rigorous analytic studies of this
type of internal wave have been presented in the literature before. A dynamical
systems approach to the corresponding elliptic problem and a center manifold to
model the behavior of small waves has now been developed. The question of global
behavior of surges is quite open and attention will be given to this issue by
using global bifurcation methods. Numerical studies on the multitude of internal
wave structures will also be carried out. Initial work was carried out on
periodic progressing gravity waves between immiscible fluids. Present
investigations are also analyzing a new phenomenon of overhanging waves. In
addition, a study is being continued on the limiting behavior of solitary waves
in a two-fluid system with upper and lower fixed horizontal walls. This models
ocean flows under ice caps. Applications of this research to the understanding
of important wave phenomena are manifest.