* 8721829
* Lipase Mediated Interesterification of Triglycerides
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1990
* Vijay John, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Dov Jaron
* 09/30/1990
* USD 105,720.00

Research into the catalytic modification of triglycerides by lipolytic enzymes
is underway. The objective is to clearly delineate the enzymatic action of
lipases on lipid substrates in systems with minimal water content. Experiments
will be conducted on the interesterification of two model triglycerides,
tripalmitin, and triolein, a specific example of a reaction involving lipid
modification by lipases. The experiments will examine and compare two alternate
modes of substrate-enzyme contact (a) through enzymic reaction in organic
solvents, and (b) through enzymic reaction in biphasic reversed micellar
solutions. The studies will be directed to determine conditions for optimal
lipase activity in essentially non-aqueous systems, with maintenance of a high
selectivity to interesterification over hydrolysis. The role of organic
solvents, the effects of water content and buffer ionic strength, colipase
effects, substrate specificities, and cation levels are various system
parameters to be considered. A thermodynamic framework for optimal solvent
design and selection will be developed, based on modified solubility parameter
criteria. Recent developments in gas chromatography will be applied involving
heat-stable capillary columns and on-column injection techniques, to facilitate
rapid analyses of triglyceride mixtures. Liapases have traditionally been
recognized for their ability to break down triglycerides through hydrolysis.
They have, therefore, been studied extensively for their medical relevance to
atheroschlerosis and their industrial relevance to the production of long chain
fatty acids from vegetable oils. It is only in recent years that their ability
to function effectively in low water content systems has been recognized. Under
such conditions, lipase action is one of lipid synthesis and modification,
rather than lipid breakdown. Tremendous possibilities exist for lipase catalyzed
biomodification and biosynthesis of several oleochemicals of importance to the
pharmaceutical, food, and specialty chemicals industries. The synthesis of
esters for example, has applications to the production of biocompatible
surfactants that are important as emulsifiers in food, cosmetics, and
pharmaceuticals. The interesterification reaction, the focus of the present
research, involves fatty acid interchange between two triglycerides and has
direct application to the production of high value edible oils, such as cocoa
butter substitutes. The understanding of lipase action in lipid modification is
still limited; it is the objective to further this understanding through a
comprehensive study of a specific reaction. Long term directions for the
research on lipases will focus on applying the fundamental knowledge acquired
through this project to a variety of novel reactions involving lipid
modification and synthesis.