* 8721973
* Kinetics of Intracellular Protein Degradation in Bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1988,03/31/1992
* James Bailey, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 03/31/1992
* USD 272,764.00

Degradation of proteins within bacteria is an ongoing regulated process, which
in concert with protein synthesis processes, determines the protein make-up of
the cell and thus its transport and reaction properties. Under conditions of
nutrient limitation, which are common to many bioprocesses or in genetically
engineered cells, intracellular protein degradation rates are greatly
accelerated. Intracellular protein breakdown contributes significantly to
maintenance nutrient requirements in many bioprocess contexts and to loss of
product yield in recombinant fermentations. This research will seek engineering
kinetic descriptions of intracellular protein degradation, which can be used to
guide organism and process design to maximize growth and product yields. In
particular, this research will provide key data which are needed to improve
kinetic models for bacterial growth and product synthesis under different growth
conditions. This research addresses a central technical limitation in the
manufacture of biochemicals, such as insulin and amino acids. After being
synthesized within a genetically engineered cell, a protein product such as
insulin is frequently attached and decomposed by digestive enzymes within that
cell. Similarly, cells used to produce amino acids lose their capability to
produce because critical proteins in those cells are inactivated by those cells'
internal digestive enzymes. This research will study these degradative processes
and how their rates might be reduced by careful choice of bioprocess operating
conditions, such as temperature. Also, various genetic changes in the cell,
which reduce its internal digestive activities, will be investigated to minimize
productivity loses. The results of this research will be guidance of the genetic
engineer and the biochemical engineer on ways to improve the useful production
lifetime of the bioprocess. This lifetime is often a critical factor in
successful process economic performance.