* 8721430
* Ion Distributions in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Harold Friedman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 08/31/1991
* USD 264,922.00

This grant in the Theoretical and Computational Program of the Chemistry
Division is aimed at improving our molecular-level understanding of the
structure and dynamics of solutions. Such advances can help one predict how
chemical reactions in solution are affected by the ion-ion and ion-solvent
forces. Recently the electron exchange between ferrous and ferric ions, a
paradigm of oxidation-reduction reactions in solution, was investigated with
respect to the effect of changing the solvent from water to heavy water. The
results invite further model studies of the structure and dynamics of the ion-
water hydration complex. Another aspect concerns effects of fluctuating
polarization fields in the medium. A new theory gives a unified view of the
thermodynamic and dynamic aspects for the usual dielectric models; it invites
being extended to molecular models. The ion distributions in solution provide a
connection between the effects of ions on chemical reactions and other solution
properties including activity coefficients, electrical conductance, NMR
relaxation, and diffraction of x-rays and neutrons. Current research includes
the development of the theory of transport in solutions so that conductivity in
the molar concentration range and even in mixed electrolytes can be related to
the ion distributions and the models from which they are calculated.