* 8721364
* Mechanisms of Heme Catalyzed Oxidations
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Teddy Traylor, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 04/30/1992
* USD 272,627.00

The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program supports
research in the mechanisms of bioinorganic chemistry. This project is a study of
the mechanisms of heme-catalyzed oxidations. The reactions of various forms of
oxygen, e.g., dioxygen, hydrogen peroxide, superoxide ion, and peracids, with
iron porphyrins in biological systems are fundamental to oxygen metabolism, drug
detoxification, steroid biosynthesis, and removal of hydrogen perioxide from
living systems. Additionally, these metalloporphyrin systems constitute
potentially important industrial oxidation catalysts. The model compounds under
study are related to the hemin enzymes horseradish peroxidase, cytochrome
peroxidase, catalase, chloroperoxidase, cytochrome P-450, and perhaps cytochrome
oxidase. The goal is to mimic the rapid, high-turnover catalytic reactions
catalyzed by these enzymes and consequently to develop new catalyst systems for
synthetic oxidations. The project involves the design and preparation of new
catalysts and the detailed studies of all of the steps involved in the
metalloporphyrin-catalyzed epoxidation of alkenes, hydroxylation of alkanes,
oxidations of arenes and phenols, and the decompositon of hydrogen peroxide and
hydroperoxides. Kinetics and mechanisms of the formation of intermediate high-
valent states and of their reactions with substrates will be investigated. In
addition, the utilization of dioxygen in such reactions will be studied.