* 8721785
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Computer Simulations of     Nonpolar and Polar Flexible Model Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Sohail Murad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 04/30/1992
* USD 14,814.00

This award will support ongoing collaboration in statistical mechanics between
Dr. Sohail Murad, University of Illinois at Chicago and Dr. J. G. Powles,
University of Kent at Canterbury, England. The objective of this project is to
carry out a comprehensive study of the effect of molecular flexibility on the
static and dynamic properties of small polar and nonpolar molecules. It is well
known that to model accurately, larger molecules (e.g n-butane) one must account
for molecular flexibility. However some recent studies appear to indicate that
even vibrational flexibility of otherwise rigid molecules may be important,
especially for some dynamic properties. The investigators will examine this
question. The proposed studies will be carried out on diatomic and triatomic
molecules, with point charges placed appropriately to mimic polar molecules. The
models will include bond stretching and bond angle bending. The liquid state
will be examined using both equilibrium and nonequilibrium molecular dynamics.
This will make it possible to investigate a wide range of properties. By
comparing results for rigid molecules to those with different degrees of
flexibility, the investigators hope to identify properties most sensitive to
flexibility for more detailed analysis. This proposed project represents a
collaboration between two highly qualified researchers, that is likely to result
in a better understanding of the thermodynamic and transport properties of small
molecules, especially those with vibrational degrees of freedom.