* 8721114
* Geomorphic Development and Neotectonic Deformation of       Paleolake Coasts in the Eastern Great Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1988,01/31/1992
* Donald Currey, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1992
* USD 150,735.00

This project will (1) reconstruct regional patterns of late Pleistocene coastal
processes and coastal chronology in the eastern Great Basin, (2) survey 300 to
400 vertical control points on selected shorelines having relatively well
constrained ages, (3) use those surveryed shorelines as long-baseline tiltmeters
to reconstruct regional and local isostatic and seismotectonic deformation; (4)
and model those data to constrain the mechanical/rheological properties of the
earth. Recent studies of coastal chronology and shoreline morphometry in the
basins of Lake Bonneville and two nearby paleolakes indicate that deformation of
late Pleistocene shorelines resulted mainly from loads imposed by Lake
Bonneville, but probably included far-field responses to loads imposed by
continental ice sheets. This study will vastly expand the existing data set, to
include the deformation of transgressive, maximum-stage, and regressive
shorelines of the last deep-lake cycle in 16 paleolake basins in the eastern
Great Basin. Studies of coastal chronology and coastal geomorphology will be
combined with vertical control surveying using an electronic distance measuring
theodolite to define the spatial and temporal dimensions of post-lacustrine
deformation. At the Lunar and Planetary Institute, the observed deflections
(shoreline tilt) will be modelled as the response of a layered elastic/visco-
elastic earth to loads imposed by the small lakes, the much larger Lake
Bonneville, and the still more massive but more distant Laurentide and
Cordilleran ice sheets.