* 8721110
* Correlation of Radiometric and Biostratigraphic Timescales  for the Triassic and Jurassic Murihiku Supergroup of New    Zealand
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1989
* James Mattinson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 07/31/1989
* USD 35,000.00

Intercalibration of radiometric and biostratigraphic time scales for the early
Mesozoic is not well established. Uncertainties in absolute age assignments to
stage boundaries for parts of the Triassic and Jurassic may exceed 30 Ma. This
proposal seeks support for high-precision zircon U-Pb age dating of vitric tuff
beds that occur within well-preserved fossiliferous strata of the Murihiku
Supergroup of New Zealand. This thick clastic succession comprises mainly marine
volcanogenic rocks that span most of Triassic and Jurassic time and can be
correlated to the international column at key points on the basis of virtually
cosmopolitan ammonoids and pteroid bivalves. Preliminary zircon ages from 13
tuff beds spaced through ~6 km of section within the Middle to Upper Triassic
portion of the Murihiku Supergroup range from 232 to 204 Ma. On the basis of
high-precision Pb/Pb ages from step-wise dissolution experiments, the FAD and
LAD for Monotis are constrained to occur within 226 Ma to 218 Ma. It is proposed
to complete detailed, comprehensive study of the Middle and Upper Triassic
sections of the Murihiku Supergroup, and extending the range of our sampling to
include the Lower Triassic and Jurassic portions of the sequence. This work,
along with high-precision dating of granitoid clasts from conglomerates in the
section, will provide information on sedimentation rates and cycling rates of
material between plutonism-uplift-erosion- transport-deposition, and will
contribute significantly to understanding the dynamics of basin evolution.