* 8721941
* Cognitive and Social Values in Computer-Aided Engineering   Design
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Gary Downey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 05/31/1991
* USD 38,800.00

One of the central problems in studies of science, technology and society
concerns the respective roles and relationships of cognitive and social values
in scientific and engineering thinking and decisionmaking. Cognitive values are
those we tend to think of as "scientific" or "objective"; they concern standards
of evidence or proof, for example. Social values also play a role in determining
successful scientific and, perhaps especially, engineering efforts. Judgments of
the marketplace, of aesthetics, of suitability, hierarchy or fairness, for
instance, can play critical roles in decisions about the directions of
engineering research and development, and the use of engineering products or
processes. Indeed, it is possible that social values have a necessary role in
standards of evidence, making a clear distinction between social and cognitive
values difficult to draw. This award, to an anthropologist and assistant
professor of technology studies at the Center for the Study of Science in
Society at Virginia Polytechnic Institute, will enable him to pursue research on
the relationships between cognitive and social values in decisions to develop
and use computer-aided engineering design (CAD). The overall objective is to
explore how the cultural identities of engineers, which include both cognitive
and social standrads, shape engineering decisions. The project has two
components. The learning component involves (1) enrolling in a sequence of two
senior- level courses in CAD and (2) assisting his host specialist, the director
of the CAD/CAM Laboratory at VPI, in an engineering design project applying
finite element analysis methods to an industry problem. The research component
involves (1) investigating the historical development of CAD systems in industry
and at universities, to identify the roles of cognitive and social value
judgments, and (2) conducting a participant observation study of the CAD design
project to investigate the roles of these judgments in a current negotiation of
a competent design solution. Results of the project will be disseminated through
two published papers, curriculum changes to two courses, and a series of public
presentations before engineering and social science/humanities audiences. This
project addresses an important issue. The applicant is well qualified. The host
specialist and other accessible experts are very well qualified and will be able
to provide the necessary guidance; collaborative efforts are likely to continue
beyond the period of this award. The project is designed well and plans for the
development and dissemination of results are appropriate. University support is
very good. An award in the amount of $38,000 is therefore recommended.