* 8721304
* Integrative Noise and Fixed Point Methods as Solution       Techniques for Generalized Linear-Quadratic Models of       Endogenous Information
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Bart Taub, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1990
* USD 28,619.00

Rational expectations models of macroeconomics that incorporate asymmetric
information typically use a linear-quadratic technical framework because
individuals' predictions or decisions are then linear (and hence tractable)
functions of observable variables. If individuals have asymmetric information
and obtain information by observing endogenous variables -- prices, aggregate
output or the like -- then it becomes technically difficult to solve such models
for the endogenous aggregates. The standard method, the method of undetermined
coefficients, is limited to special cases. The investigator developed two
promising new solution methods and in this project he expands them to a more
general setting. He will show that all linear rational expectations models with
asymmetric information are expressible as special cases of a general structure
in which economic, informational, and statistical structure is captured by
specifying the dimensions and elements of matrices of analytic functions. Any
economic structure can be rigorously modelled and empirically estimated by
specifying the details of these matrices. Solving this model requires factoring
the matrix. The first approach designs the model so that the matrix is comprised
solely of exogenous elements -- which are easily factored -- and then perturbing
the model to achieve the solution of the economically interesting model. The
second approach uses a contraction mapping fixed point method. The model will
integrate the informational externality micro literature with the rational
expectations literature. This paves the way for further analysis, particularly
of the welfare characteristics of alternative policy regimes, using what we know
from the micro literature. The investigator has already shown how informational
externalities lead to aggregate fluctuations that mimic business cycles for
special cases of stochastic driving processes. This project investigates how the
persistence, amplitudes and co-movements of economic aggregates are affected by
such externalities when the driving processes are more general.