* 8721500
* The Effects of Economic Growth and Technological Change on  the Demand for Scientists and Engineers
* O/D,OPA
* 09/15/1987,01/31/1989
* Ernest Zampelli, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Barbara A. Brooks
* 01/31/1989
* USD 32,607.00

This proposal is designed to provide more information about the sources of
employment growth for natural scientists and engineers during 1976-1982. It will
provide estimates of employment growth in approximately 200 Standard Industrial
Categories for the detailed categories of natural science and engineering
occupations used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) during that period. For
technical reasons, it is not possible to go back further than 1976 or forward
beyond 1983. Employment changes in each occupational category in each industry
will be attributed to industry growth or to technological change. This latter
category is broadly defined to include two components: changes in production
methods and changes in labor inputs induced by changes in salary rates across
occupations, including other professional occupations. This project is highly
relevant to PRA's program objective of providing useful information about the
production and employment of scientists and engineers to the director and other
senior NSF officials. The 1973-1982 period is of particular interest because
data compiled by the Division of Science Resources Studies indicate that the
employment of natural scientists and engineers (NS&E's) in NS&E occupations rose
at the rate of 6% per annum, while total employment in the U.S. rose at the much
lower rate of 2% per annum. The chief merit of this proposal is its contribution
to knowledge about the supply-demand balance for natural scientists and
engineers.***