* 8721940
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Optimal Control Studies   for Steamflooding
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1991
* W. Fred Ramirez, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 07/31/1991
* USD 27,923.00

This proposal on "Optimal Control Studies for Steamflooding" between Dr. W. Fred
Ramirez of the University of Colorado at Boulder and Professor Qi Yufeng of the
Research Institute of Petroleum Exploration and Development (RIPED) of China, is
jointly sponsored by NSF and RIPED. The investigators propose to use optimal
control theory to determine operating strategies that maximize the economic
attractiveness of the steamflooding enhanced oil recovery process. Because the
computation of optimal injection strategies is a stringent test of the usability
of the mechanistic model which describes the physical process, the evaluation of
optimization results with optimal control theory helps develop adequate
predictive mathematical models for new enhanced oil recovery techniques. For the
steamflooding process, the investigators will consider the optimal use of foam
drives. They also will investigate for the first time the effect of reservoir
heterogeneties and fractures on optimal injection strategies. To the best of
their knowledge, the principal investigators are the only ones currently
applying optimal control theory to oil recovery problems. By combining superior
computational facilities in the US with the Chinese' superior mathematical
model, the investigators hope to advance a solution of this new optimal control
problem.