* 8721340
* Systematic Procedures for the Design of MultiProduct Plants,Multipurpose Plants, and Plant Complexes
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* James Douglas, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1991
* USD 221,425.00

The goals of this research are to develop systematic synthesis procedures and
short-cut evaluation techniques for the conceptual design of multiproduct and
multipurpose plants which involves breaking the problem down into a hierarchy of
abstraction spaces, where each level in the hierarch contains more detail than
the level above it but less detail than the level below it. The most important
features of the solution are considered first, then the solution is developed by
adding layers of less important details to the partial solution that was
developed at previous levels. The PI uses this techniques and has already shown
that decisions made at lower levels in the hierarchy never reflect back on
earlier decisions eliminating the problem of conflict resolution. A systematic
procedure for synthesizing petrochemical processes where multiple products are
produced simultaneously but where the market demand does not correspond to the
product distribution produced in a single pass through the reactor (e.g. glycols
and amines) would be a very valuable process design tool. Similarly, in some
cases it might be advantageous to produce more than one product by different
chemical routes in the same equipment, where each product is made for only part
of the year. Multipurpose plants often, but not always, run in a batch mode are
needed for such operation. The third category of problems to be addressed in
this project is the design of plant complexes, i.e. the design of processes to
produce reaction intermediates, and then use the intermediates to produce a
final project. The development of all of these algorithms would be valuable not
only because a more efficient design procedure would be available but also as
teaching tools for the instruction of design to undergraduates.