* 8721103
* The Distribution of Extension with Depth in the Newark      Basin:  Constraints from Fission-Track Ages
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Paul Olsen, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 07/31/1990
* USD 56,359.00

Rifting of continental lithosphere during extensional tectonics can be
accomplished in a variety of ways including uniform lithospheric thinning and
detachment tectonics in which extension is not uniform with depth. Each model
predicts different subsidence histories subsequent to extension and these should
be reflected in the sediments in filling the rift basins. Where rapid subsidence
phase is followed by a slower negative exponential phase associated with
contraction during cooling of the rifted lithosphere, whereas the thermal phase
is reduced or absent if surface extension and rifting is detached from under-
lying unextended lithosphere. The Newark Basin of Triassic- Jurassic age in the
central Appalachians now consists of sediments interpreted to represent only the
initial rapid subsidence phase. It is unclear if thermal phase sediments were
never deposited (implying detachment tectonics) or deposited but removed by
erosion (implying uniform lithosphere extension). This project will collect and
interpret detrital apatite fission-track ages from a transect across the basin
in an attempt to determine the maximum amount of sediment that could have been
removed by erosion before Cretaceous overlap sediments were deposited. Results
will bear on rifting style of the initial breakup and formation of the present
Atlantic ocean, and will provide a well- documented example of continental-scale
extension that can be used in comparisons to other rift basins.