* 8721698
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research: Characterization of  Host-Selective Toxins from Plant Pathogenic Fungi
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1988,08/31/1993
* Vladimir Macko, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1993
* USD 11,350.00

This award supports several research visits by Dr. Vladimir Macko, Boyce
Thompson Institute of Cornell University, to the Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology in Zurich in order to collaborate with Dr. Duilio Arigoni in studies
of the chemistry and biology of host-selective toxins from plant pathogenic
fungi. Collaboration with Dr. Arigoni, a world reknowned natural products
chemist, will enhance Dr. Macko's long-term domestic research on the mechanism
of action of these toxins which is directed at gaining a better understanding of
host-pathogen interactions at the molecular level. The specific experimental
objectives of their proposed research are: 1) to isolate and characterize the
host-selective toxins from the plant pathogenic fungus Periconia circinata (PC);
2) to establish the structure-activity relationship for the PC toxins: and 3) to
prepare a radioactively labeled PC toxin that could serve as a probe in future
studies of its site of action (receptor) in the host plant. Most of this work
will be carried out in the U.S. laboratory. Spectral analysis by various methods
will be carried out in both laboratories, and Dr. Arigoni's virtually unique
expertise in interpreting spectra of the bioactive compounds will be extremely
valuable. Dr. Arigoni will carry out parallel research on the chemical and
biological synthesis of the active compounds and their precursors, with
concomitant exchange of samples, ideas and information with Dr. Macko. Despite
the contributions of modern, quantitative biology to advances in the analysis of
the physiology and biochemistry of host-pathogen interactions, we lack a basic
understanding of specificity in toxins and the molecular mechanisms of
resistance and susceptibility. The elucidation of the molecular basis of
specificity in host-pathogen interactions is one of the most important
objectives in contemporary plant pathology, because it will help in identifying
and manipulating the disease reaction genes and their products. There is also
increasing interest in bioactive natural products because of their potential
applications in agriculture and biotechnology.