* 8721721
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential       Equations in Plasma Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Robert Glassey, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1991
* USD 99,589.00

This investigation will focus on the analysis of several specific nonlinear
hyperbolic partial differential equations occurring in plasma physics. Questions
of global solutions to the Cauchy problem, stability, possible development of
shocks and collisional effects will be studied for the Vlasov-Maxwell system of
equations. Collisionless plasmas are dilute ionized gases. In them, the
interaction of particles takes place through the electromagnetic field which is
generated by the particles themselves. Their trajectories are defined by certain
differential equations involving relativistically high speeds. The principal
investigator has shown recently that the Cauchy problem for the simpler Vlasov
equations has a unique global smooth solution provided the momenta of the
individual particles are uniformly bounded. Work will now be done on models in
which the effects of collisions are taken into account. Heretofore, the
electromagnetic effects were allowed to dominate the collisional. No sufficient
condition for classical solvability is known at this time. A second line of
investigation involves equations with rotational symmetry and the question of
stability of solutions. Certain cases have affirmative answers (i.e. stability
is confirmed); the applied literature goes further, stating - without proof -
that stability is present under certain general conditions. What first must be
done is a clarification of the distinctions, if any, between asymptotic
stability and normal stability. Work will be done towards this end. Studies into
the open question of the existence of shocks in collisionless plasma will be
carried out. The work will begin with two dimensional problems where fields and
densities remain bounded for all time. What is needed now are estimates on the
derivatives of the fields and densities involved. There lacks a Huygens'
Principle in two dimensions and it is unclear whether this is a real physical
barrier (i.e. a shock really occur) or is simply a shortcoming of current
methods. In addition to its contributions to the theory of partial differential
equations, this work has important potential applications to mathematical
physics and statistical mechanics.