* 8721142
* Paleomagnetism of the Newark Supergroup and the Mesozoic    APW Path for North America
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Paul Olsen, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 09/30/1990
* USD 150,002.00

The introduction of the concept of a paleomagnetic Euler pole (PEP) to the
analysis of the apparent polar (APW) path for North America has resulted in
significant differences from most previous and widely used empirical APW paths,
particularly in the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic. Because of the fundamental
role of APW paths in geodynamic interpretations, these differences have
important implications regarding plate kinematics, terrane displacements and
paleogeography. There are however critical uncertainties in judging the
reliability of the relatively few Late Triassic and Early Jurassic paleopoles
that are available. New, well-dated reference paleopoles are therefor needed for
this time interval to resolve these ambiguities and to test the potentially
powerful PEP model. This project was a detailed paleomagnetic study of the
Newark Supergroup. These rocks are exposed in some 20 basins along eastern North
America and represent a virtually complete and well-dated stratigraphic
succession from at least the middle Carnian (earliest Late Triassic) to the
Trocian (late Early Jurassic), the same time interval when current APW paths for
the Mesozoic differ the most. Our objective is to obtain a detailed, well-
constrained sequence of paleopoles supported by fold and other field test as
well as rockmagnetic data, over the stratigraphic range by fold and other field
tests as well as rockmagnetic data, over the stratigraphic range represented by
the Newark Supergroup. Preliminary paleomagnetic studies on representative
sample collections from the Newark, Hartford, Wadesboro and Fundy basins
demonstrated the feasibility of this objective. The pattern of paleopole
migration derived from this study should allow a convincing test of PEP models
of APW and in any case contribute to the refinement of a problematical segment
of the APW path for North America.