* 8721972
* Synthetic and Mechanistic Studies on the Homogenous         Catalysis of Transition Metal Complexes (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Iwao Ojima, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 11/30/1991
* USD 188,804.00

This research on transition metals for homogeneous catalysis will be supported
by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program. The development of new
synthetic tools based on catalytic systems has the potential to provide more
economic, pollution-free methods for the synthesis of the complex materials for
industry and agriculture. The ultimate goal is to design and develop multi-
functional multicatalyst systems which will permit multi-step synthesis in one-
pot in a highly organized manner. This project includes three sub-projects: (i)
mechanistic study of mixed metal catalyst systems focusing on the mechanism of
CoRh(CO)7 catalysis including high pressure FT-IR study on the behavior of this
unique mixed-metal complex regarding the hydroformylation-amido-carbonylation
process; (ii) elucidation of the mechanism of amidocarbonylation by
stereochemical approach which will resolve a historical mystery, i.e., water
cleaves acylcobalt bond selectively in the presence of high pressure hydrogen,
by designing bicyclic intermediates bearing strict steric requirements that can
unambiguously distinguish among the possible mechanisms proposed; (iii)
chelation-directed regio- and stereocontrol in carbonylations, which will
systematically introduce chelation control, for the first time, to
carbonylations and apply it to the catalytic asymmetric synthesis.