* 8721853
* Cognitive Causes of Emotion
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1988,03/31/1992
* Andrew Ortony, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 03/31/1992
* USD 185,300.00

It is generally recognized that there is a profound interaction between emotion
and cognition. Emotional states, what we feel and the intensity behind what we
feel, can enhance and impair judgment and performance; cognitions, what we
think, typically play a major role in the generation and maintenance of
emotional states. Nevertheless, relatively little is still known about the
specific way in which cognition affects emotions. This research will test new
hypotheses about how cognitive processes trigger emotions and amplify their
intensity. The goal of this research is to develop a systematic account of the
way in which cognition contributes to emotion. A subsidiary goal is to determine
the distinct emotions that such an account should cover. Preliminary research
will be aimed at classifying different specific emotional states into those of
the same emotion type. Initial indications are that the result will be a set of
about twenty different emotion states, many of which have large numbers of
closely allied states associated with them. Experiments using these distinct
emotion types will determine whether the conclusions of experiments already
reported in the literature need qualification when the stimuli used are known to
represent genuine emotions. Once these distinct emotion types are identified,
they will be used for examining the influence of cognition on emotion. A number
of studies will examine this issue, most designed to test specific hypotheses
derived from a particular theory that specifies both the cognitive conditions
necessary to elicit each distinct emotion and the factors that make each emotion
mild or intense (their intensity variables). A number of experiments will study
emotions and their intensity variables using several different methods,
including the manipulation of information about characters in stories
(hypothetical emotions), the assessment of reactions to recent personal
experiences (retrospective emotions), and the direct induction of emotions
through hypnosis, computer games, and televised sports events (concurrent
emotions). Though this research is basic and non-clinical in nature, it has
implications for clinical work with patients in which emotions impair people's
functioning in the world. It also has implications for such non-clinical issues
as crowd control, for example, British soccer fans, and control of emotional
input to important political decisions.