* 8721872
* Competitive Nonlinear Business Cycles - II
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Mordecai Kurz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1990
* USD 75,498.00

Recent works have shown that the presence of multiple equilibria is a very
pervasive phenomenon for dynamic economic models. This project attempts to solve
the puzzles implied by the occurrence of multiple equilibria by studying the
interaction between the fundamental characteristics of the economy and the
traders' given learning process. The ultimate aim is to discover whether long
run equilibria that are stable for a large class of plausible learning
processes, are in fact characterized by a few simple, universal characteristics
of the economy. The project also continues the development of the theory of
business cycles, or more precisely the conditions of the occurrence of so-called
sunspot equilibria. Sunspot equilibria occur when the beliefs of economic agents
about the economy become self-fulfilling. For example, if economic agents
believe that changes in the sunspots affect the economy, then the economic
performance will correlate with changes in sunspots although sunspots don't
directly affect the economy. Current research on "sunspot" equilibria and
business cycles has focussed primarily on competitive economies. The basic
mechanism to generate fluctuations are interest rate or wage shocks to the
economy. This project investigates the conditions under which such business
cycles arise when one introduces noncompetitive features in product markets
(e.g. Cournot oligopolies) and in the labor market (e.g. efficiency wages or
implicit contracts). Current research suggests that money shocks will only
affect the rate of inflation and not the real economy. This project attempts to
show that the same conditions that lead to sunspot equilibria also imply that
proportional changes in money supply will affect the real economy. The
preliminary results will be generalized and economies with imperfect information
will be studied.