* 8721936
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research in theStudy of Alkyl Propargyl Biradicals
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* William Agosta, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1991
* USD 8,050.00

This award supports Dr. William C. Agosta of the Rockefeller University to
collaborate with Dr. Paul Margaretha of the University of Hamburg. They have a
mutual interest and complementary expertise in the chemistry of alkyl propargyl
biradicals, and their joint work emphasizes novel mechanistic studies and new
methods of forming these species. The small Rockefeller group is composed
primarily of postdoctoral workers, and has expertise in general mechanistic
organic photochemistry and the synthesis and characterization of small ring
compounds. The larger Hamburg group offers expertise in quantitative measurement
and the kinetics of radical reactions, electrochemistry and organofluorine
chemistry. Because of a larger number of graduate students, it is better able to
carry out studies requiring greater manpower. They have collaborated very
productively for several years under NATO sponsorship. Under support from the
National Science Foundation (NSF) they will collaborate in studies of the
mechanism of hydrogen migration in carbene, the independent propagation of
carbene 2, the photochemistry of ketone 15a and exploratory intramolecular
reactions leading to alkyl propargyl biradicals. This cooperative arrangement
will enhance Dr. Agosta's domestic research which is directed at understanding
structural and stereochemical control factors in organic photochemical reaction
mechanisms, and using controlled photochemical processes for the construction of
novel organic ring systems of theoretical and structural interest.