* 8721965
* Conference on Mathematical Modeling in Science and          Technology, Madras, India, August 11-14, 1988, Group Travel Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1989
* Romesh Batra, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/1989
* USD 20,000.00

Description: This project supports travel of U.S. scientists to India to
participate in the International Conference on Mathematical Modeling in Science
and Technology to be held in Madras. The Indian organizer is Dr. S.N. Majhi,
Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Madras, India.
The conference is aimed at exchange of ideas and information among professionals
involved in developing and analyzing mathematical models of problems arising in
various scientific and technical areas including engineering sciences,
theoretical physics, biomedical systems, ecology and environmental studies,
manufacturing, energy and economics. Emphasis to be placed on real world
problems and correlating the predictions from models with available experimental
findings. The multidisciplinary expertise of participants is to provide for
exchange of tools and ideas from different applications. Proceedings are planned
to be published. Scope: The conference organizing committee includes a large
number of experts from the U.S. and nine other western countries and the USSR in
addition to some of India's top scientists from Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research, Indian Institute of Science and the Indian Institutes of Technology.
The conference is likely to enhance the exchange of information and experiences
between the scientists from these countries and to lead to future collaboration
especially between the U.S. and India.