* 8721432
* Dinosaur Paleoecology, Judith River Formation, South CentralMontana
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Peter Dodson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 12/31/1990
* USD 66,000.00

The Judith River Formation of Montana has historical significance as the source
of America's first dinosaur fossils, which were described in Philadelphia by
Joseph Leidy in 1856. However, the formation has since been frustrating as a
source of dinosaur fossils. Beds of similar age farther north in Alberta and
farther west in north central Montana have proved to be more productive. A
dinsosaur bonebed discovered in 1981 in Judith River sediments near Shawmut,
south central Montana, is the richest yet found in the Montana Judith River, and
the southernmost productive site from this formation. Among the taxa represented
are a new genus of ceratopsid (Avaceratops lammersi Dodson 1986), a giant
hadrosaur, very rare postcrania of a pachycephalosaurid, and juvenile hadrosaurs
and ceratopsids that occur with a higher frequency here than at most other
contemporary sites. Work initially focused on the Careless Creek Quarry, but
prospecting has revealed a number of sites in the area, so it is proposed to
establish an environmental transect from west to east towards the Interior
Seaway. A 25 km transect has been established, at the eastern end of which are
found oysters, sharks and teleost fishes. Analysis of faunal changes across the
transect will permit a better understanding of the ecological determinants of
dinosaur distribution.