* 8721945
* Conference on Empirical and Conceptual Research in the      Deterrent Effect of Tax Law Enforcement, Ann Arbor,         Michigan, Spring 1990
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Joel Slemrod, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 05/31/1991
* USD 30,000.00

Tax law enforcement has been an ongoing problem since the inception of taxation.
Over the last few years, the Tax Reform Act of 1986 has addressed the issue,
several states have embarked on ambitious tax enforcement programs, and the
taxation missions of the World Bank to developing countries have become more
cognizant of taxation problems. The academic community has recently devoted its
attention to the problem of compliance, and researchers from several different
disciplines have addressed both conceptual and empirical issues. Because
rigorous and sophisticated research in this area is relatively new and
approaches to the problem are so varied, there is a need to provide exchange of
ideas and direction to those who are wrestling with these analytic and
methodological problems. Dr. Slemrod is convening an international and
interdisciplinary conference to address critical issues in the deterrent effect
of tax law enforcement. Papers will be presented in a two-day meeting in the
spring of 1990 at the University of Michigan. Scholars from economics, law,
accounting, statistics, psychology, political science, sociology, and various
other social science disciplines will participate along with those interested in
the problem from a policy perspective. A central focus of the conference is on
the empirical measurement of the general deterrent effect. Such issues will be
examined as statistical methods for dealing with the limitations of cross-
sectional and time-series data, experimental analyses of the deterrent effect,
opportunities for new data sources and techniques, attributes of tax evaders and
its relevance for the deterrent effect, and the impact of state amnesty
programs. Also central to the conference is the conceptual role of the deterrent
effect in optimal tax enforcement policy. Such issues will be considered as the
rule that characterizes the optimal size of the tax collection agency; the
optimal policy (e.g., audit policy) for a given amount of resource; and the
tradeoffs between the deterrence role of tax enforcement and its other
objectives, such as equity. Because of the intrinsic importance to policies of
the Internal Revenue Service, the conference is jointly supported by that agency
and by the National Science Foundation. The conference will contribute to
progress in this area in important ways. Because parallel and complementary
research is proceeding in different places (including different countries) and
from different disciplines, a sharing of information and insights will improve
the quality of future research. It will also be valuable to have empirical
researchers participate in panels devoted to theory or policy analysis, and
conversely to expose theorists to the issues arising in empirical analyses. The
conference will allow the development of a conceptual framework for ongoing
empirical research on tax compliance which will have far reaching significance
not only for the public purse but also for understanding compliance with law in
general.