* 8721768
* Ion Trap and Hybrid Mass Spectrometry: Instrumentation and  Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1988,03/31/1994
* Robert Cooks, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Henry N. Blount, III
* 03/31/1994
* USD 1,077,539.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfields of mass spectrometry and surface science. The unifying theme of
this broad experimental thrust is the development of new mass spectrometry
instrumentation and its exploitation in the solution of challenging problems in
trace analysis and materials characterization. Two related subareas are being
addressed in this project. One focusses on the study of the interactions of low
energy ions with surfaces. It seeks to detail the charge transfer, dissociation,
and reaction phenomena that occur when relatively low energy monatomic and
polyatomic ions strike the surfaces of metals and molecular solids. In order to
carry out these studies, Professor Cooks and his students are building a new
hybrid mass spectrometer that enables mass, angle, and kinetic energy selection
of both reactant and product ions involved in these surface processes. This
instrument also permits investigation of the chemical modification of surfaces
by low energy ion deposition and high energy ion impact. The second subarea
focusses on the development, characterization, and application of two other new
mass spectrometry instruments, an ion trap mass spectrometer and a hybrid magnet
and electric sector machine. With these two instruments, collision-activated
dissociation, photoionization, photodissociation, and ion-molecule reaction
techniques will be used to study phenomena of remote site fragmentation,
thermodynamic vs kinetic control of gas phase dissociation processes, the use of
doubly charges ions as chemical ionization reagents, the role of excited
electronic states in the dissociation of small perfluorinated ions, and the
formation of and reaction chemistry of energetic hypervalent species. This
research will lead to the development of new mass spectrometric instrumentation
and to improved, sensitive methods of chemical characterization. Additionally,
this work should give rise to the continued reassertion of U.S. technology in
the area of mass spectrometry. This is of particular interest at present
inasmuch as the leading commercial firms in the mass spectrometry world market
are currently in the United Kingdom and in Japan. It is expected that the
efficient transfer of technology from the laboratories of Professor Cooks and
other NSF grantees to U.S. manufacturers could significantly alter this picture
in the next few years.