* 8721157
* RUI: Corresponding Memory Mechanisms in Humans and Animals
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1988,01/31/1992
* Howard Eichenbaum, Wellesley College
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1992
* USD 227,282.00

When human beings sustain a stroke, traumatic head injury or neurotoxic
poisoning, they may suffer from "organic amnesia" -- a form of memory loss
resulting from damage to the brain. Clinical studies of these people have
increased our understanding of normal memory in two ways. First, we have been
able to identify many of the brain structures involved in memory. Second, we are
better able to understand some of the basic mechanisms of memory as we learn
what causes it's malfunction. Animal models of organic amnesia have furthered
our understanding of memory because the conditions leading to such memory
deficits can be more carefully controlled. Studies of animal memory often cannot
be compared directly to human memory, in part because the information we ask
animals to remember may bear but little meaning to their lives. In their recent
studies, Drs. Eichenbaum and Cohen have shown that rodents possess exceptionally
good abilities in learning about odors. In fact, their olfactory learning
capabilities may be as powerful as are visual memories of humans and monkeys. In
these studies, Drs. Eichenbaum and Cohen will utilize rodents' striking
olfactory learning capacities to: (1) develop new and more powerful memory tasks
similar to those used so successfully in monkeys and humans, (2) use these tasks
to test whether rats demonstrate amnesia as humans do after damage to specific
brain structures, and (3) employ variations of these tasks to clarify how
memories are encoded within specific brain regions. The results should indicate
whether the qualities of memory are the same in humans and in animals. In
addition, their results may help in the search for treatments of memory loss.