* 8721741
* Adhesion Deformation and Fusion of Bilayer Vesicles and     Other Amphiphilic Structures in Solution
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Jacob Israelachvili, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 09/30/1990
* USD 180,000.00

Forces between amphiphilic structures such as bilayers, vesicles, microemulsion
droplets and biological membranes are accompanied by elastic deformation of the
structures as they approach and come into contact. These deformations are
dependent on both the inter-aggregate and intra-aggregate forces and their
coupling. This project is a study of the adhesion, fusion and accompanying
structure deformations using direct force measurements, freeze-fracture, and in-
situ frozen hydrate electron microscopy techniques. The experimental conditions
are modified to test the effects of undulation, electrostatic interactions,
hydration and hydrophobic interactions on the adhesion and fusion process. This
is the first systematic effort to understand the coupling between inter-and
intra-aggregate interactions and the resulting structural modifications that
occur when amphiphilic structures are brought into contact. A video recording
system allows one to follow the fusion process in real time using a surface
forces apparatus. Though a number of these apparatus exist in various
laboratories, none is being deployed to study the dynamics of fusion as in this
work. The combination of rapid freezing, artifact-free freeze-fracture and in-
situ frozen-hydrated electron microscopy applied to amphiphilic structures is
also unprecedented. The techniques present direct images of three-dimensional
structural transitions with molecular resolution. This project should have a
major impact on both the theory and practice of all phenomena involving
interbilayer and intermembrane interactions. The expected new insights into the
fundamental forces and molecular events accompanying the fusion of micelles,
bilayers, vesicles, microemulsion droplets, foams, emulsions and surfactant-
coated colloidal particles will be especially important as this has been the
focus of much attention in the colloid and biological sciences. The stability of
vesicles and their usefulness as drug carriers, the stability of colloidal
dispersions, breaking and creating foams and emulsions, the effectiveness of
surfactants in flotation, and the wear of boundary lubricants are all examples
where understanding of basic mechanisms are still lacking. Of greatest possible
importance is the ability to directly study the interactions of real biological
membranes and other specific interactions involving biological macromolecules.