* 8721094
* Early Diagenetic Effects of Phases and Abundances of Water  in Skeletal Carbonates in Coral Reef and Associated         Sediments on San Salvador Island, Bahamas
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Susan Gaffey, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1991
* USD 76,060.00

Carbonate skeletons of plants and animals are the major components of marine
carbonate sediments. The chemical and mineralogical compositions of these
skeletons both control responses of skeletal material to and act as tracers for
monitoring diagenetic processes. Although water (liquid and bound inorganic H2O
and OH-) is the second or third most abundant component of carbonate skeletons,
little is known about the different phases present, their abundances, or how
these different phases affect or are affected by diagenetic alteration, even in
skeletons of the most important sediment-producing taxa. The goals of this
research are to study the interactions between intrinsic water in carbonate
skeletons and early diagenetic processes. The first object of the work will be
to quantitatively characterize the water content of skeletons of living
representatives of major framework and sediment producing taxa. Amount of water
present, the phases in which it occurs, and the abundances of these phases will
be related to skeletal mineralogy, chemistry, and microstructure, and to
taxonomy. The second phase of the work will examine interactions of early
diagenetic processes with the forms and abundance of water in fossil skeletons
of these same taxa, and the ways in which early changes in abundance and form of
water affect the subsequent diagenetic alteration of these skeletons.