* 8721192
* Dissecting the Biological Explosion at the Precambrian- Cambrian Transition: Integration of Geological and Paleontological Perspectives
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1990
* James Valentine, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 07/31/1990
* USD 120,008.00

The extent and complexity of problems posed by the record of the transition from
the Proterozoic to the Phanerozoic require a multidisciplinary approach. A
consortium is proposed, integrating individual missions of five principal
investigators, together with extensive support from consultants and
collaborators, into a combined geological-paleontological project, organized so
as to bear upon the pattern, conditions and consequences of the great radiation
of metazoans during that time. Major problems to be addressed include the
fidelity of the geological and fossil record during the transition, the
biostratigraphy and correlation of sections, the paleoenvironmental settings
represented, the fossil associations and paleobiodistributions to be found, and
the patterns of diversification of major metazoan clades. Methods include field
work at key sections (including the US, Australia, China and the USSR);
laboratory analyses of samples and specimens; compilation and evaluation of many
stratigraphic sections; compilation and analysis of databases of
photoautotrophs, of shelly invertebrates at the species level, and of the early
radiations of all phyla, classes and orders, living and fossil; and computer
modelling of the dynamics of the faunal radiations, turnovers and compositional
changes found during the transition. Collaborators will provide expertise on
paleogeographical, paleomagnetic, geochemical, ichnological, taphonomic,
statistical and computer modelling, as well as on sedimentological and
paleontological topics which lie beyond the competence of the principal
investigators.