* 8721466
* Collaborative Research: Archaeomagnetic Investigations of   Geomagnetic Field Behavior in North and South America
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Robert Sternberg, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 09/30/1991
* USD 67,006.00

In the United States archaeomagnetism has been used primarily as an
archaeological dating technique and has seldom been used to study the Earth's
magnetic field. This project will use well- dated archaeological sites to
acquire archaeomagnetic data relating to three problems: 1) the direction and
intensity of the field at spot locations in the Western Hemisphere between 1550
and 1800 A.D., 2) the continuous record of directional changes in the American
Southwest from 200 B.C.. to 1800 A.D., and 3) the record of intensity changes
over the past 10,000 years in North and South America. In each case
archaeomagnetism can clarify important questions about the behavior of the
Earth's magnetic field that have arisen from recent advances in the study of
historical records, rapidly-deposited sediments and lava flows. Although
standard archaeomagnetic procedures will be followed during the course of the
investigation, an important additional component will be detailed studies of the
magnetic mineralogy and rock magnetic properties of various samples. These
studies, which have never been done systematically for archaeomagnetic
materials, will provide a firmer paleomagnetic basis for the measurements which
we make and will provide new insights into the relative merits of different
archaeological materials and archaeomagnetic techniques.