* 8721314
* Workshop on National Test Sites for Earthquake Engineering  and Geotechnical Engineering Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1987,05/31/1990
* Pedro de Alba, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 05/31/1990
* USD 54,407.00

This action is for support of a workshop whose objective is the selection of a
geotechnical test site or sites for earthquake engineering research and for
general geotechnical engineering research. Before the foundation of a building
is excavated, the site is characterized by means of a morphological, geological,
and hydrological examination. The process of exploring to characterize or define
small scale properties of substrata at construction sites is unique to
geotechnical engineering: In other engineering disciplines, material properties
are specified during the design, or before construction or manufacture, and then
controlled to meet the specification. Researchers in geotechnical engineering
often require well characterized sites at which to perform experiments. Locating
and characterizing these sites is very time consuming (and often too costly to
justify a single inexpensive experiment) and usually the sites are used only for
a single experiment. There is a need to develop well characterized and
instrumented sites which are available as a national resource to increase
research productivity and cooperation between research groups. The difficulty is
in locating and deciding upon general purpose sites, and in planning for the
maintenance, management, and long term funding of such sites. The purpose of
this workshop is to address these issues, specifically to identify the best
sites, define specific plans for the construction of structures and the
provision of instrumentation, and prepare cost estimates for the development and
operation of each site. The test sites will be used: (a) to study the phenomenon
of soil response to dynamic loading, especially liquefaction, (b) to
investigate: (1) the resistance of buried pipelines to earthquake shaking; (2)
the seismic resistance of constructed facilities; and (3) soil-structure
interaction phenomena (such as the performance of piles), and (c) to evaluate
new tools for in situ testing, laboratory testing, and instrumentation . The
report of the National Research Council on "Liquefaction of Soils During
Earthquakes" recommends that the establishment of an experimental test site be
explored.