* 8721223
* Very-Long-Period Investigation of the Mantle Beneath the    Canadian Shield: A Lakebottom Magnetotelluric Observatory
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1988,02/28/1992
* Alan Chave, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 02/28/1992
* USD 99,925.00

A major feature of the plate tectonic model is the concept of a thermal
boundary layer (TBL) at the earth's surface. This TBL serves as the upper
boundary of the convective systems which drive the plate motions, and is
dominated by a conductive thermal regime. Heat flow, subsidence, and other data
have been used to argue for no significant differences between the deep
structures under old ocean basins and old continents, both of which are at or
very near a thermal equilibrium state. This suggests that the continental and
oceanic lithospheres have the same thickness of about 150 km at equilibrium.
Differences must exist in the upper lithosphere and crust to explain the
buoyancy and mechanical behavior of continental material which helps govern its
role in plate tectonics. A number of competing models for the deep structure of
the continents have been proposed which will be tested by estimating the deep
electrical conductivity structure beneath the Canadian Shield. The conductivity
is a thermally activated process, and should be extremely sensitive to the
radically different deep sub-shield mantle conditions associated with differing
models of the continental lithosphere. The PIs will operate a very long period
(VLP) magnetotelluric observatory in the bottom of a deep freshwater lake. This
innovative deployment scheme overcomes many of the difficulties previously
encountered in obtaining VLP MT data.