* 8721780
* 1988 Gordon Research Conference on Chemistry of Electronic  Materials Ventura, CA, March 7-11, 1988
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1988,02/28/1989
* Alexander Cruickshank, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1989
* USD 7,100.00

A Gordon Conference has been organized with the theme "Chemistry of Electronic
Materials", and it will be held in Ventura, California, March 7-11, 1988. The
goal is to bring together industrial and academic scientists involved in various
aspects of electronic materials science and processing to discuss the
fundamental issues in chemistry and engineering which are central to the future
development of this important area of technology. In this third Conference on
the "Chemistry of Electronic Materials", the emphasis of the first two meetings
on silicon-based materials is somewhat reduced, with increased attention devoted
to ceramic and polymer materials, chemistry, and process technology. The
sessions highlight developments in superconductive oxides, analysis techniques,
novel conductor materials, polymer resist chemistry, chemical precursors for
film deposition, formation methods for materials, and interfacial chemistry.
Major involvement of the academic chemistry and chemical engineering community
in the Conference as speakers, discussion leaders and invited participants is
anticipated. In this way, academic interest in the topic can be stimulated and
the conference can serve as a continuing focal point for the scientific issues
that must be addressed to maintain the vitality of this strategically important
technology.