* 8721417
* Collaborative Research:  Geochemical Study of Arc Magmas    from Luzon and Marinduque Islands, Philippines.
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1988,08/01/1989
* Samuel Mukasa, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 08/01/1989
* USD 32,300.00

The island of Luzon is bounded by a simple system of opposed subduction zones.
Contrasting slabs of "oceanic" Phillipine Sea and "marginal" South China Basin
lithosphere are injected into the mantle, where they appear to impact
distinctive imprints on magma sources. This project will attempt to model
subduction- induced source evolution through geochemical/isotopic study of post-
Miocene lavas from calc-alkalic Bicol and Bataan volcanic lineaments, and the
alkalic Taal-Banahaw group in southern Luzon. Data for major and trace elements,
and Be-10, Sr, Nd, Pb, H, and O isotopes will be used to contrast effects of
subducting (sparse) pelagic sediment and MORB basement with (voluminous)
continental sediment and variable MORB "transitional" basement. Thus it should
be possible to asses the influence of subducted sial on the genesis of alkalic
magma. Several specific questions will be addressed including: 1. The long term
history of the suprasubduction mantle: was this of the MORB, OIB, or sub-
continental type? 2. The nature of mantle metasomatism beneath the Bataan and
Bicol arcs. 3. The significance of accessory phase stabilities; do they
compositionally buffer second-stage metasomatic melts? 4. The role of
subduction-derived H2O. The project will involve sampling twelve active or
dormant volcanoes, and is coordinated with research by the Philippine Institute
of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS), and research groups in West Germany
and France.