* 8721977
* Measurement and Simulation of the Profile Properties of     Undeformed First-Year Sea Ice
* O/D,OPP
* 05/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Wilford Weeks, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 06/30/1992
* USD 328,821.00

This project is a three-year study of the thermal, mechanical, and electrical
characteristics of sea ice as evolutionary functions of the environmental ice
growth conditions. The characteristics of sea ice are complex, depending on
external factors such as air and ocean temperature, ocean salinity, dissolved
gas content, winds and currents at the ice/ocean interface, as well as the
immediate ice growth history itself. At this time the theoretically defined
models of sea ice growth and development cannot be adequately tested, because
independently derived data is not available. The principal investigators have
developed a sea ice simulation model that takes a representative set of
meteorological and oceanographic conditions and estimates not only the ice
profile properties, but also the composite characteristics of sea ice sheets
that have formed under a wide range of environmental conditions. The field phase
of this project, to be carried out on the sea ice off Barrow, Alaska, includes
the measurement of growth, structure and property profiles of undeformed first-
year sea ice. Several times during the growing season ponds will be cut in order
to stimulate the growth of new ice. The measurement program will track the
changes in growth and characteristics through the entire cycle from formation to
deterioration and melt in the following Spring and Summer. Supporting
observations of the meteorological and oceanographic conditions will also be
made.