* 8721844
* Information Sampling During Group Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Garold Stasser, Miami University
* Continuing grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 12/31/1991
* USD 107,860.00

When solving a problem or making a decision, small groups can potentially
benefit from having members who can contribute a diversity of knowledge and
insights. Previous research suggests, however, that decision.making groups
(i.e., groups asked to make a judgment) often fail to consider information that
is held by single members. Face.to.face, unstructured discussion focuses on
information that all members already know, and, as a result, groups frequently
overlook an option that is favored by their collective knowledge. The proposed
research will examine the extent to which this phenomenon generalizes to groups
that are solving a problem with a demonstratably correct answer. Additionally,
the research will examine the role of strategically composed minority factions
in facilitating more effective information exchange during group discussion. By
tracking the flow and impact of information during discussion, the research will
also provide data needed to refine the DISCUSS model of group decision making.
This model simulates the sampling and use of information during face.to.face
discussion en route to a group decision. It provides a convenient way of
representing the complexities of group interaction and of examining the
implications of changes in group composition (e.g., size and factional
representation) and task demands (e.g., number of decision options or possible
solutions and information load).