* 8721823
* Organic Chemistry:  Multistep Synt#hsis, New Synthetic      Methodology, Exploratory Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1993
* Elias Corey, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 06/30/1993
* USD 1,750,068.00

This program, supported by the Organic and Macromolecular section covers a broad
area of synthetic organic chemistry.The synthesis by multistep processes of
several naturally occurring and biologically active complex organic molecules is
under study. Most of the molecules under study are of unusual interest because
of their biological activities. Some may be of value in the development of new
human therapeutic agents. Hand in hand with the objective of achieving simple
and effective syntheses of specific target structures is the development of new
general synthetic organic reactions and methods and demonstrating their
usefulness in the chosen multistep synthetic problems. The discovery of such
methods amplifies the power of synthesis and extends its range of application to
ever more formidable structures. In the course of this effort, a deeper
appreciation of various fields of chemistry, e.g. organometallic chemistry and
chemical theory, can be gained. In the area of multistep synthesis the following
specific projects are being carried out: (1) synthesis of chiral C15
gingkolides; bilobalide and analogs; (2) synthesis of chiral C20 gingkolides and
analogs; (3) synthesis of kadsuranone and other antagonists of platelet
activating factor (PAF ac ether, or simply PAF); (4) synthesis of preclavulone-A
and more complex marine eicosanoids derived therefrom; (5) synthesis of
pseudopterosin; (6) synthesis of glycinoeclepin; (7) synthesis of venustatriol;
(8) synthesis of biotin; (9) synthesis of protosterol; (10) synthesis of
tricyclohexaprenol. In the areas of new synthetic methodology a number of
projects are directed at the important problem of enantioselectivity in
synthesis including the following: (1) further studies to extend and broaden the
important discovery of catalytic, enantioselective reductions by borane; (2)
enantioselective 1,2 -addition of carbon to aldehydes and ketones; (3)
enantioselective conjugate addition of cuprates and other organometallic
reagents to enones; (4) catalytic enantioselective cyclopropanation; (5) new
chiral controller groups and reagents. Finally, a number of new methods will be
studied which ultimately will lead to new and practical methods of oxidation,
C-C bond formations, and ring formation reactions.