* 8721206
* Geology and Recent Volcanology of Nevado del Ruiz Volcano,  Colombia
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1992
* Stanley Williams, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 09/30/1992
* USD 61,500.00

An integrated three-year program including geology, geophysics and geochemistry
is planned for the purpose of studying the active volcano Nevado del Ruiz,
Colombia. Since the November, 1985 eruption, the PI has been engaged in a
diverse set of preliminary projects at Ruiz which suggest that previously held
beliefs about the volcano may be in error. In order to improve our understanding
and to contribute to the general conceptual model of Andean volcanism a four-
task program has been developed: 1) A detailed geological study of the volcanic
complex including analyusis of the age of volcanism, its evolution, eruption
dynamics, petrology, and volcanic hazards. 2) A study of recent behavior of the
volcano as recorded in the nine known tephra layers distributed widely over the
region. Eruption volumes, dynamics and evolution will be a primary focus. 3) A
detailed gravity study to evaluate and model the subsurface structure of Ruiz.
Most of the questions about the unusual aspects of the form and behavior of Ruiz
could be resolved if an unrecognized caldera were actually present. 4) A
continued analysis of the geothgermal system and its response to the mesurgence
of magma. An effort will be made to more completely sample the system, analyze
the alteration products, and determine their age and relationship to the
geological evolution. Additional isotopic studies will be undertaken to
understand the nature of the deep reservoir and the origins of the main and
minor constituents. The goal of the research is to produce an integrated model
of the major northern Andean volcanic center which could then be applied to and
compared with those developed at other circumPacific volcanoes.