* 8721207
* Analysis of the Seismicity Associated with the 1986 Eruptionof Mt. St. Augustine, Alaska:  Relationship to Shallow      Crustal Magmatic Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Juergen Kienle, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Brooking
* 01/31/1990
* USD 66,469.00

We propose to use space-time behavior of seismicity to obtain an improved model
of Mt. St. Augustine's plumbing sytem and to infer the magma migration processes
associated with its 1986 eruption. The ability to accurately determine
hypocentral parameters would be achieved by using a) a realistic two-
dimensional model of the volcano's seismic velocity structure and b) both travel
time and amplitude data of seismic waves recorded at seismic stations on the
volcano. Preliminary results using data from an eruption in 1976 indicate that
amplitude data from forward modeling based on the Gaussian beam method might
provide a powerful means of constraining focal depth. The potential of that
method for volcano seismology requires detailed exploration, which we propose to
conduct in this investigation. Magma movement up the conduit of a central
stratovolcano always produces microearthquake activity due to fracture
propagation, dike emplacement, brecciation of host rocks and eventually vent
excavation. Precise location (especially of depth) of precursor earthquakes
prior to eruptions can give important clues about the evolution of the
physical/chemical instability in the magma reservoir that eventually erupts. If
we succeed in developing an earthquake location scheme that is highly sensitive
to depth of focus it could have an important application for eruption
prediction.