* 8721458
* Income Distribution, Market Size and Industrialization
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Kevin Murphy, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 12/31/1990
* USD 168,477.00

In many less developed countries, industrialization begins when a leading sector
such as agriculture or commodity exports generates income that enlarges domestic
markets for manufactured goods. As domestic markets grow, industries that could
not break even in smaller markets become profitable. One of the critical
determinants of market size that can affect the success of industrialization is
the distribution of income. If profits from an export or agricultural boom are
too unequally distributed, they will be spent on domestic or imported luxuries,
rather than on domestic, industrialized goods. The effect of income distribution
on market size can help explain the success and failure of industrialization in
several historical episodes. It can also shed light on the effects of
industrialization on the distribution of income and export promotion. The
purpose of this project is to explore theoretically the determinants of market
size for manufacturing goods in an under developed country and to relate market
size to the extent of industrialization. Of particular interest is the effects
of the composition of consumer demand on the possibility of viable
industrialization. Attention will also be paid to the question of whether
industrialization, itself, can generate enough income and, therefore, demand for
industrial goods so that manufacturing firms can enjoy increasing returns to
scale and enhanced profitability.