* 8721483
* Social Structure and Dispute Settlement, Award in Indian andU.S. Currencies
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1988,04/30/1991
* S Vincentnathan, Aurora University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 04/30/1991
* USD 34,800.00

To enhance our understanding of dispute settlement, study of settlement by
informal modes of justice as well as by formal courts is needed. A core issue
for scientific inquiry is whether the social structure in a village influences
the effectiveness of dispute management by informal modes. The research being
undertaken by Dr. Vincentnathan, who will be a guest scientist at Annamalai
University in India, offers an opportunity to assess the impact of variation in
social ideology on dispute processing, while holding constant the cultural and
linguistic context in which this variation occurs. Specifically, utilizing
ethnographic methods, Dr. Vincentnathan seeks to examine traditional dispute-
handling tribunals in two villages with differing caste structures in South
India in order to assess the degree to which the handling of disputes serves to
maintain a traditional social hierarchy or to which it serves to foster the
quest for social equality and integration. By examining disputes in the context
of these non-Western villages, the study will expand our knowledge of the forms
that disputes may take and of dispute managing methods. The Law and Social
Science Program and the United States-India Cooperative Science Program
(USICSP), are jointly supporting this project. The source of support from USICSP
is provided by U.S.-owned Indian rupees, administered by the National Science
Foundation Division of International Programs.