* 8721059
* Center for Biophysical Studies on Macromolecular Assemblies
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1995
* Thomas Tullius, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 01/31/1995
* USD 2,547,771.00

A research and training center for quantitative systems biology of organized
macromolecular assemblies will be established. The center, formally called the
Center for Biophysical Studies on Macromolecular Assemblies, will be an integral
part of a new Institute for Biophysical Research being developed at The Johns
Hopkins University. The Institute and the Biological Research Center will
integrate faculty from different campuses. Macromolecular assemblies are now
known to be wide spread and include the gene transcription complexes, the
membrane transport systems, contractile fibers, and the complexes present at DNA
replication forks. These assemblies are central elements to life processes and
lie at the interface between traditional disciplines of cell biology and
biochemistry. Four interacting projects will be the initial research focus of
the Biological Research Center, namely, the structure and regulatory
interactions of protein-nucleic acid systems, the molecular mechanics of the
cytoskeleton, the structure and function of protein oligomeric complexes such as
proton-translocating ATPases, and the problem of protein stability and folding.
The overall efforts of the Center will include collaborative research,
interdisciplinary training, education and outreach. Through the results of its
research and training programs, the Center for Biophysical Studies on
Macromolecular Assemblies should have a worldwide impact on fundamental and
applied biology. The Center will integrate the new technologies of genetic
engineering, computational science and molecular graphics, and structural
instrumentation, to develop a framework for the physical analysis of the
functional mechanisms of macromolecular complexes. These technologies have set
the stage for a new era in the quantitative biophysical study of organized
macromolecular systems. The general discipline of quantitative biology and
molecular biophysics has been neglected, but with the advent of the new
technologies has become very important. These are very central questions in
basic biology, and these research projects will be at the core of advances in
basic biological sciences in the 1990s. In addition, this work is very important
for the future development of biotechnology and the pharmaceutical industry,
among other applications. To strengthen the already strong group, new faculty
positions will be created to add to the 17 current faculty members. A special
postdoctoral training program will form a major component of the Center. This
program will provide a high-level interdisciplinary training for young
scientists, who will be in a good position to advance the emerging field of
macromolecular systems biology. The expectation for the collaborative projects
in the center is that a set of general principles and new conceptual frameworks
may emerge. This would allow a more rigorous understanding of living systems and
more predictive power in the application of biological science to developing
future biotechnologies.