* 8721081
* Competing Psychologies: A Study of External Factors in the  Development of a Science
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Jan Goldstein, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 11/30/1989
* USD 18,000.00

Historians have long argued that science and technology, as human pursuits,
must be inextricably intertwined with the culture and society in which they are
created. Preferences for certain kinds of explanations, choices of research
problems, the manner of presentation of results, etc. all are affected by
factors which are said to be external to the actual content of the science or
technology. That these factors have an impact can be seen in the different
national styles in science. The paradigm case is the differences which are
immediately apparent between British and French physics: the former being
exceptionally empirical and prone to use mechanical models, the latter being
extraordinarily formal and abstract. While the impact of external factors on
science has long been asserted, we have had too few detailed case studies of how
they affect the directions of science. Dr. Goldstein, under this grant, will
examine the development of three different schools of psychology in France of
the 19th century and the role of politics, social organization and public
support in influencing the success of one of these schools. This study promises
to greatly enhance our understanding of how science, especially social science,
is shaped by the society in which it is developed. Dr. Goldstein's study will
address the implications of the French Revolution on the development of a
science of psychology by exploring the three psychological models that competed
in France during the period 1790-1850: sensationalism, rational spiritualism or
eclecticism, and phrenology. Her study will consider the political affiliations
of their adherents, their varying degrees of success at institutionalizing their
theories in the new state educational system, and their efforts at popular
dissemination through informal channels. Arguing that each model furnished
contemporaries with a distinctive and widely used language of mental states, Dr.
Goldstein will seek to explain why eclecticism -- the least scientific of the
three -- won an enduring victory over its contemporaries. Finally, the study
will probe a little known debate over the unity or multiplicity of the self, a
debate reflecting the porousness of 19th century psychological theory to such
basic cultural issues a the attitude toward secularization and the conflict
between liberalism and socialism.