* 8722959
* Biochemical Control of Larval Settlement and its Role in Recruitment of the Coral, Agarica agaricites humilis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Daniel Morse, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1992
* USD 248,490.00

The research proposed will extend the PI's recent findings that larval
settlement of the coral, Agaricia agaricites, is specifically induced by a
biochemical factor associated with certain cructose coraline red algae (CCA).
The proposed research involves studies at the molecular level used to resolve
chemical cues controlling larval settlement in the field. The specific
objectives of the proposed research are: (1) to identify the biochemical
inducers of settlement and metamorphosis of the coral larvae, from identified
inductive species of CCA; (2) to determine the basis for the algal specificity
to the coral larvae; (3) to determine whether the identified biochemical cues
purified from CCA and found capable of inducing settlement and metamorphosis in
the laboratory actually do so in the field; and (4) to determine the
contributions of such biochemical cues to the control of settlement in the field
relative to other environmental parameters. The significance of this research is
to assess the contribution of larval recognition of natural chemical cues for
settlement and metamorphosis in determining patterns of recruitment. This
research is a first step in differentiating between ecological and molecular
("marine biotechnological") factors controlling settlement, metamorphosis and
recruitment of marine invertebrates.