* 8722982
* Conference on Arachadonic Acid Metabolism in the Nervous    System:  April 14-16, 1988; Bethesda Hyatt, Bethesda, MD
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1989
* Amiram Barkai, New York Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 09/30/1989
* USD 5,000.00

The objectives of the proposed conference are to review the recent developments
in the neurobiology of arachidonic acid (AA) and its metabolic products,
including protaglandins, thromboxanes and leukotrienes, in relation to their
formation, mode of action and functions in the nervous system. The role of these
compounds in the development of certain neurological and possibly psychiatric
disorders will also be discussed. Such a conference on basic and clinical
research issues related to AA and its derivatives in the nervous system should
fill a gap between the extensively researched field of eicosanoids formation and
function in physiological systems other than the nervous system and the rapidly
developing fields of basic research on signal transduction, modulation of
neuronal functions and clinical research on cerebral ischemia, brain injury,
convulsive disorders and other neurological or psychiatric disorders. The
proposed conference is inherently interdisciplinary in approach as the major
areas of discussion concern the biochemical physiological and pathological
aspects of AA and its metabolites in the nervous system. As much of the basic
research on the formation and effects of AA and its metabolites in the nervous
system has been conducted with animals, a major aim of the conference is to
bridge between researchers whose primary interest is in the clinical care of
humans and those working with animal models. It is expected that this conference
will bring together researchers with divergent backgrounds in the biochemical,
neurosciences and clinical fields who have interest in both animal and human
research. The following topics will be discussed; Modulation of AA release and
metabolism in the nervous system; The AA cascade in the nervous system; AA and
its metabolites in signal transduction; Cerebral blood flow and AA metabolism in
relation to brain injury and ischemic damage; AA metabolism and convulsive
disorders; and finally, AA and its metabolites in normal and abnormal brain
functions; and Relationship to pain, sleep and mental disorders.