* 8722457
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: Surface Force Measurement of Plasma Deposited Thin Films
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1993
* Hirotsugu Yasuda, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 10/31/1993
* USD 7,615.00

This award will support collaborative research in polymer materials between
Professor Hirotsugu Yasuda, University of Missouri-Rolla and Dr. Carl-Gustav
Golander, Surface Chemistry Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. The interactions
between solid surfaces can be directly measured as the force acting between two
surfaces, and the data obtained by such measurements provide very important
information pertinent to many applications of materials in which surface plays a
crucially important role. Heretofore the measurement has been limited to freshly
cleaved mica surface and modified surfaces of mica. Because of the inertness of
the mica surface, the modifications of the surface is rather limited to thin
film applications, such as by adsorption and Langmuir-Blodgett deposition
techniques. In order to broaden the scope of the surface force measurement, it
is intended in this joint project to utilize the ultra-thin film deposition
technique known as plasma polymerization, which provides new kinds of surfaces
with improved adhesion characteristics. Plasma polymers have surface
characteristics of low mobility due to the absence of long chain segments, which
are significantly different from those of conventional polymers with highly
mobile macromolecules. Plasma polymers are believed to be ideally suited for the
study of surface forces. The Swedish Institute for Surface Chemistry has one of
the most productive groups working in the area of surface force measurements. In
addition, the surface force measuring apparatus developed by J.N. Israelachvili
has been installed since 1983 in this Swedish institute. Professor Yasuda has
extensive experience in plasma polymerization and its application in surface
modifications. He will gain an opportunity to investigate surfaces of plasma
deposited polymeric materials with the help of Swedish expertise in surface
chemistry.