* 8722864
* Seismic Performance of Flanged Masonry Shear Walls
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1988,02/29/1992
* M. J. Nigel Priestley, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 02/29/1992
* USD 314,345.00

Masonry construction comprises a large portion of building construction in the
U.S. and the world. Reinforced masonry construction use is increasing in
moderate to higher seismic zones because of its apparent features of economy,
fire safety, architectural flexibility and ease of construction. The present
state of masonry structural analysis and design, and materials and construction
technologies does not enable an accurate prediction of building behavior under
lateral loads such as seismic loads. In the U.S., masonry buildings are designed
and built with methods, codes and standards that rely upon a mixture of working
stress methods, empirical rules, and questionable methods for determining
allowable stress values. Masonry is also a complex building material because of
the large number of design and construction variables which influence the final
product configuration and its response under seismic loads. In order to describe
the seismic response of masonry buildings it is necessary to develop the
fundamental knowledge base to determine basic design methodologies consistent
with safety and economic requirements. This research project is a theoretical
and experimental investigation of the seismic performance of flanged masonry
shear walls. The theoretical studies develop predictive models for effective
flange width under lateral loading and also develop load-displacement component
models for lateral hysteretic response that incorporates the separate
displacement components resulting from flexure, shear and base-slip deformation.
Particular emphasis is placed on the asymmetrical strength, stiffness, and
ductility characteristics of T-section walls loaded parallel to their web. The
experimental studies involve static cyclic load testing of T-section masonry
walls and dynamic shake-table testing of T-section and rectangular section
walls. The tests are on full-scale elements and are used to verify and calibrate
the models developed during theoretical studies. This project is part of the
U.S.-Japan Coordinated Program for Masonry Building Research and the Technical
Coordinating Committee for Masonry Research (TCCMAR) Program.