* 8722181
* IGU Global Database Planning Project - Part 2:  First       Meeting; London England; May 1988
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/1987,09/30/1989
* R. Tomlinson, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/1989
* USD 85,000.00

This project is devoted to the pre-planning and organization of the first of two
major meetings on the establishment of global digital map data bases. At the
first, representatives of all identified existing and planned global digital
data bases will be invited to address the status of existing efforts, the need
for global data bases and the decisionmaking context which has to be served.
Attention also will be focussed on the questions to be solved by their use, the
desirable data structures, the potential contribution of (next-decade) computer
hardware and concepts of artifical intelligence to data structures and the
desirable degrees of topological coding, the contradictions in map series data
used as a base, their cost, management, access policy, degree of integration and
reliability. The way in which earth observations are eventually stored and able
to be integrated will effectively determine the degree to which global spatial
processes can be understood. Systematic review papers of potential problem areas
will be commissioned for the first meeting to be held in England in the Spring
of 1988. Working groups will be established thereafter to study areas of
identified concern in preparation for the second meeting in Washington, D.C.,
now tentatively scheduled for 1990. The meetings are under the auspicies of the
International Geographical Union (IGU) and are part of the International
Geosphere-Biosphere program.