* 8722194
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Joint Seminar on Dynamics  of Protein Development and Function, Heidelberg (June 26 -  July 1, 1988)
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1988
* Hans Neurath, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1988
* USD 12,000.00

This award supports the participation of approximately ten U.S. scientists in a
workshop with West German colleagues to discuss the current status and future
developments in research on the evolution of protein structure and function.
This largely bilateral meeting was co-organized by Professors Hans Neurath of
the University of Washington and Robert Zwilling of the University of
Heidelberg. Heidelberg has become one of the leading centers of molecular
biology in the Federal Republic of Germany. Discussions by an outstanding group
of U.S. and FRG protein chemists and molecular biologists will focus on the
structure, function and evolution of specific proteins and protein systems that
have been selected due to their particular biological functions, their unique
structures and/or their evolutionary interest. The meeting should lead to a more
active integration of molecular biology, protein chemistry and the study of
protein evolution, and advance efforts to understand the factors that determine
the folding pattern of protein structures, the expression of their function and
the evolution of complex protein molecules. Current interest in protein
evolution in general, and in phylogeny and ontogeny in particular, derives from
the realization that proteins are composed of structural and functional domains
which are the products of gene splicing and shuffling. While in the past,
analysis of structure/function relationships has been directed toward the
protein molecule as a whole, this approach has changed with the realization that
all but the smallest protein molecules are assemblies of substructures or
domains which have been recruited in the course of evolution from seemingly
unrelated sources in the gene pool. The relation of domains to the organization
of the genomic DNA is one of the most intriguing problems facing the molecular
biologist interested in protein evolution. Many of the topics of the meeting are
also relevant to the processes and potential uses of biotechnology.