* 8722908
* U.S.-New Zealand-Australia Joint Seminar:  Persistence of   Pasture Legumes/University of Hawaii/July 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1988,12/31/1988
* Arthur Matches, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 12/31/1988
* USD 15,462.00

This award will support the participation of eight U.S. scientists in a seminar
on the "Persistence of Pasture Legumes," organized jointly by Professor A.G.
Matches of Texas Tech University, Dr. R.J. Clements of the Australian CSIRO
Division of Tropical Crops and Pastures, and Dr. G.W. Sheath of the Whatawhata
Hill Country Research Station, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, New
Zealand. Participants from the U.S., Australia and New Zealand will meet at the
University of Hawaii in July 1988. The major themes of the seminar will be
development and growth characteristics of legumes, stresses caused by climate
and soils, pests and diseases, Rhizobium symbiosis, genetics and breeding for
persistence, and the management of legumes. The poor persistence of legumes in
pasture lands of the U.S., Australia and New Zealand is a vexing problem.
Research leading to more widespread establishment and persistence of pasture
legumes would result in increased production of foraging stock and an enrichment
of soil nitrogen levels. This seminar will bring together leading scientists
from three countries in order to discuss the present state of knowledge on the
persistence of pasture legumes. The seminar participants will identify gaps in
current knowledge and establish priorities for future cooperative research.