* 8722721
* Design Principles for Computer Assisted Multiattribute      Preference Modelling and Assessment:  A Behavioral Approach
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1988,09/01/1990
* Max Henrion, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 09/01/1990
* USD 122,557.00

The proposed research has two basic objectives: (1) to learn more about how
people make complex decisions, and (2) to develop and test computer-based
decision support systems that are intended to improve the quality of such
decisions. The research considers two factors that make decisions difficult. The
first is uncertainty about what the consequences of each decision alternative
will be, especially in cases where there is the risk of a substantial loss. The
second is the presence of multiple objectives that conflict with one another,
thus forcing decision makers to make tradeoffs among objectives. Two types of
research activities are proposed. It involves laboratory and field studies
designed to learn more about intuitive decision making strategies and the
potential biases and other shortcomings of these strategies. Such research is
important because it allows the anticipation potential biases or errors that may
result from intuitive decision making processes. Second, computer software will
be designed to improve the quality of decisions involving risk and conflicting
objectives. Such computer-based decision support systems are important because
they may significantly improve decision making processes in business,
government, medicine, and engineering. They may even be helpful to consumers
making complex decisions involving substantial financial or health outcomes.