* 8722871
* Dynamic Response of Diaphragms
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Max Porter, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1991
* USD 20,138.00

Masonry construction comprises a large portion of building construction in the
U. S. and the world. Reinforced masonry construction use is increasing in
moderate to higher seismic zones because of its apparent features of economy,
fire safety, architectural flexibility and ease of construction. The present
state of masonry structural analysis and design, and materials and construction
technologies does not enable an accurate prediction of building behavior under
lateral loads such as seismic loads. In the U.S., masonry buildings are designed
and built with methods, codes and standards that rely upon a mixture of working
stress methods, empirical rules, and questionable methods for determining
allowable stress values. Masonry is also a complex building material because of
the large number of design and construction variables which influence the final
product configuration and its response under seismic loads. In order to describe
the seismic response of masonry buildings it is necessary to develop the
fundamental knowledge base to determine basic design methodologies consistent
with safety and economic requirements. This research project concentrates on a
lumped mass parameter floor slab spring system model to be used for dynamic
analysis of buildings. This includes hysteretic modeling for horizontal floor
systems consisting of composite steel-deck-reinforced slabs and concrete hollow-
core precast plank slabs. This research develops an analytical non-linear model
of load- displacement history of horizontal floor systems to provide associated
displacements and stiffnesses for an integrated dynamic spring model. It
provides a computer model using experimental data collected from other masonry
researchers. This project is part of the U.S.-Japan Coordinated Program for
Masonry Building Research and the Technical Coordinating Committee for Masonry
Research (TCCMAR) Program.