* 8722424
* Low Oxidation State Complexes of Early Transition Metals    with Aromatic Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* N. John Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 08/31/1991
* USD 284,227.00

This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
provides continued support for a project in organometallic chemistry, the focus
of which is the activation of aromatic hydrocarbons by the transition metal
chromium. The activation of hydrocarbons is of great importance in the chemical
and pharmaceutical industries, since hydrocarbons are the ultimate starting
materials for the synthesis of most organic compounds. The overall objective of
the research is to explore and develop the chemistry of highly reduced complexes
of the early transition metals with aromatic ligands, particularly their
potential as intermediates in a novel sequence for electrophilic arene
substitution under mild conditions. These experiments build on the recent
observation that electrophiles such as benzyl chloride or the hydrogen ion add
readily to the eta-4-complex of benzenechromiumtricarbonyl, giving
cyclohexadienyl complexes analogous to those prepared by nucleophilic addition
to this chromium compound. Specific objectives of the project include 1)
establishing the mechanistic details of the oxidative addition of benzyl
chloride to the eta-4-benzenechromiumtricarbonyl dianion, 2) exploring the range
of electrophilic functional groups which will add to the activated arenes in
eta-4-arenechromiumtricarbonyl dianion complexes, and 3) determining the range
and regioselectivity of reductive activation/electrophilic addition procedures
with chromiumtricarbonyl complexes of a variety of substituted arenes. The
possibility of reductive activation sequences with arenes coordinated to other
metal/ligand templates will also be examined, as will the feasibliity of
reductive activation of cyclopentadienyl ligands. Napthalenide reduction will be
used also as a route to substituted carbonylmetalates of early transition metals
with cyclopentadienyl and pi-heterocycle ligands.