* 8722411
* Proteins of the Photosynthetic Apparatus
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1992
* David Krogmann, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1992
* USD 244,000.00

This project investigates the interaction of plastocyanin with cytochrome f and
the interaction of cytochrome f with the Rieske iron sulfur protein to learn the
interacting domains and the path of electrons through these proteins. The
function of cytochrome c550 in cyanobacteria and algae will be studied to learn
the catalytic role of this protein. The synthesis and structure of a special
class of carotenoid proteins in cyanobacteria will be examined. The structures
of proteins in a halophytic cyanobacterium will be investigated to understand
the adaptation of protein and membrane structures to extremely high salt
concentrations.%%% This project supports a study of the structure of proteins
which participate in photosynthetic energy conversion. The objective is to
better define the structures of and the interactions between these proteins.
Cyanobacteria will be the main objects of study since they afford unique
experimental advantages. Cyanobacteria are, in most respects, very similar to
other O2 evolving algae and higher plants. They are easily grown and are
especially well suited for recombinant DNA experiments. Their simplicity
provides advantages to the understanding of photosynthetic processes in all
plants. Their long history and special adaptations to harsh environments provide
advantages for understanding the evolution of the photosynthetic apparatus.***//