* 8722663
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research in    Optical Fibers for Sensor Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Theodore Morse, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1991
* USD 12,828.00

This award supports Professor Theodore F. Morse and a graduate student from
Brown University for several short term research visits to Ruhr University in
Bochum, West Germany, to collaborate with Professor Gerhard Schiffner, head of
the Opto-Electronics Laboratory and Professor Martin Fiebig, head of the Heat
and Mass Transfer Laboratory. They are collaborating in several aspects of the
design, fabrication and testing of novel optical fibers for sensor and other
opto-electronic applications. Brown is one of the few U.S. universities equipped
for the fabrication of such special sensor fibers. Their research program
emphasizes new techniques of preform fabrication, the study of specially doped
preforms for use as sensors, fiber lasers, polarization maintaining fibers, and
studies of stress induced effects in fibers. They are also studying how
processing affects the manner in which rare earth dopants are incorporated into
a glass matrix. Prof Schiffner has extensive experience in opto-electronics,
special fibers, applications of fiber sensors, and fiber lasers. Collaboration
with his lab will include a study of frequency doubling in silica based fibers,
using a variety of dopants to increase efficiency of second harmonic conversion.
This will be helpful in guiding the special fiber designs at Brown to achieve
optimum performance in specific sensor applications. The main focus of the
cooperative research with Prof. Fiebig will be fundamental studies of the fluid
mechanics, combustion and deposition mechanisms responsible for the success of
preform fabrication by the Modified Chemical Vapor Deposition Process (MCVD).
Significant advances in state of the art materials research should result from
the interdisciplinary expertise and facilities possessed by these collaborators.
While the technology of silica communications fiber is maturing, the potential
for useful specialty fibers for sensors, lasers, and nonlinear optics is largely
untapped. Optical fiber sensors require a multidisciplinary approach with
expertise in waveguide propagation, materials properties and fabrication. The
proposed research to enhance processing techniques to achieve increased purity,
and also to incorporate rare earth dopants to produce the asymmetry needed for a
variety of nonlinear fiber devices, is at the forefront of this rapidly moving
field.