* 8722198
* Game-Playing Agents and the Use of Contracts as             Precommitments
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Michael Katz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 11/30/1990
* USD 78,835.00

The players in most economically important games are agents, not principals. For
example, almost all significant firms are run by professional managers who are
not owners of the firms that they direct, or who own only some small fraction of
the outstanding shares of the corporations. Bargaining games, too, typically
involve agents as players. The bargaining on the selling side is conducted by an
agent, e.g., an automobile salesman. Moreover, most transactions in intermediate
goods markets involve agents on both sides simultaneously, e.g., the purchasing
agent of one company bargaining with the salesman of a supplier. Game theory has
been widely applied to economic problems under the assumption that the games are
played among principals. This project examines a central, and often more
realistic, class of two-stage games in which some or all of the principals hire
agents in the first stage and these agents (and any principals who do not hire
agents) then play a second-stage game. It is well understood that if: (1) only
one principal has access to the use of an agent; (2) the agency contract is
observable to the other players in the game; and (3) it is common knowledge that
the contract cannot be renegotiated, then the contract can serve as a form of
binding precommitment that induces the agent to act as a Stackelberg leader in
the second-stage game. The effects of agency when any of these three conditions
is not met are much less well understood. The proposed research is intended to
shed light on the effects of agency when these three conditions are not
satisfied. A variety of applications will be considered, including oligopoly,
vertical restraints, international trade policy, and the interrelationship
between financial structure and product-market competition.