* 8722321
* Symposium on Effects of Radiation on Materials, June 27-29  1988, Andover, MA, Group Travel Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1989
* Frank Garner, BATTELLE MEMORIAL INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/1989
* USD 10,000.00

Description: This project supports travel of Indian scientists to attend the
Fourteenth International Symposium on Effects of Radiation on Materials. The
symposium is held every two years and is sponsored by the American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM), Committee E10 on Nuclear Technology and
Applications. It addresses fundamental and technological aspects of radiation
damage. It is followed by a series of subcommittee meetings with full
international representation to develop consensus standards for materials to be
used in nuclear power generation. Participation by Indian scientists will lead
to an increased amount of collaboration with U.S. scientists, especially since
it is planned to invite them to visit various U.S. national laboratories and
universities as part of their trip. Proceedings are to be published in hardbound
books and are subject to rigorous scientific peer review. Scope: Indian
scientists participation is likely to benefit the working of the symposium. They
will be selected based on the quality and relevance of their independently
submitted abstracts, and to ensure broad participation of the Indian nuclear
materials community. The selection will be made by the P.I. and by the symposium
Vice Chairman, with help from Dr. Kanwar Krishan of the Indira Gandhi Center for
Atomic Research in Kalpakkam, Tamilnadu, India who is a member of the Program
Committee.