* 8722496
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Intrinsic Stocha-  sticity in Wave-Particle Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Raul Stern, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1992
* USD 19,950.00

This award supports Dr. Raul A. Stern of the University of Colorado and Dr.
Nathan Rynn of the University of California at Irvine to collaborate with Dr.
M.Q. Tran and others of the Center for Research in Plasma Physics of the Ecole
Polytechnique Federale, Lausanne, Switzerland in a study of the transition to
stochasticity in non-equilibrium plasmas. The program brings together
researchers who are carrying out active projects in this area individually, and
have already collaborated successfully on this topic. Use will be made of
unique, newly-developed experimental facilities, including a 9-meter long plasma
column, fully magnetized and super-uniform, which can operate both as a gas-
discharge (high Te/Ti) and a quiescent (BaII) plasma, together with the newest
laser-induced fluorescence diagnostic technologies. Research will consist of
plasma wave excitation on the ionic branches, together with measurements of ion
velocity distributions and ion transport, to map out the phase-space history of
ions during wave-particle interactions. Results will be coordinated with
numerical studies. This collaborative project combines complementary skills and
resources and exploits a unique, world class research facility in Lausanne that
was specially designed for experimental studies in this field. The topic of
intrinsic stochasticity in wave-particle interactions is a rapidly developing
subject; it is central to fundamental plasma physics and it has direct
applications to studies of plasmas in astronomy and fusion research.