* 8722890
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Breeding Improved    Pasture Legumes from the Cross Trifolium ambiguum x         T. repens
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1988,04/02/1990
* Elizabeth Williams, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 04/02/1990
* USD 9,002.00

This award will enable collaborative research between Dr. Elizabeth G. Williams
of the University of Kentucky and Dr. Warren M. Williams and John Vanden Bosch
of the Grasslands Division, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
located at Palmerston North, New Zealand. These researchers will produce
interspecific genetic hybrids between white clover and kura clover in order to
construct breeding populations of advanced generation hybrids and backcrosses to
both parents. White clover, Trifolium repens, is a major pasture legume in both
the U.S. and New Zealand. While this clover has the ability to withstand heavy
grazing if moisture is adequate, thus improving the quality of grasslands both
with respect to digestible energy and protein, and in terms of symbiotic
nitrogen fixation, unfortunately its use is limited by a lack of persistence
under lowered moisture conditions. Kura (Caucasian) clover, Trifolium ambiguum,
possessess a vigorous underground perennial root and rhizome system and is both
more drought resistant and shows resistance to a number of different viruses
which affect white clover. The University of Kentucky staff will focus their
activity on the generation of new hybrids through a seed embryo rescue technique
which they have developed along with chromosome doubling and tissue culturing of
hybrid materials. Virus testing studies will also be conducted in the U.S. The
New Zealand investigators will focus their work on X-irradiation to enhance
genetic exchange, the development of further advanced generation hybrids, and
the selection for fertility and agronomic performance of the new hybrid
materials. The collaboration between the U.S. and New Zealand investigators,
working in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, enables a doubling in the
growing of experimental hybrid clover crops each year.