* 8722639
* Characterization and Optimization of Atomic Spectrometric   Processes and Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Gary Hieftje, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 09/30/1991
* USD 517,852.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of atomic spectroscopy. The goal of this experimental activity is
the enhancement of the sensitivity, precision, accuracy, and degree of utility
of atomic spectrometric analysis. To this end, three thrusts are being pursued.
First, techniques that were developed by Professor Hieftje under NSF grant
CHE-8320053 are being employed to elucidate the mechanism of solute particle
vaporization and atom formation in flames and plasmas of the type used for
multielement analysis. Clarification of these events can be expected to reduce
interelement interferences caused by incomplete vaporization. In a second
thrust, rare-gas plasmas are being studied in an effort to determine how they
are responsible for excitation of atoms and ions introduced into them.
Particular emphasis is being placed upon understanding the characteristics of
electrons in such discharges and the role that the electrons play in
transferring plasma energy to analyte atoms and ions. Finally, fundamental
investigations that are aimed at a better understanding of how interferences
arise in plasma-source mass spectrometry are being pursued. In aggregate, these
studies should give rise to improved atomic spectroscopic methods of analysis
and a better understanding of fundamental processes that take place in rare-gas
plasmas. This, in turn, should enable the broader, more efficient use of the
inductively coupled plasma as a source element in chemical instrumentation.