* 8722348
* Expedited Award for Novel Research:  New Processes for      Producing Cluster Based Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Ronald Andres, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1989
* USD 30,000.00

A one year feasibility study is proposed to explore: (1) the use of Langmuir-
Blodgett technology for production of monolayer and lamellar films of metal
clusters and (2) A cluster based process for producing high quality diamond
films. These are described as follows: Research Plan 1: The initial objective of
the study is to measure surface versus surface area relationships for gold
clusters bound to a variety of surfactant molecules. A series of organic
molecules consisting of straight chain alkanes with various functional groups
(ethylene, hydroxyl, amine, and carboxyl) attached at each end are tested as
surfactants. Once the ability to assemble cluster monolayers at the air/water
interface is established, the transfer of these films to solid substrates and
the structure of the resulting films will be studied. Both TEM and STEM are used
to explore the uniformity of the cluster films. Finally both optical and
electrical measurements will be carried out on the films. Research Plan 2: The
second project has the same potential for significant technological and economic
impact as the first but is more uncertain as to its outcome. The Multiple
Expansion Cluster Source (MECS) concept, which has proven so successful in the
assembly of nanometer size clusters of metal atoms, is used for controlled
polymerization. The reaction to be studied is the formation of polyacetylene
molecules suspended as aerosol particles in an inert gas carrier. If this
research is successful, it will provide a method for producing polyacetylene
with controlled molecular weight and a narrow molecular weight distribution. The
ultimate goal of the project, however, is proof of feasibility of production of
carbon clusters having ideal sp3 or diamond-like bonding and the deposition
these clusters to form high quality films.