* 8722445
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on the Application of a Unified Theory of Gas-Liquid Chromatography
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Daniel Martire, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1990
* USD 9,100.00

This award supports Dr. Daniel E. Martire of Georgetown University for
cooperative research in separation processes with Professor Ervin Kovats of the
Ecole Polytechnique Federal of Lausanne, Switzerland. Their collaboration draws
on the respective expertise of Dr. Martire in theoretical analysis and Prof.
Kovats in novel chemical synthesis, and on their common strength in the
measurement of thermodynamic solution properties by gas-liquid chromatography
(GLC). The primary objective of their research is to develop more reliable and
quantitative, correlative and predictive methods for GLC retention, based on
sound molecular theory. They have completed experimental studies on well-
characterized systems, carefully selected to display a wide range of molecular
chain length and interactional effects. Dr. Martire now plans to apply a novel
unified theory of chromatography to the theoretical analysis of the
thermodynamic results. A further objective of their collaboration is to guide
the synthesis of polar and polarizable standard liquid phases for GLC, based on
the Apolane compounds developed in Switzerland. Chromatography is the most
important and widely used instrumental method for the physical separation of
mixtures of chemical compounds, and ultimately their identification and
quantification. However, much analytical chromatography is still practiced in an
empirical manner, which is both time consuming and often unreliable, especially
when novel separation compounds are encountered. The results of this research
will promote a more informed and efficient approach to assessing GLC
separations, by guiding the selection or design of the most effective mobile and
stationary phases for a given separation.