* 8722944
* Functional Group Analysis of Infrared Spectra Using         Auditory Pattern Recognition
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1992
* David Lunney, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 08/31/1992
* USD 80,000.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry, broadly
defined. The thrust of this experimental activity is an investigation of
approaches to extracting molecular functional group information from infrared
spectra and presenting this information as auditory patterns, primarily for the
benefit of visually impaired scientists. These investigators have previously
developed several schemes for presenting tabular and graphical data as
electronic music and now seek to extend that work to develop methods that can be
used to assist in the detailed analysis of infrared spectra. A central feature
of this project will be the use of chemometric techniques to select features
from infrared spectra which can distinguish organic functional groups and
present these features as auditory patterns that will enable a listener to
discern whether or not certain functional groups are likely to be present in a
particular molecule. An essential part of this research will be the
determination of the features of the spectra to be used for generating the sound
patterns. This research has broad applications to chemistry and other
experimental fields in science and engineering. Additionally, this project is
important to Foundation activities in both the Science and Engineering Education
and Computer and Information Science and Engineering Directorates. The
techniques to be developed in this research could be useful to sighted as well
as to visually impaired scientists.