* 8722369
* Local-Global Analysis for Plastic Collapse of Shells
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Phillip Gould, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 02/28/1991
* USD 149,053.00

The collapse of shell structures often occurs suddenly, is localized in
character, and almost always associated with plasticity in the prebuckling or
post-collapse state. The major objective of the research is to develop an
analytical model which can be used for the study of such localized collapse of
shells. Though the model is to be developed initially in the context of
rotational shells, possible extensions to other types of shells are in sight and
will be spelled out. The nonlinearities are assumed to be restricted to a
definable region of the shell. In this region, general quadrilateral degenerate
shell elements incorporating large deflection and plasticity effects are to be
used to capture the localization of deformation. Elsewhere the behavior is
simply described using axisymmetric shell elements. Connecting these types of
elements, are the transitional elements which have 'line nodes' along their
common boundaries into rotational shell elements and point nodes elsewhere. A
dynamic analysis is to be incorporated to trace the snapthrough type of collapse
which is invariably accompanied by plasticity. It is anticipated that the
research will shed some new light on the mechanics of localized collapse of
shells and be of significant value in the technology of analysis and design of
shell structures.