* 8722254
* Supplement for Women, Minority, and Handicapped Under-      graduates:  Enhanced Sensitivity Chemical Microsensors      Fabricated from Polymeric Phtalocyanine L-B Films
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1990
* Murari Agrawal, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 04/30/1990
* USD 60,000.00

The long-term goal of this research is to critically examine the relationship
between the performance properties and the structure and morphology of Langmuir-
Blodgett (L-B) films and their precursor monolayers in order to determine the
prerequisite conditions for obtaining L-B films having improved properties for
use as chemical microsensors. The transport of electronic charge through a
phthalocyanine L-B film is extremely sensitive to the morphology or organization
of the phthalocyanine units. Therefore, it is essential to characterize and
control the morphology of the multilayer film in order to optimize the
electrical response performance. Attention in this project focuses on
characterizing monolayer and L-B films by further developing and applying in-
situ optical diagnostic techniques, in particular, laser fluorescence
techniques, to monitor the monolayer microhomogeneity and morphology. By
carefully controlling and determining the morphology and structure of the
phthalocyanine films, the investigators will be in a unique position to
determine the relationship between sensor response and L-B film morphology. The
development of chemiresistor technology based on very thin organic semiconductor
films deposited onto planar microelectrode arrays by the Langmuir-Blodgett (L-B)
technique offers the advantage of enhanced sensitivity to detect chemical gases
of industrial and technological importance. This project, is successful, should
help in the design of improved gas-sensitive films for a variety of
applications.