* 8722579
* RUI: Morphological and Systematic Analysis of Bipedal       Dinosaur Footprints from Texas: Experimental and Field      Studies
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* James Farlow, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 10/31/1990
* USD 35,546.00

Dinosaur trackways represent a unique and important resource for interpreting
functional morphology and the evolution of behavior. Dr. James Farlow proposes a
new experimental approach to interpreting dinosaur trackways. He proposes to
videotape and analyze how flightless ratite birds leave their footprints in a
variety of sedimentary substrata. Along with undergraduate research
collaborators, the Principal Investigator will analyze the effects of substrate
character and the age and anatomy of several bird species on the resulting
tracks. Dinosaur trackways of Cretaceous age in Texas will then be studied,
using the experimental findings to interpret the variability found among the
fossil footprints. The proposed research has implications beyond the study of
dinosaur trackways themselves. This innovative experimental approach will allow
paleontologists to more accurately reconstruct the identities, abundances and
age distributions of dinosaurs that shared an ancient habitat. The project will
provide new insight into the biomechanics and gait of dinosaurs, and into their
social structure and behavior as well. Dr. Farlow will be using the most current
techniques for computer-aided shape analysis of the footprints, and his
undergraduate students will gain important research experience under his
supervision.