* 8722509
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Analysis of Data From the South Pole Air Shower Experiment
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1991
* Thomas Gaisser, Bartol Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1991
* USD 8,042.00

This award will support collaborative research between Drs. Thomas K. Gaisser
and Todor Stanev, Bartol Research Institute and Dr. A.M. Hillas, University of
Leeds, U.K. Drs. Gaisser and Stanev will travel to Leeds to work on a data
analysis of the South Pole Air Shower Experiment (SPASE), which is an ongoing
joint experiment of the two institutions. The purpose of the experiment is to
inspect the arrival direction of detected air showers and to search for point
sources of ultra-high energy gamma-rays. The search for extraterrestrial sources
of ultra-high energy gamma-rays is an extremely interesting astrophysical
problem, related to the acceleration of the cosmic rays in the Galaxy and to
processes and models of X-ray binary systems. The South Pole location provides a
unique opportunity for uninterrupted observations of the southern sky, which is
expected to be rich in sources. In addition, SPASE is ideally situated to look
for ultra-high energy gamma-rays from the new Supernova, SN 1987a. The discovery
of such a signal would be of great importance for understanding acceleration
processes and evolution of young supernovae. The detector that will be used for
the experiment is very similar to the array now deployed by the Leeds group in
England to look for signals from Northern Hemisphere sources. Close coordination
of data acquisition and comparison of two independent analyses of the data are
essential for success of the experiment. This research brings together three of
the leading experts in the analysis of air shower experiments.