* 8722253
* U.S.-U.K. Collaborative Research:  Theoretical Physics of   Deformable Glacier Beds
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1990
* Joseph Walder, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1990
* USD 10,610.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Joseph Walder,
Department of Geological Sciences, University of Washington and Dr. Andrew
Fowler, Mathematical Institute, Oxford University, U.K. Recent developments in
glaciology have led to the recognition that deformable glacier beds may play a
significant, if not dominant, role in glacier dynamics. Nonetheless, our
understanding of the interactions between glacier ice, rock debris at or near
the glacier sole, and subglacial meltwater remains incomplete. The proposed
research project will focus on aspects of the physics of deformable glacier
beds, particularly the links between subglacial hydrology, bed deformation, and
glacier motion. There are three parts to the proposed theoretical work: 1)
Modelling of till movement over rough beds 2) Modelling the influence of ice
penetration into subglacial sediments on deformation of such sediments and 3)
Modelling stability of subglacial meltwater conduits on beds of deformable
sediment. Dr. Fowler has made significant contributions to theoretical geology
in recent years and his mathematical expertise will be valuable in pointing out
approximate analytical techniques involved in the proposed research. This
project may lead to significant advances in understanding the physics of the
complicated zone of interacting ice, rock debris and meltwater at the soles of
many glaciers. Because of the growing recognition by glaciologists that glacier
dynamics can be controlled by this complicated basal zone, research on this
topic is very timely and important.