* 8722643
* REU: Molecular Reassessment of Introgression Among Annual Helianthus Species (Asteraceae)
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1990
* Loren Rieseberg, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1990
* USD 79,013.00

The role of introgression in plant evolution has been the subject of intense
interest and speculation for over fifty years. Introgression is the transfer of
genes from one species to another through hybridization and repeated
backcrossing. The classic examples of introgression have used morphological
features as evidence of this process. Because of difficulties interpreting
morphological data in terms of specific genes, these studies have provided only
tentative estimates of the significance of introgression as an evolutionary
mechanism in plants. Dr. Loren Rieseberg will apply powerful new molecular
methods of protein and DNA analyses to measure gene flow among populations and
species of presumptively hybridizing plants. The annual species of sunflower,
Helianthus, are an ideal group for studying introgression because of the
extensive morphological and cytological data base already available for these
plants. Furthermore, evolutionists frequently cite members of this group as
outstanding examples of introgression. The objectives of Dr. Rieseberg's project
are: 1) to determine the significance of introgression among the annual
sunflowers using protein (allozyme) and DNA evidence; 2) to construct a DNA-
based phylogeny for the 11 species of section Helianthus; and 3) to establish a
general methodology for the molecular analysis of introgression in plants.