* 8722504
* Extending the Bases and Improving the Uses of Data          Envelopment Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* A. Charnes, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Shelton White
* 10/31/1991
* USD 271,359.00

The overall purpose of this project is to extend previous work on Data
Envelopment Analysis (DEA)--a method for analyzing and evaluating the relative
efficiency and effectiveness of organizational units with multiple outputs and
multiple inputs. The proposed work builds on previous theoretical nd
methodological work on DEA by the two principal investigators. This research
will extend this work by addressing important theoretical, methodological, and
applied issues related to the use of semi-infinite programming, times series
analysis, envelopment maps, and cone ratio analysis. In addition, the proposal
includes funds for a workshop aimed at assessing the state of knowledge in DEA
and identifying future directions for basic and applied research. Despite the
importance of methods for analyzing and evaluating organizational efficiency and
effectiveness, conventional methods provide an inadequate means for representing
and measuring the complex factors that affect efficiency and effectiveness in
organizations. This innovative project will use anew and powerful mathematical
programming methodology--Data Envelopment Analysis--to address this issue. It is
expected to the development of methods for analyzing organizational efficiency
and effectiveness. The project will also provide important information for both
analysts and decision makers interested in improving organizational efficiency
and effectiveness in the public and private sector. The principal investigators
are highly experienced researchers who have made numerous important
contributions to the literature on operations research and management science.