* 8722715
* Democratic Representation in District-Based Electoral       Systems:  A Stochastic Model of Legislative Redistricting
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1989
* Gary King, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/1989
* USD 37,000.00

The research for this project is building and testing a general model of
political representation in district.based electoral systems. Unlike concepts
such as "equality" and "liberty," "representation," though also a key component
of democratic theory, can only be defined in the context of a specific
constitutional structure. Although the form of representation is controlled by
statute in systems with proportional, or at large, election of legislatures, the
consequences of the American winner.take.all, district.based electoral system
are less understood. The research is organized into four phases. The first phase
is directed at resolving a fundamental confusion in the literature between the
concepts of representation and bias. In the second phase of analysis, using
techniques of probabilistic modeling and statistical analyses, the research will
address how the distribution of voter preferences across districts determines
the aggregate levels of bias and representation in each state. This stage is
aimed at uncovering a potential paradox: redistricting and even intentional
gerrymandering may have effects in predicted directions, but these effects are
short.lived. Research indicates that a decade of dynamic partisan swings and
patterns of voting for incumbents affects representation and bias substantially
more than the legerdemain of any political cartographer. The third phase of the
research program examines how particular geographically arranged clusters of
voters within a state influence the distribution of voter preferences across
districts, and hence, the aggregate levels of representation and bias. This
phase allows the researcher to assess the effects of the numerous constraints
state constitutions and lawmakers impose on gerrymanderers, such as compactness
and limitations on splitting counties and municipalities between districts.
Racial and other group biases can also be assessed in this stage. The final
phase of the research employs a stochastic model and empirical analysis at the
level of the individual voter to explore what factors determine geographic voter
configurations. These factors take on added importance insofar as they influence
the distribution of preferences across districts, and, hence, the aggregate
levels of bias and representation. As classical theories of representation
usually refer to individuals, this will make it possible to unify these theories
with the literature on legislative redistricting.