* 8722629
* U.S.-West European Seminar on Applications of Lasers in     Surface Science; Trieste, Italy; August 23 - 26, 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1988,05/31/1989
* E. Ward Plummer, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 05/31/1989
* USD 8,250.00

This award supports the participation of approximately eight U.S. scientists in
an international workshop on laser applications in surface science, coorganized
by E. Ward Plummer of the University of Pennsylvania, H.-J. Freund of Ruhr
University, and Peter Andresen of the Max Planck Institute in Gottingen. The
meeting will bring together about forty scientists with diverse backgrounds in
surface science, laser spectroscopy and dynamics, and nonlinear optics, to share
their expertise and insight in the applications of lasers to surface science.
The role of theory in this newly developing field will also be addressed. Topics
to be discussed include recent developments in laser technology, surface
processes (e.g., energy transfer, structural rearrangements, diffusion and
chemical reactions), optical techniques, such as second harmonic generation, at
the macroscopic and microscopic levels, nonlinear surface processes and resonant
phenomena at surfaces. The meeting will combine general review talks with more
detailed current research presentations, through the use of discussion panels
and conference summary presentations by leaders in each area. The goal is to
review the state of the art and identify technical limitations, breakthroughs
and future directions, while providing an environment that will also encourage
collaboration. The application of laser based techniques and technology to the
investigation of surface phenomena holds tremendous potential. Characteristics
of the laser open up new dimensions for the surface scientist, while, for the
laser spectroscopist, the study of surfaces offers a new challenge that is a
natural extension of already well-developed studies on liquids, gasses, and
solids. A broad spectrum of scientists and disciplines is needed in this new
interface of lasers and surface science. The field is new enough that there has
not yet been a meeting such as the one proposed here, where both laser and
surface science experts from chemistry and physics have been brought together.
Funding from the Adriatico Conference will be used to bring young scientists to
the meeting to encourage their participation in this important interdisciplinary
field.