* 8722090
* Analysis of Alternative Strategies for Mitigating Hazardous Material Incidents During Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Jeanne Perkins, Association of Bay Area Governments
* Standard Grant
* William A. Anderson
* 11/30/1990
* USD 142,770.00

Planning for hazardous spill prevention and response rarely considers
earthquakes. Similarly, with the exception of nuclear power plants and natural
gas lines, earthquake planning has only recently begun to include hazardous
materials as part of emergency planning efforts. Yet, emergency response experts
acknowledge that toxic material releases may be a major concern in moderate-to-
large earthquakes affecting industrialized and metropolitan areas. This project
will analyze alternative strategies for reducing the number and severity of
hazardous material incidents during earthquakes. The following are some of the
research questions that will be addressed: (1) What specific measures or
strategies are users of extremely hazardous materials, or large amounts of
hazardous materials, currently using to minimize potential problems in the
United States and other industrialized countries? (2) How can strategies
developed to mitigate more common hazardous materials incidents or earthquake
hazards be modified to deal with this combined hazard? (3) Which of these
strategies have been subjected to laboratory testing and/or been tested by being
subjected to an actual earthquake? An interdisciplinary team will be used to
integrate state-of- the-art expertise in hazardous materials management,
earthquake preparedness, and engineering design. The team expertise will be
augmented by that of a technical review committee. Past earthquake experiences
and research efforts will be considered. Literature review will be augmented
with interviews of selected company officials and local government staff. A
range of mitigation strategies will be examined, including risk assessment, site
analysis, structural design, nonstructural safety measures and education.