* 8722904
* An Investigation of the Thermo-Mechanical Properties of Sea Ice
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Robert Brown, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* La Tanya Darby
* 12/31/1989
* USD 34,609.00

Ice sheets are caused to move by wind, currents, and pressure from other ice.
When the moving ice sheets encounter man-made structures (bridges, dams, oil-
production islands,....), they can apply loads large enough to cause
catastrophic failures. Design of the structures clearly requires an
understanding of the ice forces that are likely to be applied. Existing studies
show that the physical properties of ice depend on a complicated series of
factors, e.g., temperature, strain rate, air content, and the size and
orientation of individual ice crystals. Empirical models are being developed to
provide a description of the physical properties of ice but long-term benefits
are likely to result from a more fundamental approach in which the physical
properties of individual crystals of ice are first studied and then the
resulting properties integrated into a more general model.This project
represents a starting point for the study of the physical properties of single
crystals of ice. First, it allows the principal investigator to develop
appropriate apparatus and to demonstrate its success. Second, it allows the
principal investigator to use, and perhaps improve, a technique recently
developed in Japan for rapid growth of large single crystals of ice, thus making
the research feasible. Preliminary experiments on single crystals are planned
but the major testing and analytical phases will require additional funding.