* 8722650
* U.S.-F.R.G. Cooperative Research on Retinal Ganglion Cells: Ion Channels and Transmitters
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1988,03/31/1991
* Stuart Lipton, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1991
* USD 11,610.00

This award supports Dr. Stuart A. Lipton and a colleague at Children's Hospital
Corporation to collaborate in research on retinal ganglion cells with Dr. Heinz
Wassle, Department of Neuroanatomy, Max Planck Institute for Brain Research in
Frankfurt, West Germany. The general objective of their research is to gain a
better understanding of the interactions of neurotransmitters in the mammalian
retina. The particular objective of their collaboration is to identify the
nature of the chemicals operating in specific synapses onto retinal ganglion
cells. The U.S. team has developed uniquely successful techniques for
identifying and culturing in vitro mature retinal ganglion cells from mammals.
They have also adapted the patch-clamp recording technique to this system. The
German group has perfected methods to identify and culture in vitro mature
retinal bipolar cells, a major cell type that synapses onto retinal ganglions,
and they are performing patch-clamp experiments on these bipolar neurons. The
use of these two disparate neuronal cell types from the retina is central to the
collaboration; maintaining a particular neuron in culture from a mature
mammalian central nervous system is quite difficult. Through joint experiments,
they will co-culture the two types of neurons and produce synapses between them.
Then, glutamate-like substances previously found to affect solitary ganglion
cells will be tested for their effects on endogenous synaptic activity in
ganglion cells located among clusters of other retinal cells in cultures. The
proposed joint experiments on co-cultured retinal ganglion and bipolar cells
will enable these collaborators to verify the effects of putative glutamate-like
neurotransmitters at synapses. Their research should result in characterizing
the first known chemical transmitter between identified neurons entirely within
the mammalian brain. This will contribute in a significant way to improved
understanding of the mammalian central nervous system.