* 8722580
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research on    Phenomenological and Stochastic Viscoplasticity
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Erhard Krempl, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1990
* USD 6,270.00

This award supports Dr. Erhard Krempl of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute for
collaborative research in mechanical engineering with Dr. Elmar Steck of the
Institute of Mechanics at the Technical University of Braunschweig, Federal
Republic of Germany. Research groups at both institutions are studying
viscoplasticity by developing and testing models of the inelastic behavior of
materials under stress. While their theories have some common characteristics,
they are based on completely different philosophies or approaches. The U.S.
group has developed a phenomenological, experimentally verified viscoplasticity
theory based on overstress; the West German group is working on a stochastic,
microstructurally based theory. Their collaboration is aimed at giving the
phenomenological viscoplasticity theory a microstructural base and at extending
the stochastic theory to arbitrary loading in one dimension and to a three-
dimensional formulation. The excellent experimental facilities at RPI will be
used to test the emerging models. Modern materials and production techniques
together with economic demands have led to weight reduction and increasingly
severe operating conditions for a great variety of mechanical equipment. Simple
analytical methods for predicting performance of materials under stress are no
longer adequate. Most limiting states of structural materials are associated
with nonlinear, inelastic behavior; modeling such behavior has only become
possible in the past decade or so with the availability of sophisticated
computational techniques. Further understanding of material behavior under
stress and improvement of material models can be expected from this analysis and
synthesis of different approaches to the study of plasticity.