* 8722804
* EPR Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Sandra Eaton, University of Denver
* Continuing grant
* Vickie Lewis
* 12/31/1991
* USD 186,125.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy. Professor
Gareth Eaton of the University of Denver and Professors Sandra Eaton and Martin
Maltempo of the University of Colorado at Denver are working collaboratively to
develop EPR imaging as a viable tool for the determination of the three-
dimensional distribution of radicals in various materials. This technique would
also enable the determination of the full hyperfine spectrum of the radical at
each point in space, for nonuniform distributions of radicals. The current
effort of these investigators builds upon the initial instrumentation
development work in this area by Gareth and Sandra Eaton which was supported
under NSF grant CHE-8421281. The successful development of EPR imaging would
allow the non-invasive, three-dimensional characterization of paramagnetic
centers, both metallic and non- metallic, in a broad array of materials
including those of biological interest. Unlike its now well-developed nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) analogue, EPR imaging suffers from inherently broad
resonances, which necessitate very strong magnetic field gradients, as well as
generally quite dilute concentrations of radicals. Countering this is the
magnitude of the electron spin moment and, correspondingly, a signal-to-noise
ratio which is significantly more favorable than that encountered in NMR. During
the tenure of NSF grant CHE-8421281, the instrumentation necessary for the
proof-of-concept testing of EPR imaging was developed. The primary thrust of the
current research is the development of the software with which the three-
dimensional EPR image is reconstructed from the from the acquired spectra and
subsequently presented; also the breadth of application of this technique will
be ascertained. This research award should permit a critical assessment of
potential impact of this analytical technology.