* 8722713
* Genetically Marked Male Sterile Genes and Hybrid Seed       Production
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Alison Morgan, DNA Plant Technologies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 02/28/1991
* USD 223,395.00

Dr. Jorgensen is developing a general method for producing hybrid seed which
removes the primary barrier to the use of nuclear male sterile genes. These
genes give rise to male sterility only when the plant is homozygous for the
recessive male sterility alleles. As a result, male sterile plants must be
propagated by backcrossing to male fertiles, yielding a mixed population of
fertiles and steriles. Thus, pure stands of male sterile plants cannot be
obtained without precise and expensive procedures for sorting out the male
fertile segregants. Dr. Jorgensen's solution to this problem is to create
linkage between a male sterile gene and a marker gene by introducing the marker
gene to plant chromosomes by genetic transformation. From among many plants
independently transformed with a suitable marker gene, he will select (by test-
crossing) a linkage sufficient for hybrid seed production. The most suitable
marker is seed color, because colored seed can be sorted electronically before
planting. To this end, he is engineering a bacterial gene that determines indigo
synthesis so that it can be expressed in plant cells. The method offers clear
advantages over currently available technologies, whose limitations result in
high costs and/or low purity of hybrid seed in many crop plants. %%% The use of
hybrid plants is well known as a means to enhance plant productivity and value.
This value results not only from the increased vigor and yield of hybrids, but
also from their improved uniformity and quality. Because most important crop
plants display substantial heterotic vigor, hybrid seed is widely perceived to
be a valuable commodity. This project is designed to allow these hybrids to be
sorted out as seeds in an economically feasible way. The aim is to introduce,
via genetic engineering, a set of genes that produce a colored compound in male
sterile plants. The use of male sterile plants is important in producing hybrid
plants because they cannot self pollinate.