* 8722633
* Temporal Logic, Hardware Verification, and Automatic        Theorem Proving
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Edmund Clarke, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1990
* USD 158,422.00

This work comprises several research projects in logics of programs and program
verification. All of the projects are directed towards providing tools that will
make automatic verification feasible for a wider class of programs. The first
three projects involve an approach to verifying finite state concurrent systems
called temporal logic model checking. This procedure will determine if a finite-
state concurrent system satisfies its specification in a propositional temporal
logic by methodically searching the global state graph generated by the
concurrent system. It has been used successfully to find subtle errors in
published designs of tricky self-timed circuits. The first project is to develop
ways of handling the state explosion problem that may occur with this type of
verification. Another project is to extend the temporal logic and its
verification procedure to allow operators defined by automata on infinite tapes.
This is of practical importance since a frequent criticism of temporal logic is
its expressive power compared to automata. The third project involves actually
using model checking techniques for the automatic verification of hardware
controllers. The main problem in this case is to develop methods of extracting
state machines from circuits under realistic timing models. The last project is
the development of a parallel resolution theorem prover to run on Sequent and
Encore multiprocessors. It is already well underway. Since interest primarily in
problems caused by concurrency, one can use a fairly simple theorem proving
strategy based on linear resolution/model elimination. Clauses are maintained
according to some heuristic function in a heap data structure that permits
parallel inserts and deletions. A prototype implementation of the full system
should be running in the next few months. Experiments with other ways of
organizing the theorem prover and with more complicated theorem proving
strategies will follow.