* 8722216
* Instabilities and Noise in Semiconductor Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Rajarshi Roy, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/1991
* USD 166,522.00

The coherence properties of semiconductor lasers determine the limits of their
application in optical communication channels, computation and storage. Before
these limits can be enhanced, the sources of laser instability and noise need to
be understood. Through novel statistical experiments and theoretical
calculations, we propose to discover new principles for the development of
stable lasers and noise reduction by geometric reconfiguration, manipulation of
material properties, and the application of electronic feedback techniques. We
will probe correlations between operating parameters and laser response over
time scales from seconds to picoseconds. We will study (i) reflection induced
instabilities, (ii) mode partition noise and mode-hopping, (iii) the linewidth
(power dependent and independent) and dynamics of solitary and external cavity
semiconductor lasers and (iv) low frequency 1/f noise. The generation of quantum
states with sub-Poissonian statistics by semiconductor lasers will be examined.
The role of deterministic chaos and quantum noise in reflection instabilities
will be studied with very fast transient digitizers. We expect to develop design
strategies for constructing stable lasers. Monte Carlo simulations will be used
to test hypotheses on the origins of laser instabilities in conjunction with the
experiments. The lasers thus developed could be used for information processing,
pumping solid state lasers and for precision measurements.