* 8722021
* The Ethical Behavior of Engineers and Engineering Managers: An Analysis of the Space Shuttle Program
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Norman Hummon, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1990
* USD 82,788.00

The 1970s saw the first sustained and systematic studies of engineering ethics
in the U.S. These studies have been successful at delimiting the normative
dimensions of the field, establishing that concerns for safety, due care and
responsibility are defining characteristics. Some empirical work has been done,
in case studies and surveys; the focus in these studies has been mainly on
whistleblowing and documenting the incidence of ethical problems in engineering
work. Some current research is examining how cognitive and social values enter
into engineering decisionmaking more broadly, to shape design and practice. This
project will break new ground by focussing specifically on ethical
decisionmaking in the practice of engineering. The interdisciplinary team of
investigators will conduct a one-year pilot case study on the design and
development of a specific system or subsystem selected from the Space Shuttle
Program. This analysis will examine the role that organizational contexts play
in this decisionmaking process. Augmented by one or two additional experts as
needed, a panel of three consultants, including an expert in engineering ethics,
an expert in structural integrity and thermal stress analysis and on the
mechanics fracture and adhesion, and an expert in philosophy of science, will
assist in the selection of the case and the information to be sought from it.
They will continue to evaluate the progress of this effort throughout the term
of the award. The project will identify how engineers perceive, articulate and
resolve ethical difficulties that arise in the development of complex, advanced
technologies. Of paramount interest are design decisions that involve such
activities as scale up, extrapolation of performance specification, and
mathematical representations of phenomena. Since these design activities involve
analysis of uncertainty and risk, they create situations where exercise of
engineering judgments, incorporating values, are relied on. This case study will
identify where these junctures occurred. By presenting the completed case to
practicing engineers and engineering students, the investigators will begin to
construct a normative description of how ethical decisions are perceived and
resolved. This pilot will be evaluated for use in engineering education, and
form the basis for determining whether further retrospective or prospective
studies are worthwhile. This project is of intrinsic and practical importance.
The investigators and their advisors are very well qualified; institutional
support is very good. The phased research design is cost-effective. Results are
likely to be widely distributed and of general interest. Support in the amount
of $82,788 is recommended.