* 8722303
* Hosting and Operation of the University-National            Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) Office
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1988,01/31/1992
* William Barbee, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Richard W. West
* 01/31/1992
* USD 1,205,964.00

The University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS), an association
of academic institutions, was established in 1971 as a coordinating and planning
mechanism for oceanographic facilities operated by those institutions. The UNOLS
Office is the focal point for planning, coordination, and reporting of all UNOLS
activities. It provides administrative staff services, prepares and disseminates
ship schedules, user requirements, analyses of annual ship use, committee
reports, new marine regulations and other related information. Support for
special studies and activities, the medical advisory service for ship's crews
and scientists, travel expenses by UNOLS Advisory Council members, committees,
and consultants is also provided through the UNOLS Office. This project will
conduct the activities of the UNOLS Office during the first year of a three year
commitment to UNOLS Office operations by five Federal agencies. These agencies
include: The National Science Foundation (Division of Ocean Sciences and
Division of Polar Programs), The Department of the Navy (Office of Naval
Research), The U.S. Department of Energy, The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, and The U.S Department of the Interior (U.S Geological Survey
and Minerals Management Service). The UNOLS Office is located at the University
of Washington's School of Oceanography. This project is under the direction of
Captain William D. Barbee, Executive Secretary, UNOLS.