* 8722867
* Dynamic Response of Masonry Building Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1988,02/29/1992
* John Kariotis, Kariotis & Associates
* Continuing Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 02/29/1992
* USD 404,171.00

Masonry construction comprises a large portion of building construction in the
U.S. and the world. Reinforced masonry construction use is increasing in
moderate to higher seismic zones because of its apparent features of economy,
fire safety, architectural flexibility and ease of construction. The present
state of masonry structural analysis and design, and materials and construction
technologies does not enable an accurate prediction of building behavior under
lateral loads such as seismic loads. In the U.S., masonry buildings are designed
and built with methods, codes and standards that rely upon a mixture of working
stress methods, empirical rules, and questionable methods for determining
allowable stress values. Masonry is also a complex building material because of
the large number of design and construction variables which influence the final
product configuration and its response under seismic loads. In order to describe
the seismic response of masonry buildings it is necessary to develop the
fundamental knowledge base to determine basic design methodologies consistent
with safety and economic requirements. This research project is concerned with
modeling reinforced masonry to predict its behavior under seismic forces. In
particular the modeling methods which are studied are the lumped parameter
methods and the finite element method. The models are validated by using
research data from experiments conducted by other researchers on components and
systems of masonry construction. This project is part of the U.S.-Japan
Coordinating Program for Masonry Building Research and the Technical
Coordinating Committee for Masonry Research (TCCMAR) Program.