* 8722084
* Modeling Error in Overlaid Categorical Maps
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Nicholas Chrisman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/1991
* USD 79,916.00

Overlaying maps showing zones or polygons assigned to categorical classes is a
frequent and basic process in geographical information systems (GIS). Decisions
or inferences made on the basis of overlaid maps can be no more sound or valid
than the information contained on component maps and on the maps that are
derived by combining and permuting input maps. We possess few statistical
techniques for analyzing the error inherent in categorical maps and even fewer
techniques for alerting those who use GIS maps to the errors inherent in the
images they see. The progress that has been made in developing tools for
treating continuous distributions has not been matched with understandings of
the discrete categories shown on categorical maps. Professor Chrisman's research
will strengthen the theory of map error and generate new statistical procedures
to describe error on overlaid categorical maps. Chrisman's work will make it
possible for maps to be accompanied by information on probable error. Users will
then be able to factor such imprecision into the decisions and inferences they
make on the basis of maps produced by overlay procedures. As part of the process
of developing such indices, Chrisman will explore the development of a new class
of spatial statistics with applications beyond categorical maps. His work will
be an important step toward development of a general and generally- accepted
model of error in cartographic data and in cartographic display.