* 8722497
* U.S.-Western Europe Cooperation in Gas Exchange Measurementsin a Wind-Wave Tunnel
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1989
* Richard Wanninkhof, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1989
* USD 4,315.00

This award supports Dr. Rik Wanninkhof of Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory
to collaborate with Dr. Bernd Jaehne of the Institute of Environmental Physics
of the University of Heidelberg in a study of the influence of waves on gas
exchange at the air - water interface. The initial phase of the research will be
performed in an unusually large wind-wave tunnel in Delft, Holland; its great
size will permit generation of high wind speeds and breaking waves. Drs.
Wanninkhof and Jaehne will capitalize on an opportunity to add their experiments
to an ongoing Dutch research program, VIERS, which was originally designed
simply to study the effect of waves on the backscatter signal of radar beams
directed at the water surface. Dr. Jaehne will measure heat and gas fluxes
across the interface using 3He and 4He. Dr. Wanninkhof will perform gas exchange
measurements of several compounds of biogeochemical significance: methane,
carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide, plus sulfur hexafluoride (a tracer gas). The
Dutch groups are obtaining extensive physical data on wave form, surface
tension, water viscosity, etc., which are necessary complements to the gas
exchange measurements. Much effort has been put into quantifying the
relationship between gas exchange and wind speed, since it is expected that a
disproportionate amount of gas flux occurs in high wind conditions, where, for
example, breaking waves are generated. The exchange of gases between the ocean
and the atmosphere is still poorly understood due to the difficulty of measuring
the process in the field in anything but very calm water. This collaborative
project is the first time that surface water turbulence, which regulates the
rate of gas exchange, will be well characterized at the same time that gas
exchange measurements are made in a wind driven system.