* 8722815
* International Symposium on the Molecular Biology of         Hydrogenase
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1989
* Robert Robson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/31/1989
* USD 10,000.00

The Second International Symposium on Hydrogenase will be held September 19th
to the 23rd, 1988 at Unicoi, a conference Center in Northern Georgia. The last
formal conference was held in 1985 and substantial progress has been made in the
ensued time. The conference is being chaired by Dr. Leonard Mortenson. The
organizing committee is composed of Drs. Harry Peck, Mike Johnson and Jean
LeGall, all at the University of Georgia. Other than reporting the current
status; a determined effort will be made to initiate ways to put together a data
base of information. A cross fertilization of ideas and joint experimentation
will be encouraged. The enzyme, hydrogenase, is essential for the survival of
anaerobic organisms since it couples the oxidation of key reduced electron
carriers to the reduction of protons, and in turn the H produced is used as an
electron source by other organisms, such as the electron source for CO and
sulfate reductions by methanogens and sulfate reducing bacteria, respectively.
In many organisms the function of the hydrogenase is known but in other
organisms the function is unclear. It appears hydrogenase is required to use the
H released during nitrogen fixation. Hydrogenase also functions in a variety of
procaryotes that are important in geochemical regulation. It is an important
enzyme and a meeting dedicated the elucidation of its role in nature is strongly
recommended. These funds will be targeted for young investigators.