* 8722018
* Robert Mayer and the Conservation of Energy:  The           Crystallization of Meaning
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1989
* Kenneth Caneva, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 07/31/1989
* USD 30,000.00

The process of discovery has largely been a "black box" for those studying the
development of science and technology. Anecdotal histories abound: for example,
Archimedes taking a bath and shouting "Eureka|" upon his discovery of the laws
of floatation or Kekule discovering the benzine ring in a dream about a snake
biting its tale. While these "Eureka|" experiences certainly occur, what is
clear from studies by historians and philosophers of science is that these
sudden insights can only be fruitful in the context of a well-prepared mind of a
scientist who has undertaken long careful investigations prior to gaining the
sudden new insight. Dr. Caneva is studying one such example, a critical one in
the history of science concerning the discovery of the first law of conservation
of energy. This is the case of a simultaneous discovery--that is, more than one
scientist discovered it at the same time. That the discovery is simultaneous
indicates how much the ground had been prepared among scientists in the 19th
century who were looking at the interchangability of forms of energy. Dr. Caneva
is specifically examining the work of one of these co- discoverers, Julius
Robert Mayer, who had a flash of insight in July, 1840 while letting blood in
Java from the veins of European sailors. He observed the surprising redness of
the venous blood drawn from the veins of these sailors when they are in the
tropics compared to the color of the blood when drawn in Northern Europe. He
concluded that a lower rate of metabolic combustion would suffice to maintain
the body heat in the tropics and that consequently the body would extract less
oxygen from the red arterial blood. He quickly concluded that the oxidation of
foodstuff is the only possible source of animal heat. This line of reasoning led
him, unlike others who had made similar observations, to a theory that motion
and heat were a single, indestructible force in nature, and that this force was
quantitatively conserved in any conversion. How Mayer reached this conclusion
and what prepared him for this sudden insight has remained a puzzle. The central
aim of Dr. Caneva's study is to render historically intelligible Mayer's
formulation of what became the principle of conservation of energy. In addition
to examining the creative thought processes of a single individual, this study
will throw into relieve important aspects of the "common knowledge" of
contemporary physiology, physics, and several little-known intellectual
movements; assess the nature and significance of Naturphilosophie; and provide a
basis for future comparative studies of Mayer and the other coformulators. In
broader terms, it will provide much needed new information on the creative
processes which lead to important scientific discoveries.