* 8722532
* Mathematical Sciences: Oscillatory Behaviour in Asymmetric  Systems with Loading
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Patrick McKenna, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1990
* USD 45,000.00

This project will emphasize mathematical research on nonlinear differential
equations motivated by studies of large loading on asymmetric systems which
result in highly oscillatory behavior of solutions. By asymmetric systems one
understands those systems in which there is a restoring force which is
asymptotically linear along rays issuing from equilibrium to infinity, but not
linear at infinity. The oscillatory behavior has been observed in partial
differential equations of all types as well as with periodic solutions of
ordinary differential equations and Hamiltonian systems. Recent work has led to
new insights into nonlinear oscillations in suspension bridges, ships and
elevators. One focus of the present work will be to develop a general theory of
periodic solutions of systems of ordinary differential equations. Questions of
primary interest concern the number of distinct solutions, the stability of
solutions and the persistence of solutions under damping. Work is also expected
to continue on computational approaches to Hamiltonian systems as well as on
parabolic problems with nonlinearities which describe diffusion systems.
Applications are expected to arise in areas already mentioned in addition to
electronics, in the behavior of nonlinear capacitors. Methods from nonlinear
functional analysis will be combined with computational tools and singularity
theory in seeking broad general principles in the context of asymmetric systems.