* 8722848
* Distributed Algorithms for Multiple-Access Channels
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Charles Martel, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Bruce H. Barnes
* 11/30/1990
* USD 112,923.00

Computer networks have become very common. It is very important to develop
methods which allow computers to efficiently communicate with each other. One
low cast scheme is to have a single shared communication medium, called a
multiple access channel, such that every computer can receive all messages sent
over the channel. This scheme is currently used by Ethernet and other networks.
If two or more messages are sent simultaneously, they will interfere with each
other, and no useful information will be transmitted. Efficient use of the
communication channel requires a coordination scheme which allows one computer
at a time to transmit. The main goal of our research project is to develop
improved probabilisitic and deterministic algorithms which coordinate the
computers' access to the channel so that the percentage of time in which useful
information is transmitted is maximized. In addition, we plan to show that the
algorithms employed are nearly optimal, which will demonstrate the maximum
possible effectiveness of multiple access channels. We will also develop
algorithms for multiple access channels which give computers on the network more
information. Our results on the performance of this more powerful channel will
indicate the effectiveness of improved channel technology.