* 8722132
* U.S.-Western Europe Regional Cooperative Research: NumericalMethods in Particle Transport Theory
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Charles Siewert, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1991
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports Dr. Charles Siewert of North Carolina State University to
collaborate in applied mathematics with Dr. J. Hovenier of the Free University
of Amsterdam, Dr. V. Boffi of the University of Bologna, and Drs. C. Devaux and
Y. Fouquart of the University of Lille. Using analytical and computational
methods in particle transport theory, they are working on two basic problems in
the general field of radiative transfer: the searchlight problem and the general
polarization problem. In both cases, the F-N method, derived originally by Dr.
Siewert in the context of neutron transport theory, is to be the basis of the
numerical studies. The classical searchlight problem in radiative transfer will
be studied as a first attempt to construct highly accurate numerical solutions
to a class of multi-dimensional transport problems. In addition, exact analysis
and highly accurate numerical methods are to be used to construct and implement
computationally viable solutions to basic problems in radiative transfer models
that include polarization effects. A general radiant energy transfer model that
includes polarization effects will be used to study vector problems in transport
theory where the computational difficulties encountered for non-azimuthally
symmetric problems must be resolved. Dr. Siewert has a distinguished record of
contributions to linear transport theory and a long history of productive
international collaboration. The three foreign groups with which he is
collaborating are major centers of research in radiative transfer and numerical
transport theory and a basis for sharing new data and numerical results has been
well established. The searchlight problem and polarization for multiply
scattered radiation are two important problems first proposed over forty years
ago by Chandrasekhar. They are particularly challenging in terms of numerical
analysis methods. In light of their past work and the increasing power of
computers, it is anticipated that Dr. Siewert's continued collaboration with his
European colleagues will contribute significantly to the establishment of
definitive solutions to these challenging problems in radiative transfer theory.
In addition, the results of their work on the polarization problem may offer a
useful diagnostic tool in inferring physical properties from observed intensity
and polarization profiles.