* 8722474
* Cone and Ovule Development in Relation to Systematics       and Evolution of Taxodiaceae and Cupressaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1990
* Philip Tomlinson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 09/30/1990
* USD 127,988.00

Dr. Tomlinson and Japanese postdoctoral associate Dr. Takaso of Harvard
University will study the classification of two families of conifers, the
Taxodiaceae (swamp-cypress family) and Cupressaceae (true cypress family).
Taxonomic distinctions among these conifers are limited by knowledge of
reproductive features; much of our current understanding depends upon data
provided by morphologists of the last century. On the other hand, conifers
provide the opportunity to examine evolutionary processes and establish precise
phylogenetic classifications because they have an extended fossil record so that
it should be possible to trace lineages directly by comparing existing species
with extinct forms. This comparison is made difficult, however, because cone
morphology, upon which classification is partly based, is determined by
processes of reduction so that the identity of reduced structures in modern
forms is often difficult to establish in preserved fossils. The proposed
research will look at the way in which these controversial structures originate
in the growth of individual cones, starting from early stages of development.
Scanning electron microscopy, which greatly facilitates the examination of early
developmental stages, will be used extensively in conjunction with standard
histological study of anatomy and vasculature. The information will help clarify
taxonomic relationships among living genera and provide models for the
interpretation of the morphology of fossil cones that have been proposed as
ancestral forms of these conifers.