* 8722811
* Modeling of Mixed Pixels and Shadowing Effects in Satellite Data for Geobotanical Remote Sensing Applications           (Geography)
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Nancy Milton, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 01/31/1990
* USD 71,514.00

Vegetation responses to naturally- and culturally-induced disturbances in the
environment may be expressed phytogeographically or morphologically, and
previous studies have documented the detection of such changes in satellite
data. Current image processing techniques limit our ability to detect the
changes in areas having complex vegetation patterns or shadowing caused by high
topographic relief. This study will evaluate several models for interpretation
of mixed-pixels and shadowed data and develop processing techniques to enable us
to extract the maximum spectral information from vegetation. Two study areas,
one having high topographic relief in the northern Rocky Mountains and one
having a mosaic of vegetation communities in the humid eastern U.S., will be
used for testing and verification of results. Satellite data sets to be used
include Landsat Thematic Mapper and French SPOT data. Such technology will be of
use to workers in many fields, including geology and mineral exploration,
rangeland improvement, desertification studies, agriculture, and forestry.
Teaching and counseling activities will complement the research. Two formal
courses will be offered, as well as individual counseling of students who
express interest in a geobotanical project. Of importance to both home and host
institutions is the exchange of information and ideas with faculty and research
staff which will result in expanded skill and knowledge of all participants.
Considering the very small percentage of women in geosciences, Dr. Milton's
presence will be a strong statement to women considering careers in geology or
mining engineering. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1)
to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and
in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to
pursue careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for
women scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.