* 8722540
* Propensity to Sue in Comparative Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1988,04/30/1991
* Herbert Kritzer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 04/30/1991
* USD 83,896.00

In the last several years the debate over the litigiousness of the American
population has continued unabated. On one side of the controversy are the
observers, scholars, and policymakers who cite evidence of apparently ever
increasing demands on America's civil justice system, particularly in the
federal courts. On the other side are writers who cite historical, comparative,
and other analyses that suggest that use of the litigation alternative by
Americans does not differ greatly either from past patterns or from patterns of
behavior in other developed countries. Drawing on a number of existing data
sets, Dr. Kritzer will carry out a comparative analysis (United States and
England) of the propensity to sue. The analytic framework will involve
decomposing "propensity to sue" into a sequence of stages and transitions, with
each of the transitions involving the overcoming of a particular type of barrier
(i.e., the recognition barrier, the attribution barrier, the confrontation
barrier, and the litigation barrier). For each stage of the analysis, a variety
of factors will be considered--structural factors, cultural factors,
informational factors, resource factors, predisposition factors, and problem-
specific factors. Existing data sets (three from the U.S. and four from England)
dealing with consumer problems and compensation for injury will be used
supplemented by semi-structured interviews carried out in England. The analysis
will focus on the relative influence of the factors on the production of
grievances (from problems), claims (from grievances), and lawsuits (from
unsatisfied grievances). The basic question of people's propensity to sue is an
important one. At its core, propensity to sue is a fundamental component of the
citizenry's attitude toward the legal system and the role that that system is
seen to play in the larger socio- political system. Legal mobilization is a
central component of political behavior that has been largely neglected by
political scientists and only recently explored empirically and systematically
by students of the legal system. The results of this research should
considerably advance understanding of litigation processes and trends.