* 8722489
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research on    Genetics of Mobile Elements in Maize
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Peter Peterson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1992
* USD 14,050.00

This award supports three short term research visits by Dr. Peter Peterson of
Iowa State University to the Max-Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research in
Cologne, FRG, to enhance his domestic research by collaboration with Dr. Heinz
Saedler and others. The objective of their joint work is to gain a better
understanding of the regulation of transposition and gene expression in maize.
Their research plans include efforts to 1) investigate further the relationship
of newly arisen unstable alleles to currently known mutable systems; 2) analyze
the En system by isolating mutants controlling the several specific functions of
the En element; 3) pursue the genetic analysis of mutable alleles at several
loci in order to isolate mutant derivatives for additional molecular studies; 4)
analyze populations of maize for the distribution of mutable elements; and 5)
trap master elements at cloned loci for their use in tagging genes. A
coordinated genetic (Iowa) and molecular (Germany) approach is necessary for
most of this work. Dr. Peterson has all the facilities and genetic information
and techniques to manipulate the genetic material. Dr. Saedler's group has the
molecular biology technology well developed and has personnel to carry out the
molecular level analyses. Studies of mobile elements in maize have made
considerable progress in the past few years, with the isolation and cloning of
several elements and the subsequent cloning of a number of genes. This progress
is attributable to the combined efforts of molecular biologists and geneticists,
including these collaborators. Early work has elucidated the general structure
of the elements, their component parts, and their genetic effects. This work has
generated the development of models to explain the role of these elements in
inducing changes in the genome as well as in individual genes. The proposed
collaboration will carry this work further, leading eventually to experiments on
tagging desirable genes that are important to agriculture.