* 8722778
* U.S.-Switzerland Joint Seminar on Cooperative Models in     International Relations Research; Geneva, Switzerland;      December 16-18, 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1989
* Michael Intriligator, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1989
* USD 12,910.00

This award supports the participation of eight U.S. social scientists in a
U.S.-Swiss seminar on cooperative models in international relations research to
be held in Geneva, Switzerland in December, 1988. The seminar is jointly
organized by Professor Michael Intriligator, Director of the Center for
International and Strategic Affairs, UCLA, and Urs Luterbacher, Director of the
Center for Empirical Research in International Relations, Graduate Institute of
International Studies, Geneva. The seminar will bring together social scientists
in various disciplines (economics, political science, international relations,
game theory, etc.) with a common interest in cooperative process models, in
order to survey the current state of such models in international relations
research, to develop new approaches to such research, and to stimulate
additional research in this area. Participants will consider the causes and
consequences of international cooperation at the superpower, regional and global
levels. Fundamental but potentially complementary differences in methodology
between the U.S. and Swiss communities, as well as the disciplinary diversity of
the participants, will enrich the meeting. Switzerland has one of the largest
concentrations of researchers in this field in all of Western Europe; much of
their research has involved collaboration between political scientists and
economists. Swiss researchers are particularly known for the development and use
of simulation models and other types of dynamic models that make use of
empirical estimates, optimization techniques and rational choice concepts.
American researchers have developed and used game theoretic methods, especially
repeated non-zero sum game strategies in their studies of cooperation versus
conflict scenarios. The joint seminar should advance the development and
synthesis of models of cooperative behavior applicable to international
security, politico-economic relations and other forms of interaction among
nations. Its aim is not only to produce explanations of existing situations but
also to generate normative conclusions as to how to conduct cooperative
approaches to international issues, particularly those of international security
and international crisis management.