* 8722310
* Application of Environmental Learning Theories to Spatial   Knowledge Acquisition from Maps
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1989
* Alan MacEachren, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/1989
* USD 35,907.00

This research investigates processes and strategies for learning environmental
information from maps. Although considerable attention has been given to the
role of symbolization and design decisions in map effectiveness, the processes
and strategies used for learning from maps were not addressed until recently.
Studies thus far, primarily by psychologists, have lacked a geographic
perspective that incorporates principles of map design and an attention to how
maps are actually used. An interactive computer map presentation environment
will be devised that allows information presentation and acquisition strategies
to be compared for ease of knowledge acquisition, retention in long-term memory,
and organization of the cognitive representation derived. The research will
investigate the applicability of theories of adult environmental learning,
derived from developmental theories of spatial cognition, to the process of
acquiring information from maps. Two experiments will be conducted to address
the following questions: is there a difference in the cognitive representation
derived from a map 1) when map learning tasks are directed to learning point
features versus route planning, and 2) when a map is presented to users in an
incremental fashion, focussing on landmarks, routes, or regions, versus learning
the map as a whole.