* 8722235
* Using Central Arctic Ocean and Norwegian-Greenland Sea      Sediments as Recorders of High Canadian Arctic Climate      During the Pleistocene
* O/D,OPP
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Glenn Jones, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Campbell
* 01/31/1991
* USD 208,936.00

Global climatic changes affect polar regions, specifically the arctic,in
disproportionately large ways, producing substantial variations inthe extent of
terrestrial and marine ice sheets, of sea ice, and ofocean temperatures. These
variations have not only occurred overgeologic time scales, but are thought to
occur over much shorter timescales in response to the varying carbon dioxide
content of theatmosphere, as an example. Understanding the responses of major
ice sheets to the climaticchanges that have occurred is one of the primary
objectives of marinepaleoenvironmental research. Such understanding is based on
thedetailed study of the sedimentation history of the region, whichincludes the
location of ancient and modern sediment pathways, theexamination of closely
spaced samples from high quality sedimentcores, and the regional correlation of
environmental events. This project will apply these techniques in a study of the
extent andtiming of the decay of the northern hemisphere pleistocene ice sheet.
The deglaciation of the high Canadian Arctic is quite speculative atthis time.
Hypotheses that have been advanced range from the areabeing ice-free to being
covered by the Innuitian Ice Sheet which hadmerged with the Greenland Ice Sheet
to the east, and the LaurentideIce Sheet to the south. The key to resolving this
question lies inidentifying a tracer that may be unambiguously related to
advances andretreats of an actual ice sheet. This project will examine
theoccurrences of high coarse-fraction abundance in selected sedimentsamples
(indicative of general deglaciation) in conjunction withkaolinite-rich layers
(indicative of a Queen Elizabeth Islands sourceregion). A detailed Carbon-14
analysis program will provide a precisetime scale.