* 8722863
* Limit State Design Methodology and Reliability Analysis for Reinforced Masonry
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Gary Hart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 08/31/1991
* USD 196,456.00

Masonry construction comprises a large portion of building construction in the
U.S. and the world. Reinforced masonry construction use is increasing in
moderate to higher seismic zones because of its apparent features of economy,
fire safety, architectural flexibility and ease of construction. The present
state of masonry structural analysis and design, and materials and construction
technologies does not enable an accurate prediction of building behavior under
lateral loads such as seismic loads. In the U.S., masonry buildings are designed
and built with methods, codes and standards that rely upon a mixture of working
stress methods, empirical rules, and questionable methods for determining
allowable stress values. Masonry is also a complex building material because of
the large number of design and construction variables which influence the final
product configuration and its response under seismic loads. In order to describe
the seismic response of masonry buildings it is necessary to develop the
fundamental knowledge base to determine basic design methodologies consistent
with safety and economic requirements. This research project is for the
establishment of a limit state design methodology and reliability analysis for
reinforced masonry construction. Data to validate the methodology will stem from
experimental and analytical research conducted by other masonry researchers. The
results of the research will form the basis for design recommendations and
criteria for reinforced masonry construction in seismic zones. This project is
part of the U.S.-Japan Coordinated Program for Masonry Building Research and the
Technical Coordinating Committee for Masonry Research (TCCMAR) Program.