* 8722876
* On-Line Control of Cell Reduction State
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1988,03/31/1991
* William Armiger, BioChem Technology Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 03/31/1991
* USD 206,991.00

The development of on-line, sensor-based control systems capable of directly
monitoring and responding to biochemical events inside a cell would be a major
advance in the regulation of the complex biochemical reactions needed to
synthesize commercial products. Using the butanol fermentation as a model system
in Phase I, the feasibility for process control was demonstrated by running
continuous fermentations in which the reducing agent, benzyl viologen, was
successfully used to control culture fluorescence at a predetermined set point.
It is the premise of the Phase II project that using additives to control the
reduction state of the cell is a generic phenomenon that is likely to result in
novel operating strategies for a broad range of fermentation and cell
cultivation processes. The research program is designed to study the
relationship between the intracellular reduction state as measured by the ratio
of ıNAD(P)H/(NAD(P) + NAD(P)H! and enhanced product formation in several broad
types of processes. Building upon the results of Phase I, the butanol
fermentation will be employed as the system to quantify product formation as a
function of the reduction state in anaerobic procaryotes. Recombinant E. coli
will be used to study aerobic procaryotic cells to determine the relationship
between the reduction state and the optimal expression of genetically engineered
polypeptides and proteins. Eucaryotic cells will be studied by using hybridomas
as the model system to examine the production of monoclonal antibodies as a
function of cell reduction state. In all three systems, the concentration of
intracellular NAD(P)H will be used as the control variable for regulating
product biosynthesis. Sophisticated systems for monitoring and controlling
fermentation and mammalian cell cultivation processes are needed for the scale-
up and commercial production of many products of biotechnology, such as
plasminogen activator, monoclonal antibodies, interfon, and interleucon-2. The
currently available on-line process sensors are few in number (i.e. temperature,
pH, dissolved oxygen, redox, etc.) and limited by the fact that they measure
environmental variables and not the intracellular characteristics. None of the
currently available on-line process sensors are able to measure intracellular
metabolism directly. The development of on-line process sensors are able to
measure intracellular metabolism directly. The development of on-line, sensor-
based control systems capable of directly monitoring and responding to
biochemical events inside a cell would be a major advance in the regulation of
the complex biochemical reactions needed to synthesize commercial products. The
objective for the research is to use the recently developed instrumentation for
monitoring the health of cells. This ability to measure changes directly in
intracellular metabolism will be the motivation for developing innovative
process control techniques. It is anticipated that the proposed research will
ultimately result in -2- improved process control with increased productivity
and lower costs for a broad range of commercial fermentation and cell
cultivation processes.