* 8722200
* A New Methodology for Teaching Engineering Ethics
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Tom Austin, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 01/31/1991
* USD 91,420.00

Undergraduate engineering curricula in the U.S. require issues of engineering
ethics to be addressed. Engineers and the engineering profession recognize that
students need to learn how to use and assess available information in making
ethical decisions, and how to test and develop their own perspectives on
professional ethics. They need to develop the thought processes necessary to
integrate information with acceptable professional "norms" of behavior, to make
ethical decisions. Yet, surveys demonstrate little in the way of formal or
systematic approaches to the development and testing of new curricula or
teaching methods. This project will develop an interactive computer simulation
to assist in teaching undergraduate engineering students to develop critical
thinking skills and apply them to the consideration of ethical, legal and social
aspects of engineering decisions. The goal is to develop a tool that can serve
to supplement and extend traditional teaching in engineering ethics. This
initial phase of the project will develop and test an expert system simulation
of one to five scenarios. Several expert system shells will be evaluated for
this purpose. Data bases for the simulation will be designed to incorporate data
from all branches of engineering and all states; but the initial model will use
data collected only from Iowa and from civil engineering. The computer data bank
will contain information from professional societies and advice from colleagues
and attorneys, and from other sources, which students must evaluate to arrive at
their final decisions. The approach should provide students with simulated real
world experiences and expose them to the complexities and uncertainties in
resolving problems in engineering ethics. This project addresses an important
issue in a unique way. The research team is interdisciplinary and well qualified
to collaborate in the development of the "engineering ethics tutorial."
Collaboration and further effort are likely to continue beyond the duration of
this award. The project is designed well; appropriate testing and dissemination
are planned for this initial phase. University support is good. An award in the
amount of $91,420 is therefore recommended, to be made in two equal increments.
The first half will be awarded in this fiscal year.