* 8722613
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research Magnetoelastic Studies Using Gigahertz Ultrasonics
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Werner Wolf, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1991
* USD 6,990.00

This award will support collaborative research in solid state physics between
Dr. Werner P. Wolf, Yale University and Dr. J.F. Gregg, Clarendon Laboratory,
Oxford University, U.K. Ultrasonic waves have long been used to study
magnetoelastic properties. By measuring the transit time of a short pulse, one
obtains information about changes of length resulting from magnetostrictive
effects, and also about changes of elastic moduli corresponding to changes in
the magnetic state of the material. Recent developments of high frequency
ultrasonic transducers, using sputtered ZnO films, have made possible
magnetoacoustic studies at gigahertz frequencies. A group at Oxford University
led by Dr. Gregg has developed a cryogenic system for such experiments and is
currently using it to study magnetic phase transitions in rare earth insulators.
A group at Yale under Dr. Wolf has long experience with rare earth insulators
and with phase transitions. It is proposed to enter into a collaborative
arrangement in which experiments done at Oxford will be analyzed at Yale. Also,
a number of collaborative experiments will be carried out jointly at Oxford. The
work will concentrate on magnetic systems in which a number of basic phenomena
can be studied. These include transformations between time reversed
antiferromagnetic states, involving metastability, nucleation and domain growth,
and other order-order and order-disorder phase transitions. Unexplained effects
previously observed in magnetoelectric experiments may also be resolved. Further
developments of microwave ultrasonic techniques may be expected, and these could
have important applications to devices involving four-wave mixing and phase
conjugation.