* 8722866
* The Transverse Response of Masonry Walls Subjected to       Strong Motion Earthquakes, Analytical Modelling, Parameter  Study and Assessment of Slender Wall Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Ronald Mayes, Computech Engineering Service Inc
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1990
* USD 137,109.00

Masonry construction comprises a large portion of building construction in the
U.S. and the world. Reinforced masonry construction use is increasing in
moderate to higher seismic zones because of its apparent features of economy,
fire safety, architectural flexibility and ease of construction. The present
state of masonry structural analysis and design, and materials and construction
technologies does not enable an accurate prediction of building behavior under
lateral loads such as seismic loads. In the U.S., masonry buildings are designed
and built with methods, codes and standards that rely upon a mixture of working
stress methods, empirical rules, and questionable methods for determining
allowable stress values. Masonry is also a complex building material because of
the large number of design and construction variables which influence the final
product configuration and its response under seismic loads. In order to describe
the seismic response of masonry buildings it is necessary to develop the
fundamental knowledge base to determine basic design methodologies consistent
with safety and economic requirements. The research is an analytical effort to
bridge the gap between experiments and analyses to provide a tool for the
prediction of seismic performance of masonry structures. The project in
particular addresses correlation and analytical modelling of out- of-plane
masonry walls excited by dynamic motions. Various combinations of parameters
from current out-of-plane experimental programs will be considered for
incorporation into analytical response models. These models form an integral
part of a wall/diaphragm interaction study and also overall structures models.
This project is part of the U.S.-Japan Coordinated Program for Masonry Building
Research and the Technical Coordinating Committee for Masonry Research (TCCMAR)
Program.