* 8722658
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research: The  Influence of Phosphorothioate on the Action of Restriction  Endonucleases
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1989
* Kay Nakamaye, Gonzaga University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 05/31/1989
* USD 5,520.00

This award supports a research visit by Dr. Kay Nakamaye of Gonzaga University
to the Max Planck Institute for Experimental Medicine in Goettingen, FRG, to
gain experience in the synthesis of nucleotides and to collaborate with Dr.
Fritz Eckstein, a leader in the field of nucleic acid chemistry who has
pioneered the use of phosphorothioates. Their cooperative research will focus on
the use of phosphorothioates in improved procedures for recombinant DNA
manipulation; specifically, they are interested in the effect of
phosphorothioates incorporated into DNA on cleavage by restriction
endonucleases. In previous collaboration, they developed a simple yet efficient
method of producing site-specific mutations in isolated DNA fragments or genes.
However, one of the limitations of the technique is the need for a specific DNA
sequence for the restriction endonuclease to be used, preferably near the site
of the intended mutation. They now plan to study class IIS restriction
endonucleases as a strategy for directing both the mutation and the position of
nicking by the endonuclease. This would make their mutagenesis technique nearly
universal for any DNA and DNA sequence. Development of mutagenesis techniques
has become essential to investigations in areas such as protein structure-
function relationships, gene control and regulation, and DNA/RNA structure. Gene
isolation, characterization and manipulation are fundamental components of many
biotechnologies. Any further techniques for such work will continue to have
great value in basic and applied research.