* 8722832
* An Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for      Microwave and Millimeter Wave Computer-Aided Design
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1993
* Richard Booton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1993
* USD 692,000.00

The microwave and millimeter wave industry is one whose products form the
backbone to the development of space/satellite communication, guidance and
control, broadcasting, remote-sensing and navigation systems. Its application
areas are therefore broadly-based. Advance in microwave is recognized by many as
being critically important to our nation's interest because of its defense
system applications as well as commercial applications. As a nation, we are
faced with the challenge as to how we can maintain a lead in R&amp;D, increase
the output of U.S. engineers, and more importantly, build a strong
infrastructure in microwave and millimeter wave engineering. The University of
Colorado and industry recognize this challenge and are cooperating to establish
an Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Microwave and Millimeter
Wave Computer-Aided Design. The Center already has $350,000 support from
industry and $100,000 support from government laboratories. Five additional
companies have also indicated their intention to join the Center at $50,000/year
each. The University of Colorado has agreed to forego its overhead charges
(approximately $200,000/per year). In addition, there are adequate computers,
laboratory space and instruments for the proposed research at the university.
One of the sponsors, NBS/Boulder Laboratories, has agreed to have their
facilities used for some of the required research. The proposed research
includes: (1) Loss Mechanisms in Planar Lines (2) A Highly-Accurate Numerical
Modeling of Microstrip Junction Discontinuities (3) In-Situ Sampling of
Microwave/Millimeter-Wave Waveforms (4) Parasitic Coupling Models for CAD (5) A
Generalized Program for Two-Dimensional Analysis of Microstrip Circuits (6)
Discontinuity Reactance Compensation by Geometrical Modification of
Discontinuity Configuration in GaAs Microstrip Circuits (7) Evaluation of
Radiation from Microstrip Discontinuities in Gallium Arsenide Circuits. The
principal investigator, Dr. David C. Chang, is chairman of the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering. He has assembled a balanced group of strong
senior, intermediate and junior faculty who have the capability to establish and
run an I/UCR Center. An NSF continuing grant of $50,000 per year for five years
is recommended. For years 2-5, $50,000 will be awarded on an annual basis. The
Program Director will review annually the progress of the Center on a number of
criteria, including: (1) the extent to which university/industry interaction and
collaboration are developing; (2) the extent to which the support base for the
center is expanding; and (3) the extent to which a robust research program is
developing.