* 8722263
* Velocity Related Critical Phosphorus Concentrations in      Flowing Water:  Phase III
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Richard Horner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 09/30/1990
* USD 108,332.00

The objective of this project is to continue determination of factors that
influence the formation, growth and accumulation of algal biomass on surfaces in
contact with water flowing natural streams. The effects of velocity, phosphorus,
scouring and grazing on the accumulation of filamentous algae to nuisance levels
will be studied under varying conditions of nutrient enrichment. This project is
a renewal of research conducted under NSF Grants No. 8304731 and 7918514 in
which the effects of velocity variation and suspended solids concentration (both
of which increase during storm runoff events) were evaluated with respect to
their relationship to critical levels of phosphorus concentration on development
of nuisance-level accumulations of algal biomass. Effluents from domestic and
industrial wastewater treatment plants provide nutrient enrichment of surface
waters in lakes and streams which may result in nuisance-levels of filamentous
algae. In addition, urban stormwater runoff from urban and agricultural land
contributes to the nutrients available for stimulation of algal growth. An
improved understanding of the factors that lead to nuisance-level accumulations
of algal biomass may lead to better engineering design of treated wastewater
outfalls and better management of drainage from urban and agricultural land to
minimize the pollutional impact of these nutrient sources on the quality of
surface waters, especially flowing streams.