* 8722781
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Application of Direct      Methods for Power System Operational Planning
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Felix Wu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1991
* USD 16,030.00

This award will support collabortive research between Dr. Felix F. Wu,
Electronics Research Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley and
Professor Brian J. Cory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Imperial College
of Science and Technology, London. The objective of the research is to develop a
set of indices for dynamic security assessment in power system operational
planning. The main concern in dynamic security assessment is the ability of the
system to remain stable after a major disturbance, such as transmission line
outage due to lightning or generator outage. The research will be based on the
theoretical work on exact characterization of stability regions developed at the
University of California, Berkeley and the expertise in operational planning at
the Imperial College. The interactive graphics facility for power system
simulation developed by Imperial College will be used as an essential tool in
the development of dynamic security indices. The research results can be
utilized to set more realistic power transfer capabilities in a transmission
network, thus allowing more power to be transferred between regions and reducing
the overall production costs of the system. The Energy and Power Systems Group
at Imperial College is one of the largest research groups in the power systems
field in the U.K. The group has considerable expertise, especially in power
system operational planning. Both the U.S. investigator Dr. Wu and his British
collaborator Dr. Brian Cony are internationally recognized experts on the topic
of the proposed research.