* 8722794
* U.S.-Western Europe Regional Cooperative Research: Analyses of Code Accessibility and Acquisition in Children Across    Multiple Signed, Spoken, and Written Languages
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1991
* Keith Nelson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1991
* USD 16,450.00

This award partially supports Professors Keith Nelson and Philip Prinz of
Pennsylvania State University for collaborative research in linguistics with
Professors Siegmund Prillwitz of the University of Hamburg and Inger Ahlgren,
Lenore Arnberg and Peter Arnberg of the University of Stockholm. They are
collaborating in research designed to further our understanding of the processes
by which children utilize available language input in order to analyze and
acquire new rules and skills in different linguistic modes (spoken, written and
signed). Prior and continuing experimental and observational research by the
American co-principal investigators has demonstrated that children readily
process and make use of replies to their own speech and sign utterances when the
replies recast the child's meanings into related but more complex sentence
structures. This effect has been seen in the acquisition of sign language as
well as spoken language. It is hypothesized that similar acquisition processes
and effects of input components (such as recasts) are involved when children
acquire new text skills (such as reading and writing) and second language
skills. This collaboration will combine studies of multiple sign languages
(German, Swedish and American) and reading and writing acquisition by children
whose first language may be any of these sign languages or a dominant or
minority spoken language in the corresponding countries. Such diversity of
subjects will allow more rigorous testing of process assumptions than could
possibly be achieved by concentrating on American English in the United States
alone. The collaboration will include close process analyses of newly acquired
skills through comprehension and reaction time testing using microcomputers, in
the various codes that are accessible to any individual child. Analyses of cross
linguistic similarities and differences at varied levels of code mastery will be
pursued. The ongoing and prior work of the American investigators and their
European collaborators provide a rich foundation for exchange and collaboration
on these research topics. Cross-linguistic work is necessary before conclusions
can be drawn about the universality of language acquisition mechanisms.
Coordinated research in the U.S., the FRG, and Sweden may lead to a considerable
expansion of the cross-language and cross-cultural validity of the
collaborators' work on the processes of acquiring multiple communication codes.
Although the research is process oriented, rather rapid conversion of
theoretical advances to advances in educational procedures is expected in the
areas of special education, second language learning, and literacy skill
training. The use and refinement of research techniques such as the computer-
animated signs and graphics promises to benefit other research teams that work
with visual language stimuli.