* 8722705
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Sociology): A Comparative  Study of US and Chinese Family Structure
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Martin Whyte, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 12/31/1990
* USD 85,023.00

This award supports collaborative research on societal influences on family
patterns in China through use of probability sampling and statistical analysis
of data collected in the first two years of this project. The US investigator,
Dr. Martin K. Whyte, University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, will work with two
Chinese sociologists at Sichuan University to conduct extensive statistical
analysis of data collected in Chengdu, Sichuan, during the summer of 1987.
Through use of the same data and same statistical software on microcomputers at
both institutions and through frequent exchange of output and disks, the Chinese
and American scientists will be able to coordinate their comparative analysis.
Following analysis of the data, efforts will be made to develop systematic
comparisons of Chinese and American family patterns. In addition to contributing
to our understanding of the nature of Chinese family structure and societal
influences of that structure, this project will serve to train students and
faculty at Sichuan University in survey research, family sociology, and related
skills and to facilitate the development of the discipline of sociology. This
will provide the basis for a more realistic awareness in both societies about
how the other society really operates and allow us to make some informed
decisions about our future relations with the PRC.