* 8722461
* Dangerousness as a Juvenile Court Judgment
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Thomas Grisso, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 12/31/1989
* USD 40,190.00

Juvenile court personnel frequently must make judgments about juveniles'
dangerousness in cases involving court referrals for alleged delinquencies. The
statutes of more than two-thirds of the states include "danger to community" or
"danger to others" as a legal criterion that must be met in order to allow
pretrial detention of juveniles beyond a brief two or three day emergency
period. Juvenile courts' dangerousness judgments are highly discretionary
considering the importance of the judgments to the future welfare of juveniles
as well as the interests and protection of communities. Not surprisingly, there
has been considerable research interest in juvenile courts' judgments. However,
past studies have told us little about courts' dangerousness judgments
specifically. Most studies have concluded that accurate prediction of
dangerousness is not possible. Dr. Grisso feels that the impasse that has been
felt in the prediction of dangerousness is the result of too many methodological
and conceptual problems that have manifested themselves in studies in this area.
He hypothesizes that the failure of these attempts to yield workable predictors
of violence could rest partly on an assumption that factors related to violence
bear a linear relationship to violence and partly on the fact that studies have
been based on inappropriate samples. In this study, he will investigate
interactions among variables, using a cluster approach, and examine decisions
made by a variety of actors in the juvenile justice system who provided data
about their own decisions regarding dangerousness. Using data from a previous
study which collected 432 cases (reported by a national sample of the same
number of juvenile court personnel), he will develop prototypes (typical
profiles) of juvenile cases perceived as "dangerous" by juvenile court
personnel. Prototypes will be conceptualized as potential social schemata used
by juvenile courts when processing case information to arrive at dangerousness
judgments. This research will take a large and empirically derived domain of
predictor variables and combine them in ways that reflect the practice of actual
experienced decisionmakers. If juvenile case prototypes are found, it could
greatly improve our capacity in future research to understand more clearly the
nature of the dangerousness judgment process and to examine the validity of
these judgments. Further, it would support the value of a social schemata
approach for describing decisionmaking in this legal context, and would support
generally the heuristic value of this theoretical approach in other decision
research.