* 8722703
* Investigation of Low Frequency Atmospheric Oscillations     Based on Satellite Data
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* John Stanford, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 10/31/1991
* USD 225,702.00

Low frequency oscillations (LFO) of the atmosphere, a phenomenon with one-to
two-month time scales, have captured the interest of researchers worldwide. Much
work has been concentrated on the tropics where the effects were initially
discovered. This research project will focus on higher latitudes and, in
particular, the stratosphere where this group has been the first to study LFO.
The research has four components: 1) Global correlation maps similar to those
obtained with MSU microwave analyses (90 mb temperatures) will be calculated for
infrared SSU data in the middle and upper stratosphere. 2) LFO vertical
structure and propagation from the troposphere to the upper stratosphere will be
studied with coherencies (in- and out-of phase correlations by wavenumber) using
geopotential height fields and SSU data. Lag-correlation Hovmoller studies will
be used to investigate wavepacket behavior. Tropics-higher latitude connections
will be assessed with correlations between tropical microwave data and higher
latitude/altitude geopotential height and SSU fields. 3) LFO energy propagation
and effect on the mean flow will be investigated with Eliassen-Palm flux
divergence calculations. An E-vector formulation will be used in regions of
strong basic flow zonal asymmetry. Comparison will be made with model
predictions. 4) Recently reprocessed mesospheric radiance data fields will be
used at Oxford University to search for the existence of LFO above the
stratopause. This research is important because it seeks relationships between
processes in the high atmosphere and climate as manifested near the surface of
the earth. Such relationships should enhance our understanding of climate and
our ability to predict its variations.