* 8722553
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research on    Holocene Terraces, Long Term Sedimentary Budgets and        Adsorbed Pollutant Storage Along the Upper Connecticut River
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* G. Brakenridge, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1990
* USD 8,910.00

This award supports Dr. G. Robert Brakenridge of Dartmouth College to
participate in a cooperative study of sedimentary geology with Professor
Wolfgang Schirmer of the Geographical Institute of the University of
Duesseldorf, Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). Their research plan makes use of
field study sites within the U.S., a state-of-the-art laboratory facility in the
FRG that is dedicated to the study of fluvial sediments, and the combined skills
and knowledge of these two researchers in fluvial stratigraphy and fluvial
sedimentary processes. Through preliminary joint field work, they have
determined that the Holocene age sediments along the Upper Connecticut River
contain a detailed record of recent sedimentary history that brackets the
critical pre-historic to historic transition. During this period, the relatively
pristine fluvial system began to be greatly affected by human activities. They
now plan to 1) map and date Holocene terrace and floodplain sediments in the
Upper Connecticut River Valley, 2) characterize the heavy metal concentrations
within the fine-grained facies of these sediments (through close-interval
vertical profile sampling and wet chemical analyses), and 3) estimate and
compare volumes of historic and prehistoric sediment in floodplain storage. This
will enable them to estimate the long-term (decades to centuries) sediment and,
possibly, adsorbed pollutant mass budgets of this reach of the river. This
effort to quantify long-term sedimentary dynamics has broad significance because
it will help to define the pathways and linkages that govern the erosion,
transportation and storage of sediments in watersheds. The results should
provide insight into an important component of fluvial sediment budgets, the
floodplain storage component. More specifically, the research is obviously
relevant to other studies of floodplain and terrace landforms at locations
further downstream along this major New England river, and to research focused
on deltaic and estuarine sedimentation at the river's mouth. It should also be
of interest to a wider group of investigators who are studying late Holocene and
Historic fluvial sediments in other regions of the world.