* 8722490
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Inorganic Resist Materials  for All-Vacuum Lithography
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Michael Kozicki, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1990
* USD 13,402.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Michael N. Kozicki,
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Arizona State University and
Professor Alan Owen, University of Edinburgh, Scotland. The goal of the research
is to study inorganic resist materials for all-vacuum lithography. Integrated
circuit fabrication is still widely carried out by transporting the substrates
between individual pieces of equipment in a "cleanroom" environment. Since it is
impossible to control fully the contaminant content of the air, there is ample
opportunity for particulates or vapors to impinge on the materials being
processed, thereby altering device characteristics and reducing product yield. A
complete fabrication process carried out under vacuum compatible conditions
would result in a significant reduction in substrate contamination. Many process
steps may already be carried out under vacuum, but lithography, a process which
uses organic materials with volatile components, is not compatible with this
concept. This is currently a barrier to the realization of all-vacuum
processing. The objective of this program is to investigate the As-S/Ag
inorganic resist system with a view to applying it to all vacuum-processing.
This will be done in conjunction with the University of Edinburgh, which has
considerable experience with the As-S chalcogenides and is currently performing
research on the optimization of the As-S/Ag system for applications in
microlithography. The cooperative program will involve fundamental materials
science and physical chemistry research being done at Edinburgh, with an
investigation of all-vacuum applications and the development of a full
lithographical process being carried out at Arizona State University. Results of
this research may have a significant impact on the development of silicon and
compound semiconductor device fabrication technology.