* 8722107
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research on    Van der Waals Complexes, Laser-stimulated Desorption and    Multi-photon Ionization
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1992
* Sheng Lin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1992
* USD 16,000.00

This award supports Professor Sheng Hsien Lin of Arizona State University for
several short term visits to collaborate with Prof. E. W. Schlag of the
Technical University of Munich. They are studying the mechanisms of laser-
stimulated desorption or vaporization of adsorbed molecules from solid surfaces,
using both infrared and ultraviolet-visible lasers. They plan to continue their
investigation of spectral shifts and electronic relaxation of van der Waals
complexes. In addition, they will study the spectroscopic properties and
dynamical processes of benzene and other dimers and the photoisomerization of an
aromatic molecule embedded in a cluster as a function of cluster size. They will
also carry out a theoretical study of photoionization threshold spectroscopy on
van der Waals clusters to show that this leads to more accurate determination of
ionization potential and provides information on the structure and vibrational
frequencies of the cluster. Professor Lin is carrying out state of the art
theoretical research on problems of great current interest in chemistry -
studies of laser-stimulated vaporization of molecules from surfaces and of the
spectral properties of van der Waals complexes. Such work requires input from
experiments. Collaboration with Dr. Schlag and his outstanding group of
experimentalists provides this very necessary interaction. Their prior
collaboration has produced a number of significant contributions. Current plans
for further collaboration promise valuable new insights into the processes that
take place in a molecule after it has absorbed energy from light.