* 8722567
* Collaborative Research on the Influence of Pretrial Publicity on Jury Decisionmaking
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,03/31/1990
* Daniel Linz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 03/31/1990
* USD 43,009.00

Despite considerable academic and public policy interest in the issue of
pretrial publicity, currently there is only limited knowledge of its nature and
effects on jury decisionmaking. Over recent years a variety of methods have been
used to examine media effects, but, while producing some knowledge, these
efforts have had their weaknesses. Studies of real jurors and real cases have
typically used post hoc survey methods which cannot fully unravel the linkages
between pretrial publicity and jury decisionmaking. Simulated jury studies have
shown that people can and will form impressions of defendants based on pretrial
publicity, but these studies do not demonstrate the impact of any particular
sets of biases on jury decisionmaking, and, by and large, these efforts suffer
from problems of external validity. Drs. Linz and Penrod seek to expand our
knowledge of the influence of pretrial publicity while transcending some of the
common pitfalls. Three experiments are planned. The first experiment assesses
the impact of pre-trial publicity in four actual trials involving varying
degrees of publicity. Using a new jury simulation procedure called the
"facsimile method," videotapes of these ongoing trials will be presented to
"shadow" juries selected from community and student populations. The second
experiment is a laboratory study that makes use of the real trial videotapes but
systematically manipulates the pretrial publicity material that is shown to
subjects. The third study also uses the actual trial material but in this
instance does so in order to examine experimentally professional (judge, lawyer)
and lay evaluations of pretrial publicity. The three experiments combined
constitute a most imaginative package. By integrating laboratory and field
approaches in data collection and design, the research maximizes both
experimental control and experimental realism. From that vantage alone, it
constitutes an important advance. In addition, and equally as important, the
facsimile strategy has the potential of being used in other domains relating to
legal decisionmaking. Therefore, this research promises a methodological
contribution to the field above and beyond what it should contribute to our
understanding of pretrial publicity.