* 8722187
* Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations and   Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1993
* Avner Friedman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1993
* USD 184,378.00

This work focuses on a large class of nonlinear partial differential equations
arising from physical and engineering models. A particular set of problems
centers on free boundary problems occurring in the study of melting and
solidification processes, cavity and jet flows and electrochemical processes
from machining or electroplating. In such problems, a part of the boundary of
the domain where the solution is to be found is unknown and must be found
simultaneously with the solution. Substantial progress has been made on problems
of this type but newer and more realistic models lead to complex equations,
especially when going from two to three-dimensional descriptions. Work on
optimal design involving free boundaries will also be carried out. These can
often be formulated as a minimization problem for some function of a control in
which the solution may not be differentiable. Problems of this type occur, for
example, in trying to minimize the pressure in a dam. The control variables
appear either in the data or in the coefficients of the resulting differential
equation. The free boundary conditions may occur on a surface which is the
control variable. Recent work on construction for an optical lens with certain
refraction properties reduces to solving systems of two nonlinear functional
differential equations. The construction of a global lens with one axis of
symmetry which focuses all rays from two sources into two given collecting
points all on the axis has been described although it is not clear what happens
when not all points are on the axis of symmetry. Future work is planned on this
equation where applications to satellite antenna modeling are expected.