* 8722093
* Mathematical Sciences: Closed Form Solutions of DifferentialEquations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Michael Singer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1990
* USD 44,062.00

This mathematical work will center on the algebraic structure of solutions of
differential equations. By this one means the analysis of how solutions of
differential equations can be expressed in terms of solutions of certain special
differential equations. Particular instances of these problems include solving
differential equations implicitly or explicitly in terms of elementary or
liouvillian functions, or more generally, in terms of solutions of differential
equations of lower order. Related investigations into the calculation of
associated Galois groups will also be carried out. The work divides into three
parts. In the first, work will be done on the algebraic structure of elementary
and other special functions, with the aim of improving and extending existing
algorithms for integration in finite terms. The second thrust involves a
continuation of efforts to develop a theory of liouvillian first integrals -
first integrals expressible in terms of algebraic combinations of integrals and
exponentials, and developing algorithms for finding such integrals. By a first
integral, one understands a function of several variables which vanishes on
solutions of systems of differential equations. A third goal of this project is
to understand the algebraic structure of solutions of linear differential
equations. Here one is interested in using algebraic arguments, Lie theory and
Galois theory to determine whether solutions of given differential equations can
be expressed as combinations of solutions of equations of lower order. Coupled
with this are fundamental questions of providing algorithms for accomplishing
the desired representations. In addition to its applications to the general
theory of differential equations, this research bears direct relationship with
important work at the frontiers of computer science, particularly with regard to
symbolic manipulation algorithms.