* 8722231
* The Coming of Age of American Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/1988,07/31/1989
* Jane Maienschein, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 07/31/1989
* USD 25,000.00

The United States, by virtually any measure, is the world leader in biology.
How it achieved this preeminence is a significant aspect of Dr. Maienschein's
study. During the period from 1880 to 1915, work in the life sciences in the
United States underwent a significant maturing process, becoming self-
consciously modern, productive and explicitly biological as well as uniquely
American in some respects. Four individuals, Edmund Beecher Wilson, Edwin Grant
Conklin, Thomas Hunt Morgan, and Ross Granville Harrison, played central roles
in establishing strong and successful research programs which attracted
international attention and graduate student interest. Each of the four became a
leader in establishing major biological societies, journals, and research
funding foundations. They tried to hire each other and retained strong ties
beginning with their graduate student days at Johns Hopkins. Yet they generated
divergent programs in developmental biology: Wilson in cytology at Columbia,
Conklin in experimental evolution in Princeton, Morgan in genetics at Columbia,
and Harrison in experimental embryology at Yale. Dr. Maienschein is focusing on
those four individuals and on their changing research programs, thereby also
examining the process of scientific change at this critical time in the rise to
preeminence of American biology.