* 8723173
* Tests of a Real-Time Model of Pavlovian Fear Conditioning
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* John J. B. Ayres, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1991
* USD 73,535.00

Backward conditioning has always been controversial, and even in the most
convincing demonstrations has been weak. Still, it is of great theoretical
importance because its existence argues against the widely accepted view that
neutral events must predict the occurrence of non-neutral events in order to
acquire conditioned strength. Dr. Ayres will carry out experiments using rats in
order to study backward excitatory fear conditioning, in which a once-neutral
stimulus (CS) comes to arouse fear because it has in the past closely followed
(rather than preceded) a non-neutral stimulus (US). In Dr. Ayres' work, the US
is a brief electric shock, and the CS is a tone, click, or light. Dr. Ayres will
manipulate such variables as CS and US duration, the length of the gap between
US termination and CS onset, etc. The aim is to discover parameters that will
make the backward- conditioning effect as robust as possible and thus to
facilitate future experimental and theoretical analysis. The discovery of a
strong effect could, moreover, implicate backward conditioning as a hitherto-
neglected source of human anxiety disorders. Dr. Ayres' research is unique in
focusing mainly on one-trial conditioning procedures. Human anxiety disorders
(and learning by animals in the wild) often appear to be based on a single
experience, yet one-trial conditioning has received relatively little
experimental attention. Such procedures also have important methodological
properties. Finally, the research is also unique in that the bulk of the studies
are guided by the computer-simulated predictions of a formal model of
conditioning. The studies thus provide strong tests of that model.