* 8723093
* Computer Based Grinding Model to Predict Temperature        Residual Stress and Phase Transformation Distribution       in the Workpiece
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* William Mayo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 08/31/1991
* USD 187,274.00

This project deals with the development of a computer model for surface
grinding. The goal of this research is to predict the processing parameters in
order to minimize workpiece damage and optimize surface quality. The
mathematical model should permit calculation of the temperature and stress
fields, the extent of any thermally induced phase transformations and the
magnitude of the residual stresses. The model considers the fully coupled
thermomechanical field equations, with coupling through the dilatational work,
the plastic work, and the heat release during any phase transformation in the
energy balance equation. A simple finite element model developed under a
previous grant (DMC-8414917) provided data on grinding of an alloy steel (AISI
4340), a carbon steel (AISI 1038), and a stainless steel (AISI 304) which are in
quantitative agreement with experimental data. The present work will refine the
previous model to enhance its applicability, computational speed, and accuracy.
Parametric studies will be made to identify critical process parameters of the
grinding process. Once these computations are completed, attempts will be made
to develop a second generation computer model which will refine both the
computational process and the material properties used in the model. In
addition, the model will be extended to examine additional grinding processes
such as multiple pass and cylindrical grinding.