* 8723072
* Laboratory and Field Studies on the Cycling of Archae-      bacterial Lipids in the Orca Basin, an Anoxic Hypersaline   Basin in the Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Edward Van Vleet, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/1991
* USD 173,674.00

In marine systems where high salinity, high temperature, low pH, or extreme
anoxicity characterize the environment, archaebacteria (including methanogens,
extreme halophiles, and thermoacidophiles) play a dominant role in the cycling
of organic carbon. Isopranyl glycerol ethers have recently been recognized as a
characteristic morphological feature in identifying and differentiating
archaebacteria. In order to use these compounds as geomolecular markers, it is
first necessary to understand their cycling in the environment. Dr. Van Vleet
proposes to investigate potential diagenetic alteration products of these
compounds using a series of laboratory thermal alteration experiments and to use
these diagnostic organic molecules to investigate their distribution and cycling
in the Orca Basin, a well studied anoxic hypersaline basin in the Gulf of
Mexico. %%% Objectives of the proposed study are (1) to investigate the
alteration of isopranyl ether-linked lipids in the environment by using
laboratory heating experiments combined with analysis of kerogen cleavage
products to simulate diagenetic processes, (2) to examine the distribution of
archaebaterial ether-linked lipids in the Orca Basin, including the overlying
water, halocline, brine, surface sediments and selected DSDP sediments, and (3)
to combine information on the distribution of archaebacterial ether lipids in
the Orca Basin with data obtained from laboratory thermal alteration studies to
eluciate the diagenetic pathways of archaebacterial ether lipds in the
environment. Results of this study will provide a basis for investigating
microbial ecology in the Orca Basin and may also serve as a model for other
marine anoxic or hypersaline systems.