* 8723084
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research:  Elemental Ratios andStructural Events in Fish Otoliths as Environmental and LifeHistory Indicators
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Richard Radtke, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 11/30/1989
* USD 10,000.00

This award will enable collaborative research between Dr. Richard Radtke of the
University of Hawaii and Dr. Robert Gauldie of the Fisheries Research Center,
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, Wellington, New Zealand. They will
conduct research aimed at extracting life history and physiological information
on fish from structural and chemical analyses of fish otoliths. Yearly, daily
and population rhythmic patterns in fish maintained under experimental
conditions will be correlated with otolith macro- and micro-structure as
observed by light and scanning electron microscopy. Chemical analyses of otolith
carbonate for stable isotopic and elemental concentrations will be used to
examine experimentally entrained changes in chemistry which in wild fish would
constitute the history of an individual fish. Microprobe analyses will be used
to interpret short-term changes in temperature. The combination of structural
and chemical analyses of fish otoliths can potentially yield life history
profiles for individual fish, together with information on the environmental
history of the fish. Such information will increase our understanding of the
processes underlying recruitment and growth rate and would make it possible to
link growth and mortality rates to nutritional and environmental occurrences.
The analytical equipment available in Dr. Gauldie's laboratory, together with
the complementary skills of Drs. Gauldie and Radtke, make this collaborative
effort particularly attractive.