* 8723160
* Synaptic Structure And Function (Neurobiology)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Mary Rheuben, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/28/1990
* USD 73,861.00

The long term objectives of this study are to provide insights into the ways in
which particular elements of the neuromuscular junction work. The strategy is to
make quantitative structure-function correlations in situations where the
difference in function can be specified, and where the corresponding structure
is of special interest or relevance to synaptic transmission. The first group of
comparisons will be among a series of three types of neuromuscular junctions
which appear to differ in synaptic strength. The quantal content of the
junctions will be estimated, and the probability of transmitter release at a
single site for each type of junction will be compared with the intramembranous
particle composition of its active zones as seen in freeze-fractured samples. A
clear correlation between the number of particles observed at an active zone and
the probability of release would support (but not prove) the hypothesis that
some or all of these particles represent calcium channels. The methods include
making intracellular and extracellular recordings from muscle fibers from the
appropriate populations to obtain data for a quantal analysis. The same or
comparable samples would then be fixed and prepared for freeze- fracture, thin-
section, or scanning electron microscopic study of their ultrastructure. Each
technique contributes to the structural data, which can be analyzed to obtain
estimates of the average number of particles per active zone, the total number
of active zones per junction, and the total number and length of junction per
muscle fiber. Although the presence and role of calcium channels in synaptic
transmission is well supported by physiological data, and the likelihood that
they lie close to or within the morphological structure known as the active zone
has been previously suggested, there is no direct evidence to describe their
structure or precise location. Lacking an irreversible blocker for the calcium
channel or similar "label" to precisely define their location, the experiments
above represent the most reasonable approach to the question. Dr. Rheuben will
participate in the Advanced Neurobiology Laboratory, which is a graduate level
laboratory course in electrophysiology. She will also participate in the
Neurobiology Journal Discussion series, which meets to discuss and critique
recent papers of interest. In addition, she will organize an informal seminar
series oriented toward graduate and under- graduate students. This project
furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women
to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science
supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and
engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers
employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.