* 8743318
* Investigation of the Mesospheric Chemistry and Dynamics     Using the Arecibo Radar Facility
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1989
* John Mathews, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Shannon L. Hughes
* 01/31/1989
* USD 101,000.00

Of all the unsolved problems of the middle atmosphere, more seem to occur in
the upper mesosphere (80-95km) than in any other region. One general reason for
the accumulation of problems here is that radiative, chemical and dynamical
equations used to model the regions below this region all contain
simplifications that are invalid in the upper mesosphere. This implies that
theories and modeling for this region require special attention beyond that
usually required for the regions above or below it. Not only is this region
difficult to model, but it is also difficult to investigate experimentally. This
region is too high for access with airplanes or balloons and too low for
satellite in situ measurements. Clearly, the development of reliable sensing
techniques is important to the study of this region of the atmosphere. A
pioneering effort in the development of radar techniques for the study of the
chemistry of the upper mesosphere which includes the ionospheric D region is
being carried out by Prof. Mathews, the PI on this proposal. Using large
incoherent radar facilities operated by NSF at Arecibo in Puerto Rico and
Millstone Hill in the Boston area, Prof. Mathews has been able to generate a
valuable data set for the important study of D-region chemistry and the
associated dynamics. THis proposal describes a research project to extend the
observations, analyze the data, and carry out theoretical work on the modelling
of mesospheric ion chemistry and the formation and maintenance of the sporadic
ionization layers. The experiment results which include the electron and ion
concentrations will be used as constraints on the theoretical models. also, work
will be done on further refinement of the radar scattering theory and
utilization.