* 8750588
* Portable Equipment for Teaching Undergraduate Biology       Students to Conduct Digital Video Analyses along            Environmental Gradients.
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Christopher Kitting, California State University, East Bay
* Standard Grant
* Frances Chesley as Backup AA
* 12/31/1989
* USD 13,422.00

A transportable image analysis computer system is being used for the objective
acquisition, analysis, and presentation of diverse imagery data collected in the
field and laboratory. Primary goals in the extensive undergraduate field
projects supported through this award are to illustrate limitations on
population distributions; students thus uncover major limits at opposite
boundaries in zonation along environmental gradients. Nearby marshes on San
Francisco Bay provide gradients between marine, aquatic, and terrestrial
environments, both natural and disturbed. One such set of quantitative
experimental field ecology studies is providing students with valuable insights
into field experimentation through high-resolution, time-lapse monitoring of
transplant experiments. Students are comparing the fates of plants (and of
sedentary animals) that have been moved experimentally beyond their normal
zones, with the fates of replaced individuals. These studies strikingly
illustrate the selection pressures that operate when an organism attempts to
invade a new habitat. Such modern field experimental approaches are preparing
students to make practical, technical, and logical applications of science in
their personal lives and, for some, in environmental careers.