* 8750415
* Digital Techniques in an Undergraduate Electrical           Engineering Laboratory.
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1987,05/31/1990
* David Wright, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dorothy Cudmore
* 05/31/1990
* USD 50,000.00

Demonstration of the use of digital techniques in representative electrical
engineering contexts is the object of the proposed laboratory. The associated
course is aimed at EE seniors and is comprised of a set of experiments which
broadly exhibit the use of digital processing within EE systems. Eight similarly
equipped student stations plus a central station for one-of-a-kind equipment
form the ensemble to be purchased under this grant. Each station includes a unit
for capturing, processing, and creating electrical waveforms. These units are
basically general purpose micro-computers augmented with data acquisition and
control modules. Additional instrumentation to create and observe signals, to
produce output action, and to record results is proposed also and includes
signal generators, transducers, oscilloscopes and other items of general purpose
test equipment. The laboratory course is new and self-contained and complements
several undergraduate EE courses for which no supporting physical senses.
Together they demonstrate: the basic effects of quantization in time and in
amplitude; serve action with an imbedded digital processor; random process
phenomena; digital filtering; and signals encountered in telephony robotics,
biomedical instrumentation, et cetera.