* 8750955
* High Sensitivity Charged Coupled Device (CCD) Imaging in    Undergraduate Astronomy
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Thomas Balonek, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1989
* USD 32,297.00

Charged-coupled devices (CCDs) are being increasingly used as sensitive imaging
devices on small optical telescopes. The high quantum efficiency and low noise
of these array devices permit their use as faint object detectors, so that a
small telescope equipped with a CCD camera is operationally equivalent to the
largest astronomical telescopes of a decade ago. Colgate University will acquire
a high sensitivity cryogenically cooled CCD array imaging system for use with
its campus 16-inch telescope to train students in techniques of high accuracy
spatial and intensity measurement. Use of the CCD camera system will enable
students to work with recent technology such as electronic array detectors,
cryogenics, electronics, microcomputers, computer interfacing, computer
programming, image analysis, as well as fundamental astronomical research. There
are a wide range of astronomical projects which can be conducted by
undergraduate students with this instrumentation: imaging of extended or faint
objects such as galaxies, nebulae, and star clusters to study their structure
and composition; search for the study of transient events such as supernova in
distant galaxies, flaring in cataclysmic variable stars and dwarf novae, and
motions and changes in appearance of comets and asteroids; monitoring of the
optical continuum spectrum and time variability in stars, quasars, and active
galaxies. With a device capable of sensing faint astronomical objects, students
will become involved in research, using recently developed electronic
instrumentation, which is representative of projects being conducted by
professional scientists.