* 8750387
* Gene Manipulation: A Practical Undergraduate Education in the Theory, Methods, and Potential of Biotechnology.
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1987,10/31/1989
* Sandra Sharp, California State University-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Frances Chesley as Backup AA
* 10/31/1989
* USD 49,421.00

With the equipment (centrifuges, incubation equipment, specialized storage
apparatus, a DNA photodocumentation system, water purification equipment and
electrophoresis apparatus) secured through this project, this Biology Department
is expanding its course offerings in Molecular Biology to include a core of four
courses to deal biotechnology at various levels. Two of these provide intensive
experience with practical genetic manipulation procedures in a student genetic
engineering laboratory. Recent advances in the technology of gene manipulation
have created a booming new industry, an extraordinarily powerful research tool,
and promises for novel solutions to medical, environmental, and
agricultural/industrial problems. A broad spectrum of undergraduates have a need
for education in the new molecular biology. Those who plan to continue in
research-oriented higher degree programs will profit greatly from having
practical knowledge and laboratory skills that will equip them to apply modern
molecular genetic approaches to research problems. Students terminating their
formal education at the B.S.-level can be immediately employable in the
biotechnology industry or in one of the many research laboratories employing
techniques of gene manipulation. Pre-professional students can be prepared
better to understand and appreciate diagnostic and therapeutic techniques
stemming from the new biotechnology and to appreciate its potential for the
future practice of medicine.