* 8750858
* Membrane Gas Separation Experiments for an Undergraduate    Chemical Engineering Laboratory.
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* C. Stewart Slater, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* Dorothy Cudmore
* 11/30/1989
* USD 21,504.00

The area of gas stream separation and purification has been revolutionized in
the past decade by the development of hollow-fiber membrane systems. These new
technologies are rapidly replacing antiquated ones and are being incorporated
into the modern areas of chemical engineering. Applications are found in gas
recovery for: waste gas streams, landfill gases, etc. and for gas generation and
purification for: ammonia and petrochemical production, food processing and
storage, semi-conductor manufacturing and the medical/health care industry. The
present Chemical Engineering curriculum at Manhattan College will be
supplemented by providing instruction and laboratory experience in gas
separation by membrane processes. This will be accomplished through current
course supplement, new course development and the introduction of new laboratory
experiments covering the fundamentals of membrane gas transport and the
operation of a hollow fiber membrane gas separator. Experiments on the
laboratory-scale membrane system will illustrate the concepts of the driving
forces for separation of gaseous components, overall material and component
balances, separation factors in mass transfer, and temperature and residence
time effects on gas separation. After completion of the course and laboratory
developments, the student will have gained both theoretical and working
knowledge of membrane processes used for gas stream separation and purification.