* 8750838
* Meteorologic and Hydrologic Instrumentation for             Undergraduate Field Work
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Henry Art, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1989
* USD 27,723.00

Meteorologic and hydrologic instrumentation will be used to improve field
laboratories and computer studies in Geology and Biology courses at Williams
College. The instruments will be used at a weather station in Hopkins Memorial
Forest, an experimental forest managed by Williams College, and the focus of
field classes and independent research in the environmental sciences. The
sensors and data loggers will be installed at the existing weather station, and
three portable meteorologic and hydrologic stations will be assembled for use at
remote sites. Use of state-of-the-art instruments which encode data in digital
format will permit easy transfer of weather and hydrologic data to computer
files. Portable instrumentation will significantly improve the quantity and
quality of data collected in the field and used in required courses such as
Geomorphology, Environmental Biology, and Communities and Ecosystems. Computer
files of weather and hydrologic data will also be used to develop new field and
computer labs in elective courses such as Weather and Climate and Computers in
Geology. Biology and Geology majors most likely to go to graduate school, those
students involved in field studies for senior honors theses, will gain
invaluable experience using modern instrumentation and computer reduction of
data from their field sites.