* 8750891
* The Research Commons Approach to Teaching General BiologicalResearch Processes.
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1987,10/31/1989
* Daniel Lavoie, Saint Anselm College
* Standard Grant
* Frances Chesley as Backup AA
* 10/31/1989
* USD 17,632.00

The special characteristic of this project is its plan for creating a "research
commons" for undergraduate science majors. A student research and study suite
surrounded by faculty offices has been established and equipped to support a
curriculum that places major emphasis upon students' learning through research
participation. Basic scientific skills in research are being developed by
underclassmen through regular use of microscopes, spectrophotometers, and
related equipment. By requiring all Biology, Natural Science, and Biochemistry
seniors to participate in student research, graduates leave the program with
ability to design, plan, and execute experiments, to critically evaluate
experimental results, and to design new experiments based on such evaluations.
The students also are developing skills in reporting and communicating ideas and
experimental findings in both informal and formal presentations. The new
equipment is aimed at meeting the needs of the students for experience in
conducting research under faculty direction. The physical reorganization of the
Department is complete, the faculty all are actively directing student research,
and now the equipment needs are being met. This places the Department in a
strong position to accomplish its goal of developing problem-solving
capabilities in its majors, not just providing them with an accumulation of
biological facts.