* 8750754
* Biochemical Equipment for an Undergraduate Forensic Science Laboratory in Blood/Body Fluid Identification and Individualization.
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* R. Gaensslen, University of New Haven
* Standard Grant
* Frances Chesley as Backup AA
* 11/30/1989
* USD 15,086.00

Forensic scientists require methods and procedures for identifying and typing
the human blood and body fluids encountered in cases of homicide, assault,
robbery, sexual assault and other crimes against persons. The Enzyme-Linked
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) technique offers a desirable alternative to present
procedures. Its major advantages are increased sensitivity, ability to utilize
recently developed, highly specific monoclonal antibodies in its tests, and the
ability to introduce new levels of quantitation and instrumental objectivity in
interpreting test results. Modern ELISA instrumentation, its use and
applications are revolutionizing forensic tests on blood, body fluids and
stains. In addition, the isoelectric focusing (IEF) technique offers many
advantages over earlier electrophoretic procedures for typing blood and body
fluid stains. Its advantages include the ability to recognize more genetic types
in several systems and thus to improve individualization of stains left by
biological materials. The application of IEF to the genetic typing of blood and
body fluid stains increases the capabilities of forensic scientists, enabling
them to provide more and better evidence to the justice system they serve.
Through the help of this grant, future forensic specialists in this model
program are being trained on state-of-the-art apparatus. This project
constitutes a striking example of science serving society in helping to
demonstrate the guilt or innocence of persons accused of violent crimes.