* 8750246
* Introduction of Computer-Aided Data Acquisition and         Analysis in Advanced Undergraduate Physics Instructional    Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1987,09/30/1989
* Richard Haskell, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1989
* USD 15,873.00

Computers have revolutionized experimental methods in physics, yet physics
students have not had the equipment to use computers for data acquisition and
analysis. The Physics Department at Harvey Mudd will integrate computer systems
into three laboratory experiments. The first experiment is in Fourier transform
spectroscopy; it requires extensive computation using the fast Fourier transform
algorithm. The second is a photon statistics experiment, which requires the
acquisition and analysis of large quantities of data. The third is an atomic
spectroscopy experiment which relies upon computer-aided data acquisition to
eliminate systematic drifts while increasing the signal- to-noise ratio. All
three experiments depend critically on the judicious use of computers. In order
to equip these experiments, three DEC LSI-11/2 microcomputers will be ungraded
by the addition of hardware and software for data acquisition and for
communications to provide access to the Harvey Mudd College central network of
VAX computers. In addition, the department will purchase a stepping motor to
complete a Fourier transform spectrometer and photon counting accessories. The
new equipment will be used in a junior-level optics laboratory, a senior- level
advanced laboratory, and in individual student research projects.