* 8750777
* Lasers and Other Instrumentation for Modern Spectroscopic   Laboratories in the Undergraduate Physics Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1987,10/31/1990
* Theodore Ducas, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1990
* USD 34,883.00

The project entails the coordinated introduction of modern spectroscopy
laboratories into the Wellesley physics curriculum. The instrumentation will be
used in the sequence of student work that includes the modern physics course, a
new advanced laboratory course and student research projects. The requested
system includes a nitrogen laser and high resolution dye laser, a boxcar
integrator a broadband light source, a spectrometer and lock-in amplifier,
detectors and data handling electronics. It is designed to be flexible enough to
handle the range of spectroscopic topics that will be covered in the associated
courses. The pulsed dye laser will be used to study atomic structure, and the
broadband light source will enable students to look at simple quantum structure
in solids. In the subsequent advanced course, the lasers, spectrometer and
boxcar will be employed for more sophisticated studies of structure and decay in
atomic and condensed matter systems and of non-linear effects. Detailed
investigations of excitons and the band structure of solids will be made with
the spectrometer and lock-in amplifier. This work will correspond closely to the
material covered in the Applications of Quantum Mechanics course. Students will
then be able to use the same system and the skills they have acquired in their
research and honors projects while working with professors who taught them
earlier courses. This instrumentation represents a major step in the upgrading
of the physics major at Wellesley. The overlap of skills and interest on the
part of the participating faculty make it particularly appropriate and assure
continuity in its implementation.