* 8750648
* Improvement of Undergraduate Advanced Cell Biology and      Recombinant DNA Technology Courses.
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Bonnie Sampsell, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Frances Chesley as Backup AA
* 11/30/1989
* USD 22,612.00

The equipment purchased through this award is being used to improve the
laboratory components of two courses: Advanced Cell Biology and Recombinant DNA
Technology. The courses are designed to present the fundamentals of experimental
procedures and to provide opportunities for extensive practice with different
pieces of equipment under the supervision of experienced researchers. Among the
competencies being developed are microscopy, spectro- photometry,
electrophoresis of proteins and DNA, growth of bacteria, and the isolation and
manipulation of recombinant DNA. Use of computer programs to analyze molecular
structures also is being taught. A phase contrast microscope, two UV-VIS
spectrophotometers, gel boxes and a power supply for electrophoresis, an
incubator/shaker and a sterile hood for growing and handling bacteria, a
computer and computer software -- all purchased with help from this grant -- are
being used to illustrate current techniques commonly encountered in Molecular
Biology. Students completing the two courses are learning habits and skills that
they can use in graduate school or in an entry-level position in a research
laboratory. Many graduates of the program will become science teachers at the
pre-collegiate level.