* 8750160
* A Boat Equipped with Survey, Sampling, and Analysis         Equipment for a Five College Undergraduate Marine Sciences  Program
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1987,10/31/1989
* Paulette Peckol, Five Colleges Inc
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1989
* USD 30,115.00

Five Colleges, Inc., a consortium comprised of Amherst, Hampshire, Mount
Holyoke, Smith and the University of Massachusetts, will strengthen its
interdisciplinary program in Coastal and Marine Sciences. The goal is to enhance
the field-research portion of several courses and independent student projects
by improving access to marine habitats and by removing the restrictions imposed
by the lack of essential, specialized equipment. Specifically, the consortium
will purchase a boat which is the laboratory from which students will conduct
nearshore and open water experiments. Surveying equipment will permit students
to generate accurate, on-site topographic maps of salt marsh and rocky
intertidal habitats; coring equipment will enable students to visualize the
dynamic processes molding the coastline, recorded in underlying peat and
sediment layers. Other equipment, including trawls, gill net, plankton nets,
field balance, underwater camera, light meter, and oxygen meter, will provide
training in contemporary sampling methodology, and enable students to design
sophisticated field experiments. Improving the Coastal and Marine Sciences
Program, by taking advantage of the new teaching opportunities represented in
modern, analytical field equipment, will make the program more effective in
preparing students for successful professional study in marine sciences.