* 8750041
* Image Processing/Analysis System and Remote Sensing Center  for Undergraduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Thomas Huber, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1989
* USD 49,474.00

The University of Colorado, Colorado Springs, will obtain current production
quality image analysis equipment to be used in the undergraduate curriculum for
geography and environmental studies majors, geology/geography distributed study
majors, and students in other related disciplines. The present curriculum will
be redesigned to contain an introduction to image processing at the level of
Introduction to Remote Sensing. Traditional air photo interpretation and
photogrammetry will still be introduced in this course. The proposed new
equipment will be used for the entire Advanced Remote Sensing course. Students
will get in-depth instruction and extensive hands-on experience with the new
system. The class will be designed so that at the end of the course students on
their own will be able to function well with all of the system capabilities to
solve real remote sensing and image analysis problems. A new seminar, Practicum
in Image Processing, will be added to the curriculum. This course will be the
organizational mechanism for establishing the Southern Colorado Remote Sensing
Center in which students will elicit real world remote sensing problems from
local and regional government agencies (e.g. planning departments), private
enterprise firms on a cost paid basis, and university projects. The students
will then design, produce, and present their work to the data requester.