* 8750803
* Equipment to Facilitate Undergraduate Laboratory            Investigations in Cellular Biology.
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Jim Doolittle, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Frances Chesley as Backup AA
* 12/31/1989
* USD 28,551.00

The project is improving the quality of the laboratory part of a course in
Cellular Biology. The laboratory experience is acquainting Biology majors with
such modern experimental and analytical techniques of Cell Biology as
microscopy, tissue culture, cytological, cytochemical, and labeling methods,
methods of cell fractionation (esp. centrifugation), and methods of molecular
analysis (esp. electrophoresis). The equipment for this project falls into three
categories -- microscopy, centrifuga- tion, and electrophoresis: phase-contrast
compound microscopes for observing living cells, phase-contrast inverted
microscopes for observing tissue cultures, a fluorescence accessory to detect
fluorescent stains and labeled antibodies and a video accessory to facilitate
group observations, a tabletop ultracentrifuge for cell fractionation, a micro-
centrifuge for molecular techniques, and electrophoresis systems for the
analysis of proteins and nucleic acids. Instead of depending on demonstrations,
all students now can be exposed to a more realistic atmosphere of experimental
science that encourages originality and the cultivation of research and problem
solving skills. Such experience is particularly valuable for students who are
planning to enter graduate school, and those who are planning to become Biology
teachers.