* 8750875
* Psychology Microcomputer Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1987,10/31/1989
* John Batson, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Nina P. Roscher
* 10/31/1989
* USD 29,098.00

In recent years, Furman University has outfitted most of its psychology
laboratories with appropriate scientific equipment and as a result, psychology
students now receive thorough training in most areas of scientific psychology.
They do not, however, have access to powerful microcomputers for data capture
and data analysis. The chief objective of this project is to equip a multi-
purpose laboratory with sophisticated microcomputers so that the psychology
department can better prepare undergraduates for research. Psychology students
will get an intensive introduction to microcomputers in the second course in the
major and will build upon this foundation in upper-level courses. The computers
will be used in three ways. First, and most importantly, students in the course
"Experimental and Statistical Methods" will learn to use computers for
collecting and analyzing data from experiments they conduct in the course.
Second, advanced majors will use the computers for independent research projects
that cover a variety of experimental contexts. Finally, a large number of
students will utilize the proposed laboratory to conduct computerized exercises
(simulations, classic experimental protocols) that demonstrate phenomena that
are discussed in many of the upper-level courses and to analyze data that are
collected in these courses. This project will permit the psychology department
to complete its goal of equipping the experimental laboratory courses with high
quality scientific instruments. The psychology program will be greatly enhanced,
particularly for majors and those students who wish to pursue graduate work in
research programs.