* 8750314
* Photographic Image Analysis by Undergraduates in the Naturaland Social Sciences
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Dallas Rhodes, Whittier College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1989
* USD 14,200.00

The project will provide students in the natural and social sciences with
experience in detailed image analysis. The instrumentation will allow Whittier
College to make full instructional use of the Fairchild Aerial Photography
Collection--a unique archive of historical (1928- 1964) aerial photographs.
Because of the age and breadth of photography in the collection, both major and
non-major students in several disciplines can use it for laboratory, class, and
research projects. Geology students will use aerial photographs and maps to show
the progress of natural processes and analyze geological features. Students in
biology will be able to map vegetation, habitats, or particular environments and
show how they have changed in response to natural events (e.g., fire) and
changing land use. Sociology classes will analyze processes of urban development
and the distribution of social and ethnic groups in terms of their geographic
location in the natural and man-made landscape. The major piece of equipment to
be purchased is a Bausch & Lomb Zoom Transfer Stereoscope. This instrument
allows all types of images to be compared by carefully matching scales and
removing distortions, and information on an image can be transferred to special-
purpose maps. A digitizer tablet with appropriate software and a computer will
be used to convert the graphical data to numerical form for image and
statistical analyses.