* 8750901
* Instrumentation for Undergraduate Biochemistry and Cellular Biology Laboratories.
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1987,03/31/1990
* Virginia Brown, Heritage University
* Standard Grant
* Frances Chesley as Backup AA
* 03/31/1990
* USD 16,309.00

The high-speed centrifuge, chromatography refrigerator, fraction collector and
support equipment acquired in part through this grant are being used to
strengthen upper-division laboratory courses in Biochemistry and Cellular
Biology for students who are predominantly female, American Indian, and older
than the traditional undergraduate. During the past year, this relatively new
independent institution has received accreditation and instituted a four-year
curriculum in Science and Mathematics. Funds were obtained from Federal and
corporate sources to implement the basic curriculum. The goal of the current
project is to develop and enhance capabilities for giving students needed
laboratory experiences in upper-level courses in such areas as protein
purification and characterization, and the investigation of cellular components.
The new instruments are essential components of technical skill training in
Biochemistry and Cellular Biology in that they support approximately one third
of the experiments in these laboratory courses. This instrumentation also is
being used to support experiments in other upper- and lower-division courses in
the Science curriculum. The program is designed to meet the needs of students
who, despite limitations in their precollegiate science training, are seeking an
education that will adequately prepare them for successful careers in
technology, teaching or nursing.