* 8750765
* An Atomic Absorption Spectrometer for Undergraduate         Environmental Studies in Biology and Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Esther Gibbs, Goucher College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1989
* USD 22,107.00

Goucher College will buy an atomic absorption spectrometer (AA). The AA will be
used in a variety of upper level chemistry and biology courses, and it will also
be the major piece of equipment used in six week intensive projects, where
chemistry and biology students join forces to investigate the uptake of heavy
metals in aquatic organisms. This project will simulate the interaction of
biologists and chemists typical of research or industrial settings and will
require both independence and communications skills. This project may serve as a
model for cooperative teaching between disciplines where shared expertise is
focused on different aspects of the same question. After receiving background in
toxicology and instrumental analysis respectively, the biology and chemistry
students will join forces. Biology students will formulate the basic questions
about metal uptake and toxicity and then consult their chemist peers to develop
the experimental design and analytical protocol for metal analysis in tissues
using the AA. The biology and chemistry students will then analyze the samples
and interpret the data together. This is an excellent place for students to
experience the benefits of modern computer interfaced instrumentation, for it
will greatly affect their ability to answer scientific questions. The
sensitivity of the AA will permit detection of trace levels of metals in the
environment or in tissues. Sample automation will allow enough samples for
thorough data analysis, which will in turn be greatly facilitated by the onboard
graphics and data management software of the AA.