* 8750842
* Equipping an Undergraduate Instructional Laboratory with theTools of the Molecular Biologist.
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1987,10/31/1989
* Rivka Rudner, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Frances Chesley as Backup AA
* 10/31/1989
* USD 45,150.00

Recent advances in Molecular Biology and Molecular Genetics are significantly
changing the laboratory approaches required for training undergraduates majoring
in Biology. The Hunter College faculty has prepared a revised and expanded one-
year Molecular Biology course for undergraduate majors which includes two
updated laboratory courses in the areas of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics.
The revised and expanded curriculum (emphasizing basic cloning techniques,
analysis of the plasmids present in recombinant clones, isolation and
characterization of enzymes, and structural analysis of cell surfaces) will give
students increases hands-on laboratory experience with molecular procedures and
scientific instruments. In addition, increased access to the course for students
with limited experience in the tools of scientific investigation will be
possible. For the experienced students there is opportunity to expand their
existing knowledge by using modern molecular techniques for an independent
honors research project. Additional changes in the two laboratory courses are
also projected with the utilization of this same equipment. The major items
being used to implement these changes include high speed ultra- and micro-
centrifuges, a scintillation counter, shaker incubator and a speed-vac system. A
large fraction of the students benefitting from these courses are women and/or
members of minority groups underrepresented in the Nation's pool of scientists.