* 8751287
* Washington Middle School Engineering Program
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/1987,11/30/1992
* Thomas Stoebe, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Alice Moses
* 11/30/1992
* USD 778,794.00

The middle school years are critical in determining a student's success and
continued participation in mathematics. This proposal involves the expansion of
MESA (Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement) model to the junior
high/middle school population in the State of Washington. The project will focus
on updating and revitalizing middle school mathematics curriculum, the goal
being to increase minority student enrollment in algebra in the ninth grade. The
MESA model also recognizes the need for teacher support and provides teacher
seminars on a regular basis. Additionally, the expansion of the statewide Pre-
College Center at the University of Washington will include the coordination of
a statewide program at the junior high/middle school level. The MESA model is
based on a partnership between industry and educators--a cooperative effort
involving scientists on loan from industry, educators at the university level
and educators at the secondary school levels working together to develop
curricula that will stimulate student interest and achievement in mathematics
and science. The staff for the project is well qualified with experience in the
MESA program and in curriculum development and teacher training. The proposal
addresses a clear need for improving minority mathematics education in
middle/junior high schools and promises to have an impact throughout the nation
for all students by serving as a model academic program. The project goals are
consistent with the Instructional Materials guidelines. Therefore, an award is
recommended.