* 8751239
* Research on the Development of a Nationwide Support Network for the Implementation of Science, Technology and Society   (STS) Education in Junior and Senior High Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Barbara Barchi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert E. Wylen
* 01/31/1991
* USD 654,745.00

This project proposes to facilitate the implementation of Science, Technology,
Society (STS) Education in classrooms, grades 7-12, by linking together a
nationwide, regionally focused network of state education agencies, intermediate
service units and local schools through a cadre of project trained STS leaders
with support from the extensive resource base of the STS Program at the
Pennsylvania State University. To accomplish this concerted effort, the project
will: * Create regional and state advisory committees of distinguished STS
university leaders and state science and social studies supervisors, whose
charge will be to identify STS initiatives and needs, and to facilitate access
to existing resources and potential state inservice leaders. * Train a cadre of
450 leaders at the school district and intermediate service unit level in a
repertoire of teacher inservice models for STS instruction and then to serve as
a continuing source of information and support to that group throughout the
project. * Develop the resource-sharing network in three ways: arrange for
access to existing and new STS educational products and practices through a
print and a computer retrieval system; provide ongoing professional support by
the exchange of information through a computer conferencing system; integrate
ethics and values studies components into the on-going activities of the
network.