* 8751667
* Molecular Genetics and Cellular Biology in Primary and      Secondary Education
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Steffen Rogers, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 09/30/1991
* USD 432,303.00

Over the next three years the University of Tulsa will conduct a series of four
week workshops for regional elementary and secondary biology teachers, and their
principals, in the areas of modern molecular genetics and cellular biology. This
project was designed in direct response to the expressed needs and requests of
regional teachers, principals and superintendents who, in every instance, listed
a lack of knowledge in modern molecular genetics and cellular biology as their
primary deficiency in the teaching and/or understanding of modern biology.
Twenty teachers per year and their principals will participate in this program
which will serve as the basis for an articulated regional biology program. The
workshop will be heavily content-based with researchers from universities,
research institutes, and private industry acting as presenters on the specific
topics with which they are working. Half of each day will be spent in the
laboratory dealing with the experiential aspects of the topics covered in the
lecture portions. Teachers and Master Teachers working together will also
"translate" the lab activities to the appropriate level for students. Elementary
and secondary teachers and administrators will work together to create an
articulated educational model. Presentations by superintendents who have been
successful in implementing an articulated curriculum, a concurrent principal's
workshop, and a rigorous evaluation of the project will be implemented. Previous
experience has demonstrated that a combined elementary/secondary program can be
extremely successful in fostering change in a school district. The University of
Tulsa, the Tulsa Educational Foundation and the participating school districts
have contributed 24% as their share of the cost of this project.