* 8751476
* A Model Program in Science and Mathematics for Elementary   Pre-Service Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1987,07/31/1994
* Teresa McDevitt, University of Northern Colorado
* Continuing Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/1994
* USD 1,312,862.00

This project will develop a model approach for the preparation of prospective
elementary teachers. The goal of the program will be to have these elementary
teachers finish their four years of college possessing integrated knowledge
about mathematics and science, innovative teaching skills in mathematics and
science, and self- confidence and positive attitudes towards mathematics and
science. To achieve this goal the program proposes to integrate all preservice
components -- Content courses, methods of teaching courses, education courses,
and early, sustained field experiences. The special behaviors and skills
(problem solving, modeling, "hands-on" activities) prerequisite for teaching
elementary science and mathematics will be stressed. In addition, special
instruction strategies (laboratories, discussions, and visual-spatial
activities) especially appropriate for groups underrepresented in the
scientific/technological fields (women, minorities, handicapped) will be
addressed by the comprehensive nature of the project. It is anticipated that the
proposed model will be widely disseminated due to the modular nature of many of
the materials, the large numbers of elementary teachers prepared at the
university, and the project's close association with new elementary science and
mathematics curricular projects.