* 8751503
* SQUARE ONE TV:  Two Additional Seasons of Mathematics       Programs for Children on Television -- Children's TelevisionWorkshop
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1991
* Keith Mielke, Sesame Workshop
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 02/28/1991
* USD 7,759,893.00

Schneider Peel SQUARE ONE TV Children's Television Workshop (CTW) will produce
two additional seasons of SQUARE ONE TV, a daily series of mathematics for
children aged 8-12. The first season of 75 half-hour shows premiered on public
television stations in January 1987. The second and third seasons will each
consist of 65 programs to capitalize on the success of Season I and compound its
educational utility. SQUARE ONE TV has three goals: to promote positive
attitudes toward, and enthusiasm for, mathematics; to encourage the use and
application of problem solving processes; and to present sound mathematical
content in an interesting, accessible and meaningful manner. Based on
preliminary research results, the series appears to be meeting these goals. The
series has attracted a substantial audience from throughout the country during
its initial season, and a very positive reception from mathematicians, parents,
teachers, and the press. Most importantly, the target-aged children are enjoying
and learning from the series. The goals and content for additional seasons will
basically remain the same, with refinements made as research results are
assembled and digested by in house staff in conjunction with mathematics
advisors. Production plans will take advantage of the learning experiences
acquired from Season I. The additional seasons of SQUARE ONE TV will be
supported by a full range of promotion, community outreach activities and school
services, including teacher's guides. Season II should be ready to air in
September 1988. The highly skilled production team responsible for season I
remains in place: Dave Connell, Vice President and Executive Producer, CTW; Dr.
Keith Mielke, Vice President for Research, CTW; Dr. Joel Schneider, Content
Director, SQUARE ONE TV; and Bettina Peel, Director of Research, SQUARE ONE TV.
An 18 member National Advisory Board is chaired by Dr. Gerald Lesser, Bigelow
Professor of Education and Developmental Psychology at Harvard, and more than 15
additional distinguished mathematicians, scientists, and educators serve as
project consultants. With the addition of SQUARE ONE TV to the existing 3-2-1
Contact science series, america's children now have a full hour a day of math
and science learning opportunity at home. Continued development of SQUARE ONE TV
mathematics programs is essential to sustain our national commitment for
improved mathematics and scientific literacy for our young. An award of an
additional $3,000,000 for FY87 and $3,000,000 for FY88 is recommended.