* 8751220
* Experimental Foundations of Waves and Vibrations:  A Summer Institute for High School Physics Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* John Senior, Bakken Library of Electricity in Life
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 12/31/1988
* USD 28,350.00

This project provides funds for a three week summer workshop for 20 teachers of
physics and physical science, grades 7-12, during the month of July, 1987. The
workshop entitled Experimental Foundations of Waves and Vibrations will enable
the participating teachers, through the reenactment of historical experiments in
the areas of optics and acoustics, to study and understand the role of
experimentation in creating scientific knowledge. The teachers will have the
opportunity to build and assemble the equipment essential for several of the
historical critical experiments in the field. They will be urged to take ideas
and resources back to their middle and high school classrooms to enrich their
instruction of precollege students and to provide inservice education for their
peers. The workshop will be held at the Bakken: Museum and Library of
Electricity in Life. The unique facilities of this institution will be available
to the participants. The staff for the workshop will be drawn from the Bakken
and university scientists. University of Minnesota credit will be given to the
participants who successfully complete the workshop. This project is worthy of
funding for the following reasons: it utilizes an innovative and creative
approach to the enhancement of teacher knowledge in the physical sciences; the
teachers will enrich their understanding of the historical development of an
area of science as well as increasing their conceptual understanding of the
area; the project is a collaborative effort among a museum, university, private
sector businesses and school districts; and a resource book of physics
experiments will be distributed to physics teachers throughout the state of
Minnesota.