* 8751786
* An Ocean Focus for Science Teacher Enhancement
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Virginia Chambers, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 08/31/1992
* USD 449,455.00

This project features the ocean as a focus for science teacher enhancement.
Bowling Green State University has the unique facilities including an inland
Marine Laboratory which provides the local site and expertise. This three-year
project will provide an opportunity for 120 elementary, middle and high school
science teachers to study the marine environment at the University laboratory,as
well as at Sea World of Ohio and Florida and compare and correlate it to the
freshwater ecology of the area. The National Marine Fisheries Service is an
additional supporter, both programmatically and financially of this project. All
teachers will study oceanography and marine biology in the spring prior to the
two-week summer study and field trips. The latter will include trips to Lake
Erie for the nearby freshwater environment and to Orlando and Long Key in
Florida to study the salt water environment. Marine habitats will be observed
and live specimens will be collected for classroom aquaria. Teachers will be
instructed in the care and maintenance of the aquaria and school districts have
indicated support for their purchase and upkeep. A unique opportunity exists
with this project not only to enhance the teachers in an area of science that
with which they are not familiar, but to provide a focus for career information
to students who have no direct connection with the oceans. The new knowledge,
experiences and materials should improve the quality of science teaching.
Numerous science disciplines, mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, and
geology can be interrelated through ocean study. This can create both an
increased awareness among teachers and students of the ocean's impact on inland
residents as well as a renewed understanding of the interrelatedness of many
areas of science.