* 8751515
* Computer-Based Learning Tools for Basic Algebra
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1991
* David McArthur, Rand Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1991
* USD 900,426.00

The main aim of the project is to conduct computational investigations of
intelligent tutoring tools, in coordination with empirical studies both in the
field and laboratory. The main computational goals are to expand the pedagogical
expertise of an algebra tutor, and to investigate tutoring tools that can help
students learn new kinds of algebra skills in novel learning situations. In
developing the current algebra tutor, we discovered that little research
precisely describes teaching tactics and strategies. Our pedagogical
enhancements to the algebra tutor attempt to formalize such knowledge, and to
provide a computational framework for testing representations of pedagogical
policies. In addition to developing pedagogical enhancements, several algebra
tools or environments will be constructed. Each tool will be designed to help
students learn skills that are not taught in the traditional algebra curriculum,
including higher-level problem solving skills, and skills in problem finding and
formulation. The tools will also allow students to learn using regimes other
than traditional drill-and- practice. They provide a situated problem solving
environment that embeds mathematical reasoning in a meaningful context.
Empirical studies will be conducted in both field and lab settings. Continuing
field-based research in the local high school will carry out relatively formal
studies of facets of the tutor and the algebra tools, while the lab studies will
test software at a much more formative stage.