* 8751211
* Cellular and Molecular Biology in the High School Classroom:A Laboratory-Oriented Approach
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Jill Adler-Moore, California State Polytechnic University-Pomona
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 11/30/1990
* USD 397,213.00

This 3-year program is designed to provide 64 high school biology teachers with
the confidence, expertise needed to implement an experimental approach in their
classroom teaching. In conjunction with school district personnel and university
faculty, some of these teachers will also help develop an In-Service Training
Program for other high school biology teachers which emphasizes use of a
discovery/experimental approach in the classroom. During the first two years,
each teacher (32/year) will develop a research project in collaboration with a
university faculty member of the CA Poly Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology (ICMB). The independent research project will be done during four weeks
of the summer and the results presented at a symposium. Teachers will also
participate in a week of intensive laboratory exercise workshops in which they
will gain hands-on experience with student exercises which emphasize the
discovery approach, quantification of results, and new techniques for teaching
cellular and molecular biology. Teachers will have the opportunity during the
summer to expand their expertise in computer-aided instruction and to acquire
background and updated information in various areas of cellular and molecular
biology through seminars and workshops, and the monthly ICMB Journal Clubs. They
will also learn about and gain experience with modern techniques and
instrumentation through their research projects, the lab exercise workshops and
an electron microscopy seminar. The help implement the scientific method in the
high school classroom, weekly group sessions during the summer and academic year
workshops will be organized to discuss various methods of incorporating this
approach in the classroom. The teachers will maintain a teaching "diary" to help
them monitor their individual progress in achieving this objective. University
Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology faculty will visit the classrooms
of their high school faculty partners to encourage them to make these changes.
During the third summer, six of the participants, school district science
education personnel (4-6) and the ICMB Board will develop an In-Service Training
Program designed to help other teachers use an exploration/inquiry approach in
their classrooms. The project directors will visit school districts to promote
the use of the In-Service Training Program.