* 8751464
* Within the Brain
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Jennifer White, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 02/28/1991
* USD 400,702.00

The Lawrence Hall of Science proposes to develop two 1400 square foot
interactive exhibitions based on the latest research findings on the structure
and function of the human brain; one for permanent display at the Hall, and one
for circulation to 12 science museums over a five year period. The exhibition
will use large scale models and equipment from two television programs on the
brain. Substantial input from scientists and psychologists will be combined with
the educational expertise of curriculum development, museum, and design staff
from the Lawrence Hall of Science to create the exhibitions. Visitor and school
related curriculum materials will be developed, including a video library and an
auditorium show for large group school use. The Lawrence Hall of Science has
more than 300,000 visitors per year and is a major science education research
and development facility; the twelve host museums will reflect museums in both
large and medium sized cities well distributed geographically. More than three
million people will view the exhibits over a five year period. The topic is
timely, the treatment substantive and educational, and the qualifications of
staff and advisors high. The re-use and relationship to a major television
series, "The Brain", is an ingenious and effective strategy. The Lawrence Hall
of Science is matching the National Science Foundation contribution with
comparable private funds. A 24-month FY87 award of $ is recommended.