* 8751433
* Reading Rainbow
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Jack McBride, Nebraskans for Public Television Inc (NPTV)
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 01/31/1991
* USD 750,000.00

McBride Lenzen READING RAINBOW is a multi-part PBS children's television series
that encourages children ages five through nine to read good books. The program
format involves book reviews through narration and illustration with an overall
program theme set by a lead book. With support from NSF they have produced and
aired five half hour programs devoted to science books and science topics as
part of the READING RAINBOW series. The present proposal will add an additional
eight programs that focus on scientific themes over the next four seasons of the
program, demonstrating to children how science is integrated into all aspects of
their lives and encouraging them to read science books. The series utilizes a
thorough system of book and program topic review before material is selected for
each program. Scientists, educators, librarians, teachers, parents, and children
evaluate candidate books for interest, appropriateness, readability, and
suitability for television treatment. READING RAINBOW programs are evaluated for
effectiveness after they are produced to provide feedback for future programs.
The resulting programs are having a substantial effect on home, school, and
library. Booksellers are reporting dramatic increases in sales of reviewed
books; librarians greatly increased requests for and use of materials. Recent
READING RAINBOW book reviews have led to new covers and new marketing programs
for books, and teachers are using materials during the school year following
summer broadcast. Publishers, seeing an increased market for books for young
children, are encouraging new work by authors and illustrators. A $750,000 award
over three years is recommended: $250,000 for FY 87, and additional amounts of
$250,000 in FY 88 and $250,000 in FY 89.