* 8751885
* Local and Regional Teacher Development Program:  Retraining and Upgrading Precollege Physics and Physical Science       Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1990
* Donald McCollum, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 03/31/1990
* USD 68,124.00

This proposal is a modification of proposals for previous institutes because a
survey of applicants for and participants in previous years show that it wil
meet the needs of teachers in southern California School districts are
reassigning teachers trained in other sciences to teach physics or physical
science. The goals of the project are (1) improve the general background of the
teachers by providing reliable information "classical" as well as current
advances in physics, (2) improve classroom presentations of specific topics by
providing important teaching aids, (3) prepare participants in teaching methods
in and the use of classroom demonstrations including the means to construct
necessary equipment and provision of materials, (4) prepare the more experienced
teachers to deliver "in-service" to colleagues in their own schools and (5)
provide opportunity for computer useage including a survey of available computer
software and interfacing capabilities. These goals will be accomplished (1) by
an updated series of lectures, with notes and diagrams provided, by University
of California-Riverside faculty chosen for their ability to present at a level
appropriate for the targeted group, (2) by individual participant selection of
at least 30-40 teaching demonstrations to be constructed by the participants
from among 300 demonstrations presented and explained at the beginning of the
four-week Institute, (3) by group instruction on science teaching methods using
experienced University staff as well as experienced "mentor" teachers, and (4)
by the use of the Technical Education Center of the Riverside County Public
Schools. An amount equivalent to 23% of the NSF request is being cost-shared by
the UCR in contributing half of the salaries for instructional time and all of
the cost for the machine shop facilities required for the participant
construction of the demonstration material.