* 8751746
* Regional Institute for Teachers of Science in Grades 4, 5,  and 6 in Tidewater Virginia
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Ian Howard, Old Dominion University
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 09/30/1991
* USD 487,206.00

Regional Institute for Teachers of Science in Grades 4, 5, and 6 in Tidewater
Virginia is a three year long sequential program to upgrade the qualifications
of 40 upper elementary grade science teachers in six cooperating school
districts in the Tidewater area. In the first two years of the program there is
a strong emphasis on improving the physical science background and teaching
skills for the participants. This is done through two six week long summer
workshops with follow- up academic year seminars. In the third year of the
program 35 of the teachers will be selected to participate in a six week long
leadership program designed to permit them to provide in-service training to
other elementary school teachers within the Tidewater area. This program will
serve an area with a high minority teacher and student population. Approximately
65% of the particpating teachers will be from minority groups, and approximately
90% of the participants will be female. The program includes a very strong
evaluation component which will seek to measure the effect of the program on
students as well as teachers. The participant teachers will assist in the design
and implementation of evaluation instruments. Likewise, the participating school
districts have agreed to implement in-service support following the completion
of the project.