* 8751276
* Enhancing Interactive Teaching and Learning in the          Precollege Classroom
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1989
* Jerry Bell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 07/31/1989
* USD 1,149,970.00

Through this award, the Institute for Chemical Education (ICE) will continue
its work to enhance chemical education at all levels by fostering continuing
professional growth and developing and disseminating creative "hands-on"
teaching methodology. In this project, workshops, evolved over the past three
years will be given at five different colleges and universities: University of
Wisconsin, Madison; University of Arizona; University of California, Berkeley;
University of Maryland; and University of Northern Colorado, Greeley. The
following activities will occur at one or more of the collegiate sites during
the summer of 1987: Chemistry Fundamentals for teachers with minimal background;
Chemistry Supplements for Pre-High School Classes for primary and middle/junior
high school teachers to learn how to introduce science to younger children;
Chemical Instrumentation to enrich the well qualified teacher's background in
modern technological techniques. A total of 360 teachers will benefit from these
varied programs. Participants will conduct inservice out-reach activities for
peers after the summer experience. During this phase of the ICE project,
resource materials developed during the past several years will be edited and
published for wide dissemination. Evaluation and assessment of the effects of
the project will continue. This project is worthy of support because of its
national scope, the collaboration of several universities in addressing a
national problem, the apparent success of prior activities supported by ICE, and
the attempt to build a national network of precollege and college chemistry
teachers to continue fostering excellent chemical education at all levels.