* 8751199
* "Pathways to the Past" - A Discovery Center
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Kevin Bowler, Audubon Zoological Garden
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 08/31/1989
* USD 185,915.00

Dorand Shannon New Orleans' Audubon Zoological Garden will design and construct
a 3,000 square foot exhibition "Pathways to the Past" that will utilize
interactive exhibits to highlight the ancestral link between birds and reptiles
and to explore the ensuing development of each species. The permanent
exhibition, occupying a prominent place in the newly remodeled Odenheimer
building, will be used both by 125,000 school children visiting the zoo each
year and for the more than one million regular visitors. More than a third of
the residents of New Orleans are minority group members. Zoos are increasingly
emphasizing their science communication and science education mission in the
context of zoological research and species preservation. They have a substantial
need for improved educational resources to better meet the needs of the large
and broad cross section of their visitors. The Audubon Zoo's specific plans for
interactive exhibits are well thought out, with many connections back to the
living collection of the zoo. They have assembled an advisory committee and
consulting team that includes scientists, zoologists, educators and science
education specialists. They plan a variety of educational materials in support
of the exhibition, and will communicate the results of the project to other zoos
through reports, publications and presentations. More than $213,000 in direct
matching support will be provided by private sources. An FY87 award of $185,915
to the Audubon Zoological Garden is recommended.