* 8751204
* Demonstration Project - Model Plan for Video Utilization,   Grades K-12
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1992
* Elizabeth Kirby, Georgia Department of Education
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 07/31/1992
* USD 997,768.00

Optimal use of video resources as an integral part of instruction in K-12
public schools has been hampered by the difficulty teachers experience in
obtaining video materials that meet specific instructional meeds, and obtaining
access to video equipment. A project conducted by the Georgia Department of
Education in the late 1970's demonstrated that utilization of instructional
television (ITV) materials increased if teachers were given input into the
selection and scheduling of ITV programming. Since that time, the use of
broadcast in Georgia as a means of resource distribution instead of resource
scheduling has given teachers greater flexibility in the selection of
instructional video resources. Two limiting factors remain: and inability on the
part of the teachers to determine which video meets specific instructional needs
and a lack of video equipment in the classroom. The Georgia Department of
Education and the Clarke County School System will develop and implement a model
project which demonstrates that optimal video utilization is achieved if
teachers are provided: 1) easy access to video equipment in the classroom, 2)
video materials that support their instructional needs, and 3) instruction in
the use of video materials and the operation of video equipment. This project
will equip each math and science classroom in Clarke County with a videocassette
recorder and television monitor, provide each school with a collection of math
and science video resources, and provide teachers with a comprehensive video
index, and development in the utilization of video resources. The project will
measure and compare level of video usage before and after classrooms are
equipped with easily accessible equipment. That quality video materials increase
learning has been documented. The potential for improving teaching and learning
through the use of new technologies has also been demonstrated. However, the
demands of the classroom teachers tend to preclude their taking the steps now
necessary to utilize the technologies. This project will provide a model as well
as documentation that teachers want and will use improved methods of instruction
if unreasonable demands are not made in order to use the methods. The final
results can be used as arguments for those making policy decisions for expending
more resources on new teaching technologies.