* 8751520
* The Nature of Mathematical Thinking and Problem Solving
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Alan Schoenfeld, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 12/31/1990
* USD 47,931.00

Approximately twenty-five cognitive scientists, mathematicians educators, and
philosophers will meet for a three-day conference in the fall of 1988 that will
be supported jointly with the Sloan Foundation. The conference will be held in
an isolated setting (at a conference center, probably Pajaro Dunes) to promote
the substantive, sustained interaction of the conference participants. To
establish a context and some uniform background for the conference, conference
participants will be mailed two "baseline" documents: the manuscript of
Cognitive Science and Mathematics Education and the report "Establishing a
research base for science education: Challenges, trends and recommendations".
Two advisory boards, one for mathematics and one for cognitive science, will
help select attendees and set the conference agenda. The mathematics advisory
board consists of Ingram Olkin (Statistics, Stanford), Robert Osserman
(Mathematics, Stanford), Henry Pollak (former vice president, Bell
Communications Research), and Lynn Steen (Mathematics, St. Olaf); the cognition
advisory board consists of James Greeno (Education and Psychology, Stanford),
Lauren Resnick (Learning Research and Development Center, Pittsburgh), and Alan
Schoenfeld (Education and Mathematics, Berkeley). The advisory boards will frame
key issues regarding mathematical understanding that they hope to see addressed
by conference participants, including issues regarding a possible research
agenda. The participants who prepare papers will be asked to write about those
issues in such a way that (a) the papers are accessible to the broad range of
participants, and (b) there is enough specific detail (research findings,
examples of problems or instructional methods, etc.) to provide a base for
substantive discussion. The papers will be mailed to the reactors a month before
the meeting. The meeting will open with a general introduction. For the first
two days of the conference, papers will be presented in one-hour sessions, with
critiques and open discussion. Readers for each paper will be chosen from a
cross-section of the disciplines represented, to foster the kinds of
interactions the conference is supposed to induce. The third day will be devoted
to synthesis and an attempt to set a research agenda. Summary reaction talks
will attempt to draw together various themes of the conference: identifying
commonalities among the various perspectives, identifying points of controversy,
and pointing to lines of communications among the various constituencies that
might be pursued. A final session will focus directly on a proposed research
agenda. What issues do the participants believe are a important and
approachable? What do we need to know in order to make progress? The conference
will generate a number of papers which will be compiled as Conference
Proceedings. The Proceedings will be edited by the members of the two advisory
boards and published through a dissemination medium such as the Mathematical
Association of America's MAA Notes series, or through a commercial publisher
known for disseminating such work (e.g. Lawrence Eribaum). Presentations based
on the results of the conference will be made at meetings of the American
Educational Research Association, Mathematical Association of America, and
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.