* 8751330
* Improving Leadership Skill Among High School Mathematics    Teachers with Collaborative Research
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* John Kolb, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 11/30/1989
* USD 183,069.00

This project intends to investigate uses of computers in mathematics classrooms
and to develop research capabilities of teachers for the purpose of improving
their leadership skills. There are four goals to the proposed project: 1. To
implement in algebra and geometry classrooms computer software by introducing
teachers to research methods and developing instructional stategies for the
transition of the software to traditional curricular materials and methods; 2.
To conduct formative evaluation research and empower teachers as leaders to
investigate the effectiveness of the software implementation; 3. To develop peer
training activities that enable the teachers as researchers to share their
findings and instructional methods with their peers; 4. To disseminate the
results of the research. The plan consists of having four faculty members from
North Carolina State University work collaboratively with high school
mathematics teachers who have been identified locally as expert teachers. The
team meets for two weeks during the summer for initial investigations and this
is followed by monthly meetings throughout the year. The work at first is to
focus on the potentials that the tool software offers to the existing
curriculum. Seven of the lead teachers were involved in an initial pilot study
and they have experience with the software. They will serve as resource teachers
for the other teachers in the study, for a total of 27 initial participants. The
team will develop materials to provide the interface between the computer
software and the traditional textual materials and then share the results of the
project activities with other teachers in their districts. The research methods
will be used to evaluate the results as well as to analyze learning styles in
light of the infusion of technology.