* 8751837
* Enhancing Interactive Teaching and Learning:  Expanding     Resources and Teacher Preparation
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/1988,06/30/1992
* Jerry Bell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 06/30/1992
* USD 2,496,691.00

This multifaceted program known as the Institute for Chemical Education (ICE)
will continue its work to enhance chemical education at all levels by fostering
continuing professional growth, developing and disseminating creative hands-on
teaching methods and helping to strengthen the content background of chemistry
teachers. Programs are being held at four campuses throughout the country,
University of Wisconsin at Madison, University of Arizona, University of
Maryland at College Park and University of Northern Colorado. Chemical
Instrumentation Update Workshops will be given at three ICE Centers, UWI, UA and
UMD together with a fourth separately proposed at University of California at
Berkeley. These workshops are designed to renew the enthusiasm of these selected
teachers and provide them with a backgroud in modern instrumental methods. An
Instrumentation Loan program at the Arizona site will enhance this program. A
two-week Supplements Program will be held at each of three of the Centers, UWI,
UMD amd UNCO, with a fourth at UCB. This program will provide opportunities for
elementary and secondary teachers to learn how to use demonstrations and hands-
on activities in their classrooms. Science supervisors will be included as
participants in this program to enhance the implementation of these activities
in schools. Three community college and university colleagues will participate
in order to develop programs which they may disseminate in their own locales.
The Chemistry Fundamentals Program is a longer program (six weeks at UWI and
four weeks for each of two summers at UMD and UCB) designed to provide content
background, laboratory activities and teaching strategies to teachers whose
background is deficient in content and methodology. Each component of the ICE
activities can stand on its own merits, but the combination of activities
provides a productive climate of interaction and collaboration.