* 8751195
* Research to Identify Critical Factors Contributing to Entry and Advancement in Science, Mathematics, and Engineering    Fields by Disabled Persons
* EHR,DRL
* 11/01/1987,04/30/1990
* Robert Weisgerber, American Institutes For Research California
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 04/30/1990
* USD 299,988.00

The involvement of disabled persons in science education is critical to the
Nation's scientific enterprise. The potential of this minority has begun to be
recognized however the actual level of participation remains low. This project
seeks to bring into focus the factors influencing the successful entry of
disabled persons into the fields of science, mathematics, and engineering. The
Critical Incident technique will be used to gather data on "barriers" to working
in the sciences and how these barriers were overcome from 150 disabled working
scientists and from 150 disabled college students. This information will be used
to develop booklets of two types: career decision and "making it" booklets for
pre- college students, and an Achiever's book (profiles of disabled scientists
who can be used as role models) for secondary and post-secondary students.
American Institutes for Research will collaborate with the American Association
for the Advancement of Science (as subcontractor) in carring out this research
on a national basis. AAAS will participate in the selection of sample, analysis
of data, and in the development and dissemination of materials. The proposed
research is challenging and will provide needed information to a critical
minority group. The proposers are highly qualified and the research has been
carefully designed. The reviewers were enthusiastic about this project and
recommended funding. The project is planned for a period of 24 months.