* 8751833
* Life Lab Science Program:  Development of a Comprehensive   Experiential Elementary Science Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1992
* Roberta Jaffe, Life Lab Science Program Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Frank X. Sutman
* 12/31/1992
* USD 2,208,868.00

This is a broad expansion of a program that has had ten years of successful
piloting and tryouts throughout the country, but particularly in California. It
had some previous National Science Foundation and U. S. Department of Education
funding. This garden-based program for grades K-6 will expand the proposers'
current life science program into a comprehensive elementary science program. It
offers an explicit plan to involve students in a substantial number of good
hands-on experiences; and it offers teachers friendly and manageable materials.
The materials for hands-on work are not only familiar to most teachers, but in
terms of their quantities and cost, are both affordable and manageable. The Life
Lab Science Program integrates conceptual learning and practical applications to
demonstrate to students how science relates to everyday life. They learn, for
example, how their bodies, like plants, need nutrients that are available from
various sources. This learning is gained through chemical experiments with, and
data analysis of, nutrients in soil. A variety of learnings are derived from
this work, including some relating to ecology, ethical issues, and decision-
making. Roberta M. Jaffe and Gary W. Appel, the Co-Principal Investigators, of
Life Lab Science Program, Inc. (a non-profit organization), will have the
support of their own staff and advisors, schools from around the country, and a
major educational publisher. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company will provide
strong staff and financial support from development through dissemination and
teacher training, and assures potential for broad use of this program in our
schools. Addison-Wesley will provide support in the amount of $2,238,500. This
proposal was submitted in response to the Program Solicitation, "Programs for
Elementary School Science Instruction II," which encourages "troika"
partnerships among publishers, school systems, and scientists/science educators.