* 8751801
* Pre-College Teacher Enhancement Program for Middle/Junior   High School Life Science Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/1988,03/31/1992
* Thomas Koballa, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 03/31/1992
* USD 325,231.00

This teacher enhancement project consists of three-full year cycles, beginning
with a summer workshop and followed by the school year. This design gives the
participants an opportunity to interact and learn the biological concepts,
processes and teaching methods, to share and work together with outstanding life
science teachers and to establish and maintain a continuing collaborative
partnership with scientists and science educators from University of Texas at
Austin. Twenty-four of the less well-prepared middle/junior high school life
science teachers from the counties around the University will be selected for
each cycle. Twenty summer and seven fall sessions, a total of 118 contact hours,
will be required of participants for which they will receive six semester hours
of credit. The summer sessions will include laboratory and field experiences,
content presentations by scientists, and small group work periods during which
lessons will be prepared. During the fall, in addition to working with the
scientists, the participants will prepare instructional units and special
sessions entitled "Middle/Junior High School Kids Meet the Scientist" which will
be held in the participants' classrooms. A series of visits by two scientists to
participants' classrooms will be made during the fall and spring of each yearly
cycle. The participating school districts as well as other non-NSF sources are
contributing more than 30% of the cost of the project.