* 8751528
* AP Chemistry by Satellite
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1993
* John Gelder, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 10/31/1993
* USD 430,563.00

Students from small high schools are often educationally disadvantaged when
they reach college because their schools lacked the resources required to teach
those advanced courses that would have helped them succeed in college. This
project will determine whether live instruction-by-satellite is a viable means
of providing high school students with an advanced course in chemistry. The
opportunity will be offered to schools which are too small or lack resources to
provide Advanced Placement Chemistry, but which do offer one year of the
subject. The format will be designed to incorporate as many of the desirable
features of live classroom instruction as are possible. It will include video-
and computer-based learning experiences for students that usually cannot be done
in a live classroom. Students will be able to ask questions and respond to their
distant instructor during each telecast. They will do experiments in their own
school laboratories and will exchange data using computers. Local supervision
will be the responsibility of the school's "first-year" chemistry teacher who
will interact with the University as a cooperating teacher. It has recently been
shown that one of the strongest correlates with persistence at the college level
in the study of mathematics and the sciences is the opportunity for the student
to take Advanced Placement or Honors courses in the subjects. By allowing
students in rural schools to have this experience, the project addresses two
important issues: human resources and equity.