* 8751468
* Zoos for Effective Science Teaching:  A Training Program forMiddle and Secondary Level Science Teachers, Phase II
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/1987,04/30/1990
* Annette Berkovits, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 04/30/1990
* USD 213,304.00

In September, 1986 the New York Zoological Society, funded by NSF, initiated a
program for 30 outstanding middle and secondary school science teachers from New
York, New Jersey, and Connecticut. The program was entitled "Zoos for Effective
Science" (Z.E.S.T.). The present proposal is a continuation of the program for
two additional years. Six hour sessions, held on 8 Saturdays, January through
March 1987, involve behind-the-scenes touring, animal observation and data-
gathering activities, audio/visual programs and presentations by zoo staff on
animal behavior, cooperative breeding and demographic management for zoo
animals, and care of classroom animals. Segments are conducted on how to design
innovative materials linking classroom curriculum with use of the Zoo and on
assisting participants with peer-training techniques. Role-playing exercises are
used to enhance the confidence of the teachers in peer training. Participants
receive a wide range of printed materials including WIZE (Wildlife Inquiry
through Zoo Education) classroom kits: Diversity of Lifestyles and Survival
Strategies. WIZE, the winner of several prestigious awards for excellence in
science education, is a life science curriculum for grades 6 through 12
developed by the Bronx Zoo with major funding from the National Science
Foundation. Each participant will select a subject of special relevance to his
or her science discipline and develops an instructional unit on the topic. The
best of the instructional units will be reviewed for inclusion in a Z.E.S.T.
Teachers Manual, which will be made available to science teachers in the tri-
state area for use in conjunction with class visits to the Bronx Zoo. The topics
teachers chose to concentrate on and the materials they received in their
Z.E.S.T. training also serve as the basis for peer training the teachers are
expected to conduct in their own schools. Prior to the Z.E.S.T. program,
administrators from the participants' schools attend a conference at the Zoo for
an overview of the project. The importance of their support to the teachers,
particularly in their efforts to train their peers, is also stressed. This
project has a number of features which justify its funding as a Teacher
Enhancement Project. The following are the more significant: 1) it broadens the
perceptions about zoos being educational; 2) it presents techniques and
materials using animal exhibitions in conjunction with classroom instruction;
and 3) develops a model for use by zoos throughout the country.