* 8751208
* Four Films on Language
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1987,06/30/1994
* George Miller, Equinox Films Inc
* Continuing grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 06/30/1994
* USD 536,412.00

The evolution of language, perhaps two hundred thousand years ago, led to our
ability to think abstractly, invent logic, store and exchange ideas and to
create culture. What language is, how it works and how it distinguishes us from
others is the subject of a four part public television series produced by
Equinox Films, Inc., New York, N.Y. To examine language, the series will be
filmed in laboratories and universities throughout the United States and on the
streetcorners to capture the everyday life and language of Americans.
Additionally, parts of the film will be shot in Japan, a sophisticated culture
with a completely different language type from ours and in North Central
Australia and Papua, New Guinea, where two exotic languages of special interest
are spoken. Language is so taken for granted that most of us do not question its
nature. Most educated people are unaware even of the revolution that took place
in the study of language about 30 years ago. The intriguing interplay between
language as a grammatical system and, conversely, as a living changing part of
human expression is a complicated and fascinating journey. Exploring the
development of language is a challenging project and one that has been
imaginatively conceived and developed. The P.I. is highly respected with a
number of credits and awards in television production. The co-P.I. is a noted
linguist and scholar. The list of linguistic experts who are advisors to the
project represents some of the top scholars in the field. All reviewers were
extremely enthusiastic about the series and recommended funding. An award of
$400,000 with $200,000 in FY'87 and $200,000 in FY'88 is recommended.