* 8751819
* Raising Awareness of High School Teachers of the Breadth of Applications of Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1993
* Deborah Haimo, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 01/31/1993
* USD 361,015.00

The project will involve 90 high school mathematics teachers, 30 each year over
a period of three years, with inservice opportunities to update their knowledge
of topics in discrete and continuous mathematics. There is to be an intensive
summer course in applications provided by the project staff and enriched by
visitors from diverse occupations. The participants are to prepare papers on
applications of mathematics that they have studied and about which they will
teach to their students. The participants will prepare multiple copies of their
applied lessons for distribution to the other participants and other interested
parties. There is to be a demonstration class for participants which involves
staff from the project working with teachers in their own classrooms. Also,
there will be presentations by the participants for their peers dealing with
issues from the main topics of interest. Developing out of the project will be a
network of teachers who encourage the sharing of information about the
applications of mathematics with other teachers in the network. One of the
principle investigators will conduct an extensive program of classroom
visitations to provide support to the participants during the school year. There
will be a hot line available from the teachers directly to the PI for help or
information dissemination. There will be videotaping of highlights of various
presentation by project staff, scientific visitors, as well as the participants'
presentations to be used for further dissemination. There is the intent to
establish a resource center for offering the participants a broad range of
materials on applications of mathematics and top provide extensive references.
The participants are to be selected from among those recommended by the school
districts that have committed to the project.