* 8751823
* Field Geology as a Paradigm for Earth Science Instruction
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/1988,12/31/1989
* Stuart Birnbaum, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 12/31/1989
* USD 57,780.00

Thirty Middle School teachers from the public and private schools of Region 20
and Northside Independent School District in the San Antonio, Texas area will be
given the opportunity to participate in a graduate Summer Institute utilizing
the innovative "trainer of trainers" approach toward enhancing field and
classroom instruction in geology. Prior to the three-week Institute, meetings
will prepare participants for the course work, provide interaction with
university faculty and introduce the "training of trainers" program. Field work,
lecture and "hands-on" application will target essential elements of earth
sciences which have been already identified by teachers in this region as
requiring attention. A field trip to the Black Hills will introduce the teachers
to a stratigraphy that exists in Texas, but is scattered around the state making
it difficult to study in a short period of time. This site will make the
segmented Texas geology more available and comprehensible to the teachers. This
experience will enable them to develop good field trip experiences for their
students at more home-based sites. Approximately 60% of the participants will be
from campuses with more than 65% minority students. During the year following
the summer component, participants and universtiy faculty will evaluate the
results of the program and develop a package consisting of a teaching manual and
video recordings for use in future training of teachers. Both pedagogy and
content will be emphasized in this project.