* 8751283
* Travel Support for U.S. Participants in the Ninth Inter-    national Conference on Chemical Education
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1988
* Sylvia Ware, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 06/30/1988
* USD 37,486.00

Much appears to be happening in science education throughout the world, much of
which is quite successful and very worth sharing. This proposal would support
the participation of approximately twenty chemical educators in the Ninth
International Conference on Chemical Education, to be held in Sao Paulo, Brazil,
26-31 July l987. Elementary, middle, high school, and college teachers will be
represented in the delegation, with the precollege teachers comprising 70% of
the total. In order to facilitate the development of international teacher
support networks at the conference, and the further dissemination of knowledge
gained in Brazil, the teachers selected will agree to undertake a specific
information-gathering activity at the conference. Each teacher will select an
issue of concern to chemical educators in this country and, through network
activities in Sao Paulo, collect the information needed to compare other
countries' efforts to address this issue with efforts in the United States. On
returning from the conference, they will be expected to write a paper discussing
relevant approaches to the issue selected and submit this paper to the American
Chemical Society for review. Seven of these papers will be selected for
presentation during a special symposium at the ACS Division of Chemical
Education's Tenth Biennial Education Conference to be held during July l988.