* 8751303
* Materials and Assistance for Science Teaching-Project MAST
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Douglas Martin, Sonoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 02/28/1990
* USD 63,410.00

The purpose of this project is to design and evaluate a cost-effective model
program for improving science instruction in all 125 elementary classrooms of
the Cotati-Rohnert Park Unified School District. Project MAST will adapt
existing effective elementary teaching materials and methods to meet the
curricular objectives established by the school district in its program to
implement a comprehensive and articulated elementary science program. This two-
year project will devote its first year training teachers to adapt effective
teaching techniques and materials to the specific objectives identified by the
school district and to produce instructional kits, which will include both
physical teaching materials and teacher instruction and background information.
This design and production effort will be carried out by a team of school
district teachers and university specialists in elementary science education.
Special emphasis will be placed on including many district teachers in field
trials and evaluation of teaching materials in order to encourage teachers to
commit to the project. The second year of Project MAST will be devoted to
inservice training of all 125 district elementary teachers. District science
mentor teachers will be responsible for providing four days of training for each
teacher in the use of the instructional kits and for providing support as
required. The evaluation of the project will include a longitudinal analysis of
the actual classroom use of the instructional units and analysis of anecdotal
evidence concerning the reactions of teachers to the project.