* 8751313
* Mathematics, Physics, and Computer Science Summer Institute for High School Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Bill Aldridge, National Science Teaching Association
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 06/30/1990
* USD 355,642.00

The National Science Teachers Association in cooperation with the National
Center for Excellence in Education will conduct a Physics and Computer Science
Summer Institute for High School Teachers for 32 physics teachers of gifted
students at Long Island University during two weeks in the summer of 1987 and
another 48 teachers during three weeks in 1988. At each institute, conducted by
NCEE, teachers will study advanced concepts in physics and computer science with
special emphasis on solving problems and explore alternative teaching strategies
for which they will receive two graduate credits from Long Island University.
They will interact formally and informally with eight eminent scientists,
including two Nobel laureates, who will visit the project and give evening
lectures. Teachers will observe and participate in the NCEE math, science, and
computer science program for 120 academically talented high school students and
assist in designing and running the mathematics and science olympiads in that
program. Following the institute, participants will expand or start science
clubs and organize physics competitions in their schools or districts with the
technical assistance of NCEE. Also, they will be given release time to conduct
workshops for their colleagues to share information and teaching methodologies
from the institute using videotapes of the lectures. NSTA will prepare and
disseminate a monograph based on the institute experiences to assist other
teachers in setting up and running math clubs and competitions. One goal of this
project is to establish a model that improves the professional image of high
school teachers by recognizing them as legitimate members of a peer group that
includes distinguished scientists, acknowledging the important relationship
between a high school teacher's professional status within the educational and
research community and his or her own job satisfaction. By interacting with
leading research scientists, institute participants will expand their knowledge
of science and their range of teaching skills and be able to share the benefits
of this experience with students and colleagues.