* 8751729
* University of Illinois Teacher Enhancement Project in       Statistics Education
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1993
* William Stout, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Ransom
* 04/30/1993
* USD 659,095.00

By introducing teachers to an empirical approach to statistics, this three-year
project will facilitate the teaching of statistics in middle and secondary
schools. A total of 150 teachers of mathematics, science, and computer science
will participate in a three-week summer workshop in statistics and in follow-up
activities during the academic year. Evaluation will assess the project's
success in introducing statistics into the curriculum at the classroom and the
district level. The project builds upon inservice workshops that were funded by
the State of Illinois. Although based upon a high-school level statistics text
(with accompanying software) that was written by the PI's, the workshops will
familiarize participants with a variety of approaches to the teaching of
statistics. There will be one workshop for 30 teachers in the first summer and
two in each of the following two summers. Each of the five workshops will
recruit from a particular region of the United States, and teachers will
participate in "teams" of 2-4 superior teachers, depending on the size of the
school. Each team will also include a supervisor or administrator, and must
contain at least one senior teacher. The schools must agree to provide funds and
other support for introducing statistics into the curriculum. Cost-sharing
contributed by the university, the participants' schools, and the publisher
amounts to 32% of the NSF award.