* 8751813
* LIFE:  Cracking the Code (an Eight-Part Prime-Time          Television Series for Broadcast on PBS in the Fall of 1990)
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/1988,03/31/1994
* Graham Chedd, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 03/31/1994
* USD 500,000.00

WGBH Boston and its NOVA production group will produce a series of eight one
hour television programs titled "Life: Cracking the Code". The series will cover
recent advances in molecular biology, the record of personal quest and
achievement of many of the biologists who have contributed to these advances,
the social costs and benefits that have resulted and the ethical questions that
new knowledge and new abilities in biology have generated. Individual programs
will include "The Language of Life" on the discovery of DNA's role in molecular
biology, "Molecular Machines" on proteins; "Designing the World to Order" on
practical consequences of the new biology, "When Cells Rebel" on the processes
involved in cancer, and "Between Self and Other" on the immune function. The
series will be produced for prime time PBS evening broadcast to an audience of
more than twelve million individuals by a co- production by the NOVA science
unit at WGBH and the Chedd-Angier Production Company. Scientific advice and
consulting will be provided by Harvard's Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research and a project advisory committee composed of seven distinguished
scholars chaired by Prof. David Baltimore. The series production budget will be
approximately $ 4.2 million. This new science series on DNA, molecular biology
and its new technologies will cover one of the great intellectual achievements
of our time. It will provide timely information about an area of scientific
discovery that is rapidly transforming many aspects of our life. The series
will, in addition, document the rich recent history of molecular biology with
the participation of many of the original researchers who are still alive and
active in their fields.