* 8751345
* Leadership Development for Middle/Junior High School        Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 12/15/1987,07/31/1992
* LeRoy Lee, Wisconsin Academy of Sciences Arts & Letters
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 07/31/1992
* USD 193,699.00

This three-year project initiates a long-range plan of the Wisconsin Academy
Center for the Advancement of Science Education (CASE) to develop leadership
among Wisconsin's middle/junior high school science teachers and to increase the
quality and quantity of field experiences provided students in grades 7-9. The
project's major components include: developing increased subject matter
competence in field ecology and field earth science; participant development of
local field experiences; and developing leadership skills and applying these
skills in local community and state-wide professional activities. An active
support network will be established between participants and between
participants and scientists. Sixty middle/junior high school earth science and
life science teachers will be selected over the three-year project, representing
25% of Wisconsin middle/junior high schools. Subject matter will be provided
through seminars, workshops, and field experiences led by university,
government, and industrial scientists. Participants will have field experiences
in the major geological and vegetational provinces of Wisconsin as well as their
local area. Current environmental issues will be discussed. Leadership
development will be addressed through discussions, readings, and seminars.
Stress will be placed on strategies to implement change. Through development of
field-based curricular models participants will be introduced to the process of
curriculum development. They will be expected to provide leadership in their
district as local schools develop a science curriculum to meet the new state
guidelines. Participants will apply leadership skills and subject matter
knowledge during the project. Each participant will be expected to: conduct
local field experiences for their students as part of the curriculum; provide an
inservice field experience for elementary teachers and principals; conduct a
field experience for community adults; assist their school in local curriculum
development; and present a professional paper at a local or state meeting. In
addition, each participant will work with master teachers as those teachers work
with students and/or teachers in summer programs.