* 8751458
* Central Pennsylvania Chemistry Teachers Science Education   Improvement Project
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1987,06/30/1992
* Donald Mitchell, Juniata College
* Continuing grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 06/30/1992
* USD 576,192.00

Juniata College proposes a five-year program including 1) 6 weeks + 2 weeks
summer institutes for a total of 120 in-service teachers on the pertinent theory
and use of modern chemical instrumentation with ample opportunity for hands-on
experience, 2) an opportunity for teachers to work as research scientists within
a research group directed by a Juniata faculty member, 3) a mobile chemistry
instrumentation laboratory staffed by a properly trained, certified science
teacher who will work with participating teachers and deliver modern
instrumentation for use in the schools, and 4) the development of a network of
well trained science teachers throughout the target region to ensure systemic
and lasting program impact. The project specifically targets science teachers in
a four county region of rural, central Pennsylvania and focuses primarily on
chemistry. This project is designed to help pre- college science teachers
perceive themselves as scientists as well as teachers, to provide them with the
training and support to improve their performance as scientist-educators, and to
help them produce better science students and increased student interest in
science careers. Due largely to the revolution in technology and
instrumentation, the way scientists operate has changed drastically in recent
decades. Unfortunately, the teaching of science at the pre-college level remains
essentially unchanged -especially in small, rural school districts without
sufficient resources for modern, fully equipped laboratories. However,
appropriate instrumentation exists and teachers can be trained so that pre-
college students experience educationally sound, hands-on science learning.
Juniata's experience is that the excitement of science is most convincingly
conveyed to students by those who perceive themselves to be scientists - albeit
scientists who have chosen to teach. Further, the observe and think in the
manner of modern practicing scientists. This project builds on those principles
to improve the quality of science education in the schools of Central
Pennsylvania.