* 8751396
* Naive Knowledge and the Design of Science Museum Exhibits
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1987,10/31/1990
* Minda Borun, Franklin Institute Science Museum
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 10/31/1990
* USD 129,803.00

The investigation of naive conceptions of science has many implications for
both teaching and learning. The predominant model for past investigations has
been with school children or within very formal settings. Extending
investigations of misconceptions to informal settings is the challenge of this
research. Museum visitors' misconceptions about two topics, gravity and
mechanical advantage, will be recorded through a variety of interview formats.
Twenty-five persons from each of the age ranges 9-11, 12-14, 15-18, and college
students/adults will be interviewed. Information from the interview will be used
to modify the current exhibit or to build new prototypes. The research will
determine if a modification can be made that results in individuals moving from
their previous misconceptions toward a correct conceptualization of the
concepts. This research will document what individuals actually learn from
museum exhibits and how "front end evaluation" can be used to redesign exhibits
for maximum concept learning. The proposed research is challenging and has the
potential of adding significant information to science education research on
misconceptions. The principal investigator is highly respected in the field of
museum education and the associated staff and consultants are the top scholars
in their respective fields.