* 8751111
* Prototype Learning Laboratory Extension
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Edward Lee, National Learning Center
* Continuing grant
* Alice Moses
* 12/31/1990
* USD 480,540.00

The National Learning Center (TNLC) incorporates informal learning with self
directed, engaging materials. TNLC has produced, with a three year grant, a
multimedia elementary science learning Lab that uses tabletop exhibits to create
a mini-museum for students in grades four through six. The additional two years
of funding will enable the project to produce and field test four new Learning
Lab units and two related educational software packages. Each unit will consist
of about fifteen tabletop exhibits, student workbooks and a Teacher's guide.
Delta Education, Inc. will work closely with TNLC to ensure that each new unit
will become commercially available and will provide teacher training. The
National Learning Center is located in Washington, D.C. and is engaged in a wide
range of education activities. It has an excellent record and is one of the few
cultural and educational institutions in the nation that is totally integrated.
This is a challenging project which addresses the goal of the Instructional
Materials Program to support the development of improved instructional materials
for precollege classrooms. The museum's commitment is strong, the product well
defined, the staff is highly qualified and there is active participation of a
publisher. An award is recommended for the National Learning Center.