* 8751116
* Northwest Regional Leadership Workshop for High School      Teachers of Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1987,04/30/1990
* Glenn Crosby, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 04/30/1990
* USD 160,289.00

Fifty outstanding high school chemistry teachers from Idaho, Montana, Oregon,
and Washington, will participate in a four week intensive summer program and two
follow-up sessions during the academic year. The instruction will focus on how
to employ safe demonstrations and the utilization of computers in effective
instruction. These teachers will provide in-service and leadership activities
for other chemistry teachers in their state. The State Science Supervisor in
each state will provide support services and communications for the in-service
activities that will be conducted by the participants from their state. The
instruction will emphasize "descriptive " chemistry and how demonstrations can
be used effectively to reduce abstractions to some degree and provide concrete
observations through demonstrations. A concerted effort will be made to modify
some standard demonstrations so that they can be done with less expensive
equipment and inexpensive materials. Managerial and CAI uses of the computer
will be emphasized. Software programs will be made available for teachers to
evaluate. Science, Technology, and Society topics will be stressed with a focus
on how they can be translated into the daily instructional program. Participants
will develop materials to be used and distributed to other teachers who
participate in the in-service workshops that they present. School district
administrations will support the workshops presented by teachers. The PI has
been very instrumental in providing instruction for precollege teachers. He and
the staff are deeply committed to improving instruction in secondary chemistry
teaching.