* 8751349
* Application of Electronics to Teaching High School Physics  and Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1989
* Donald Dailey, University of Wisconsin-Superior
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 03/31/1989
* USD 37,392.00

This project will bring twenty-five high school physics and computer science
teachers from the state of Wisconsin to the University of Wisconsin-Superior
during the Summer of 1988 to participate in a two-week workshop on electronics
to better prepare them to teach high school physics and computer science.
Teachers selected for the program will learn concepts in basic and advanced
electronics including electronics as it applies to the microprocessor. A
significant portion of the workshop will be devoted to the development of
strategies and materials for use by the teachers in their classrooms, In
addition, participants will be able to choose self-paced modules in specialized
areas of electronics in which they way want to develop a better understanding.
The teachers will be expected to develop an electronics project to assist their
teaching. This project will be utilized in their classroom during the following
school year and the results of its effectiveness will be determined. A teacher's
guide of classroom strategies will be developed by the participants in a follow-
up seminar to be held in the winter of 1988-1989. This guide will be available
to 19 CESA agencies in the state of Wisconsin and will be distributed to the
Wisconsin Society of Science Teachers. Copies will be sent to the Department of
Public Instruction in each state office.