* 8751800
* High School Mathematics Instructional Improvement by and forTeachers
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Frederick Flener, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1990
* USD 162,746.00

The main goal of the project is to have outstanding teachers lead seminars in a
program designed to upgrade the mathematics competence of less prepared
teachers. There are to be two seven-week workshops with 25 participants; each
workshop will be lead by a master teacher with significant expertise in the
topic of the seminar which they lead. The plan is to use these seven master
secondary school teachers as the main instructional staff of the workshop. Each
week a major topic in secondary school mathematics is addressed by one of the
master teachers. Some curriculum materials are also prepared for use in the
participants' classes. Current topics are discussed, such as problem solving
activities, probability, statistics and data interpretation, use of computers in
the mathematics classroom, and geometry. Also, the master teachers devote time
demonstrating and discussing effective instructional techniques and classroom
organization. The follow-up activities include classroom observations,
interviews with participants, supervisors and students. The dissemination
activities include distribution of curriculum materials developed at the
workshop, a newsletter containing reports of classroom use of materials and
methods in their classes, and possible use of participants as mentors in future
workshops.