* 8751828
* Enhancing Elementary Science
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1992
* Jack Perna, Community School District #4
* Continuing Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 12/31/1992
* USD 633,843.00

Community School District 4 has designed the Elementary Science Enhancement
Project to address the issue of effective science instruction that meets the
State mandate. The purpose of this project is to enhance the quality of science
teaching and thus the increased awareness and preparation of under represented
elementary students in East Harlem. The project will, over three years impact
upon 30 supervisors, 500 teachers and 12,000 students. In New York this comes at
a time when the State Education Department is introducing a new elementary
science syllabus requiring enhanced teacher competence and "hands-on"
involvement in science instruction. The immediacy and extent of need suggests an
intervention model that operates at the level of direct instruction (the school
district); that is organized to meet the in-service needs of current
professional; that institutionalizes a system of peer support, turnkey training
and supervisory involvement in every school; that develops a cadre of elementary
science instructors/trainers for long term effectiveness; and that provides up-
to-date information and materials, drawing upon the support and expertise of
educational publishers, private industry, curriculum authors, scientists and
science educators. The project has a three-year plan in which teachers leaders
are trained along with building level supervisors in order to provide on-going
elementary science staff development and collaboration on a district-wide basis.
The strategies formulated by this project will be shared with the 31 other
school districts in New York City as a viable model for the implementation of
the new science syllabus. The expertise developed in staff development will be a
valuable resource for New York City schools as well as the 700 other school
districts throughout New York State.