* 8751523
* Computer-Based Integral Calculus for High Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1990
* Patrick Suppes, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1990
* USD 993,156.00

This project addresses the general problem of how the tools of symbolic
computation can be used in the context of calculus instruction in high schools.
For many years there have been programs, such as REDUCE, MASCYMA, SCRATCHPAD,
and MuMATH which can perform symbolic computations that are required for the
solutions of calculus exercises. But these powerful programs have been used
mainly by researchers in many areas of pure and applied mathematics and in
practical engineering applications. REDUCE algebra system will be adapted for
instructional purposes by building a set of sample computer-based lessons in
integral calculus. These lessons, combined with earlier work on the differential
calculus, will cover all the standard material of the College Board's
recommended curriculum for advanced placement calculus, AB. In addition to the
use of REDUCE as an "algebra engine" the lessons make full use of high-
resolution graphics, and the software is intended to be delivered to students on
individual workstations. Most importantly, the software for problem-solving and
calculus exercises will be able to keep track of the validity of the steps the
student makes and detect and inform the student about incorrect steps. The
overall environment is one in which algebraic and graphics tools are embedded in
a framework of valid mathematical inference. In addition, this project is
developing an interactive theorem proving system in which very able students can
prove the main theorems of real analysis which are relevant to concepts in
first-year calculus. During the academic year 1988-89 the lessons will be tested
with a small number of high school students. The lessons will be available for
wider use in January 1990.