* 8751326
* Self Help Elementary Level Science (SHELS)
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1993
* Mary Rowe, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Alice Moses
* 03/31/1993
* USD 1,686,398.00

The technology-based "Self Help Elementary Level Science" (SHELLS) package is a
three-year project to help teachers and administrators integrate science into
their elementary programs. Twelve major obstacles to doing science in the
elementary school have been identified and strategies have been designed for
dealing with them through video and audio tapes and print materials. One set of
video and audio tapes will show what to do to minimize or reduce the obstacles.
Another set will teach basic physical science concepts. A third set will be
explicitly helpful to administrators. In addition, experienced elementary
teachers will model how to put them into practice with research based teaching
examples. Thirteen video and six audio tapes with print materials will be
developed. The intent is to provide administrators and teachers with
instructional tapes to be used as a stand alone inservice program by individual
teachers and principals or as a supplement to inservice and preservice
activities conducted by trained leaders. Video production laboratories in the
Colleges of Engineering, Medicine and Education at the University of Florida and
at the Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD) in Virginia
will collaborate in the making of the tapes with scientists, supervisors,
administrators and teachers from twelve institutions and districts.
Dissemination plans for SHELLS recognize the value of working with professional
organizations that have good access to administrators and elementary teachers.
The Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development which has extensive
experience in video education, publications and institutes for administrators
and teachers will be the publisher of the SHELLS project and will take major
responsibility for dissemination. The National Science Teachers Association will
collaborate in dissemination as will the National Association of Elementary
School Principals. Dr. Mary Budd Rowe, principal investigator, is well
recognized for her research in elementary science education. Dr. Rowe's
background and experience more than qualify her to conduct the project. This
project addresses the goals of the Instructional Materials Program, particularly
the application of an alternative method of delivering instruction. An award is
recommended to Florida State University, Gainesville for the Self Help
Elementary Level Science program.