* 8751862
* Teacher Enhancement Workshop in Field Biology and Geology   for Middle School Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Charles Ritter, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 01/31/1990
* USD 114,687.00

A six-week field biology and geology workshop will be conducted by University
of Dayton scientists for 20 Middle School teachers. It will focus on the
acquisition and development of skills in problem solving and an additional
knowledge base in ecology and geology. Emphasis will be placed on applied
biology, field biology and environmental geology. The target group of teachers
are the less well-prepared Middle School teachers in southwestern Ohio,
including both large urban centers, such as Dayton, Cincinnati and Columbus and
suburban areas surrounding the cities and the University. The first three weeks
of the program will include an introduction to the principles of geology and
ecology as well as discussion of local resources and their uses. Following that,
the group will travel by vans to a field facility outside of Denver, Colorado to
investigate the biology and geology of the area around the High Altitude
Laboratory on the slopes of Mt. Evans. Because this project includes both a
home-based study and a distant field site, teachers will experience a unique
opportunity to participate in an exciting environment, and apply the field
techniques to their local environment. Modules for school use will be developed
with the assistance of project staff and mentor teams selected from previous
participants. Six evening meetings and several field trips are included in the
follow-up plans for the academic year.