* 8751860
* GREAT PROJECTS in Engineering -- Its History, Present       Practice, and Future Prospects
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1988,01/31/1993
* Daniel Polin, ETV Endowment of South Carolina, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 01/31/1993
* USD 356,399.00

GREAT PROJECTS will be a six-part series of television programs on large scale
engineering in society, co-produced by SCETV and Manifold Productions for
national PBS distribution. The six one hour programs will examine civil
engineering projects from the perspectives of the historical role of
engineering, the risks and benefits of new projects, and engineering's role in
meeting humanity's future needs. This series will be one of the few programs on
public television which has examined civil engineering from a wide perspective,
and will be the first to explicitly look at the benefits, costs and societal
consequences of investment in large scale engineering and infrastructure
projects. ln addition to informing and educating the public about the field of
civil engineering, it will serve to illustrate engineering professions and to
provide realistic role models for student career choices. GREAT PROJECTS will be
sponsored by the National Academy of Engineering, which will convene a National
Advisory Committee to insure balance, accuracy and objectivity in the series'
content. Substantial use will be made of professional, academic, and
governmental advisors and experts in preparation of its content. Support for the
project will be raised from corporations, foundations and professional
societies; the National Science Foundation is providing approximately l0% of the
$3.8 million project total.