* 8751332
* Regional Continuing Education on Modern Genetics for        Secondary School Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Dean Zollman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 12/31/1990
* USD 304,730.00

This project addresses the task of keeping the high school and middle school
curriculum current in the area of contemporary genetics by providing continuing
education, inservice, and logistical support to a selected and diverse group of
teachers throughout the state of Kansas. For maximum effectiveness the scope is
focused on the specific, interdisciplinary topic of molecular genetics and the
genetic effects of radiation, using yeast cells as a model system. However, the
need that is addressed and the approach taken should be appropriate for any
field where progress in research and technology is moving too fast for the
standard teacher education and curriculum development pathways to respond in a
timely fashion. The project has been designed, and will be implemented, by an
interdisciplinary team of professionals with strong commitments to improvement
of science education. They represent professional competence in research in the
discipline, research in science education, and classroom teaching at the
secondary and post-secondary school levels. They include university faculty
members from the Kansas State University (KSU) Departments of Physics, Biology,
and Curriculum and Instruction, a graduate student in Curriculum and
Instruction, and high school science teachers. Thirty secondary school science
teachers will participate in the program during each of two years. Each of the
one-year periods will begin with a three-week, intensive summer workshop on the
KSU campus to introduce the participating teachers to the content, teaching
strategies, and technology. Using this knowledge base, the participants will
develop lesson plans under the close guidance of the staff. The lessons will
utilize laboratory experiments in yeast genetics, microcomputer software, video
materials, and the critical thinking skills of problem solving and concept
mapping. During the subsequent school year these lesson plans will be
implemented in the participants' classrooms. The project staff will provide
continuing support during this phase. Follow-up and consultation will be
facilitated through a 24-hour computer bulletin board and electronic mail
service, a series of teleconferences, one weekend conference associated with
annual conference of the Kansas Association of Teachers of Science, as well as
individual consultation by telephone and mail. These communication channels will
provide continuing contact between the project staff and the participating
teachers as well as offering the teachers several ways to communicate directly
with each other. An important contingent of the project staff will be peer
teachers who have taught these materials. During the first year these will be
teachers who participated in a related NSF-sponsored workshop and teleconference
project in 1985. During the second year of the project the pool of peer teachers
will expand to include the teachers from the first year. By keeping the lines of
communication open to all current and previous participants we will be
developing a network of teachers who can share experiences and information and
who can be provided continuing support by the project staff, and subsequently,
through continuing programs that are the mission of the KSU Center for Science
Education.