* 8751344
* The Tuskegee-Macon CADRE in Science and Math (A Collabora-  tive Alliance for Development of Resource Educators)
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Paul Wall, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 12/31/1990
* USD 358,900.00

This project is designed to improve mathematics and science instruction in a
rural Alabama school system by training the existing elementary and middle
school teachers. It is a collaborative effort between the Macon County School
System and the faculty at the Tuskegee University; College of Arts and Sciences
and School of Education. Project activities include: (1) workshops to improve
the science and mathematics knowledge of teachers; (2) the development and
utilization of demonstration classrooms for the classroom application of teacher
knowledge in science and mathematics; and (3) leadership development through
administrator workshops and the preparation of teacher consultants to ensure
effective instructional change beyond the life of the project. The central focus
of the project is the development of a cadre of twenty teacher consultants who
will receive sufficient preparation to serve as resources to their classroom
peers. This strategy involves a multi- stage process of in-school training,
university instruction, and teacher consultation. In the first year,
approximately 117 teachers and 7 administrators will be trained by university
personnel. Of these, 20 teachers will be selected for further training in second
year training activities to serve as lead teachers for training of teachers for
additional school districts during the third year of the project. Expected
training outcomes are (1) increased teacher knowledge; (2) more effective
instructional delivery by teachers; (3) improved student performance; and (4)
demonstration classrooms as a teacher resource and for use in the clinical
experiences of university teacher trainees.