* 8751263
* Incorporating Computers, Calculators and Manipulatives Into Middle School Mathematics Through Teacher In-Service
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/1987,10/31/1988
* Ruth Hoffman, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 10/31/1988
* USD 135,860.00

The availability of computers, calculators, and manipulatives has raised various
questions about the impact of these technologies on the mathematical content and
instructional methodology that are related to the mathematics curricula at the
elementary school level. The purpose of this project is to extend the work of
the proposer and her colleagues who have, with previous support from the
National Science Foundation, developed a future-oriented mathematics curriculum
for grades K-6 along with a teacher inservice outline. The work in this project
is to conduct intensive inservice workshops for about forty teachers at the
middle school level who have been designated as master teachers by their school
districts. The teachers work within the framework of their present teaching
situation, including use of curriculum guides and textbooks, to infuse as
appropriate the instructional materials and methods of the project. The
workshops will be videotaped and analyzed by the teachers and the project staff.
The master teachers will work with the project staff to develop inservice models
that are appropriate to their districts. During the year the master teachers
will experiment with the instructional methods in their classrooms and prepare
to conduct their own workshops for about twenty teachers each in their districts
during the year and the following summer, thereby effecting upwards of 800
teachers with this effort. Products to come from this project are videotapes of
the inservice workshops on the use of computers, calculators and manipulatives
in the teaching of mathematics at the middle school level; evaluations and
reports by master teachers on how to modernize an existing curriculum; and
documentation on how the materials that were developed under a previous project
were implemented in this experiment. The proposer has a long and distinguised
record in mathematics curriculum development, preservice and inservice teacher
education. In addition, she has established a model and highly functional
mathematics laboratory that has serviced the schools and colleges in her region.
She has a reputation for accomplishing excellent results from cost effective
projects.