* 8751718
* Teachers Teaching Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1992
* Karen Dotseth, University of Northern Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Ivo Lindauer
* 08/31/1992
* USD 476,357.00

The main goal of the project is to enable the Council of Presidential Awardees
in Mathematics (CPAM) to conduct a series of workshops and seminars for teachers
of mathematics at two main sites in the country, namely the University of
Northern Iowa and the University of Northern Arizona. Over a three year period
300 teachers of mathematics will receive inservice educational experiences to
update their knowledge of mathematics and modern pedagogical practice. An honors
seminar will be held for fifty participants for two weeks each during June which
there will be lectures, discussion groups and planning sessions. The
instructional staff consists of past Presidential Awardees cooperating with
faculty members at the University of Northern Iowa. Also, some past Presidential
Awardees will be participants in the seminars along with other talented teachers
of mathematics. Later, in each summer, the leaders who have experienced the
honors seminar will conduct two week inservice sessions for other teachers at
other universities. Three workshops are planned: one will focus on issues of
teaching and learning mathematics at the middle school/junior high school
levels, a second will emphasize questions related to geometry, and a third is to
focus on discrete mathematics. Problem-solving, applications, the integration of
computers, and techniques of instructional methodology are aspects of all the
workshops. The follow-up activities include one-day sessions to be held each
semester as well as visitations by the workshop leaders at the schools of the
participants. there is a newsletter planned as well as research components
related to each of the planning groups. The non- NSF cost sharing is
approximately eleven percent of the funded amount.