* 8751234
* An Urban Environmental Program for Middle and Junior High   School Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1989
* John Niman, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 07/31/1989
* USD 143,921.00

Hunter College of the City University of New York jointly with the Research
Foundation of the City University of New York will develop an Urban
Environmental Program for Middle and junior High School Teachers with energy and
environmental control as the main theme. The program includes workshops,
lectures, demonstrations, field trips and a camping experience where the 70
participates will have the opportunity to compare and contrast urban and rural
environments. The objectives for the program include developing program for
teachers based on staff prepared materials, computer programs, and material
prepared by NSF sponsored curricula projects and other national programs;
enabling teachers to master the requisite subject matter and to acquire
techniques for teaching urban environmental studies; assisting teachers to
develop activities for the classroom and to implement them; providing problem
solving experiences in science and improving the practice of techniques in
teaching problem solving. The staff will develop the program in the fall of
1987, test it during the spring semester for a small group of participants, and
use the information gained during an intensive three week summer session for
which participants will receive four graduate credits. Five participants will be
Visiting Adjunct Lecturers. Approximately one-half of the project activities
will take place at the Fireboat House Environmental Center, a research center
for the study of energy conservation and analysis of environmental problems.
One-half of the activities will be held in the science education laboratory at
Hunter College. Hunter College CUNY has been designated as a minority
institution, with more than one-half of its student body being black or
hispanic. It has a deep commitment to teacher education and close rapport with
the New York City public schools built on numerous joint projects. There is a
unique cooperation between the education division and the division of science.