* 8751739
* Mathematics Improvement Initiative
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* James Bryson, Three Rivers Regional Education Service Agency
* Standard Grant
* Henry S. Kepner, Jr.
* 12/31/1991
* USD 462,141.00

This is a three year project aimed at the elementary and junior high school
teachers in six Appalachian counties of northeast Mississippi. The project
involves administrators, supervisors, coordinators, and teachers from 52 schools
representing 14 rural school districts. The administrators receive the
equivalent of three full days of orientation and instruction to give them
familiarity with the trust, scope, and expectations of the project. Some of
these activities are funded from external sources. During the first summer the
supervisors are involved in over 100 hours of workshop experiences to enable
them to prepare their own workshops for teachers in their districts. The
participants are to establish a mathematics resource center and laboratory in
each of the 52 elementary and junior high schools in which they will conduct
inservice sessions that extend the workshop to other teachers at their schools.
Also, there is a component involving parents as well as business and industrial
leaders in the communities. The second and third summers of the project place
emphasis on developing master teachers who are to serve as resource personnel at
the targeted schools. The mathematics content of the courses is a blend between
skill building and problem solving and covers the main topic areas in the school
program. There are, for example, sessions underlying arithmetic topics as well
as geometry and pre-algebra. The pedagogical component includes sessions on
diagnosis, remediation, and methods of materials development. Follow-up
activities during each of the intermediate years have the staff helping the
leaders and master teachers conducting staff development sessions for other
teachers in the districts. These activities take place primarily in the resource
centers.