* 8751336
* Strengthening Middle/Junior High School Science Education
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1990
* Douglas Ryan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Emma L. Walton
* 06/30/1990
* USD 216,722.00

The Biology Department, the Morris Arboretum, and the Plant Science Institute
of the University of Pennsylvania propose to improve the quality of
middle/junior high school science teaching in the Delaware Valley and to build a
summer enrichment science "academy" for ninth and tenth graders which will be a
laboratory school for annual teacher programs. During the summer of 1988 an
intensive four week workshop will be held for 30 teachers. Ecology will be used
as the means of exploring the scientific method and each teacher will be
required to develop a curricular unit. During the academic year the units will
be completed and field-tested. The best units and teachers will be selected to
create a summer science academy for students the following summer. During the
summer of 1989 a second workshop based on the previous summer will be offered to
15 additional teachers. It will be run concurrently with a science academy for
30 to 45 middle school students taught by teacher participants from the previous
summer. During the academic year fifteen additional units will be completed and
tested. The best units will be incorporated into the curriculum of the next
summer program. This project has a number of features which justify its funding
as a Teacher Enhancement Project. The following are the more significant: 1.The
projects will attempt to update the background material and teaching strategies
through the involvement in the informal atmosphere of an arboretum; 2.A program
will be developed to encourage promising students to be involved in science
activities during the summer; 3.Information will be supplied with respect to the
success of outdoor field activities in modifying on the curriculum of the middle
schools; and 4.If successful, the project can be a model for other locations.