* 8751878
* The Science Connection
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Carolyn Sumners, Houston Museum of Natural Science
* Continuing grant
* Frank X. Sutman
* 06/30/1991
* USD 1,627,901.00

This supplementary program for grades 1-6 is designed to take advantage of an
existing vehicle, those basal science textbooks now in broad use, to improve the
quality and quantity of science being taught. The materials described below will
include correlations to those programs. A Science Discovery Reader for each
grade level will introduce concepts within the context of student experiences,
and will be fun for children to read. Critical thinking questions throughout
these books will check understanding of the concepts being taught, and teacher
editions will suggest additional activities and references. The Science Shoebox
Recipe File will provide teachers with plans for self-contained, hands-on
activities. These activities will coordinate with the plot and action of stories
in the Science Discovery Reader. The Science Extension relates the concepts
developed in the basal textbook series and in the Science Discovery Reader to
other school disciplines and to students' out-of-school environment. Ancillary
audio and video tapes will also be available. Carolyn Sumners and Terry Contant,
the Co-Principal Investigators, will have the support of their own institution,
the Houston Museum of Natural Science, plus an array of university and school
advisors, and a major educational publisher. Silver, Burdett and Ginn publishing
company will provide strong staff and financial support, from development
through dissemination and teacher training, and assures potential for broad use
of this program in our schools. Silver, Burdett and Ginn will provide support in
the amount of $2,185,029. This proposal was submitted in response to the Program
Solicitation, "Programs for Elementary School Science Instruction II," which
encourages "troika" partnerships among publishers, school systems, and
scientists/science educators.