* 8751459
* EQUALS in Mathematics and Technology
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1992
* Glenn Seaborg, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* diane spresser
* 03/31/1992
* USD 808,059.00

The project proposes to work with 116 teachers, including 96 teachers from six
school districts in California and 2 each from ten other states. Each of the 20
teachers outside of California will in turn work with 100 other teachers in
their states or districts. These are teachers at the middle school level, grades
3-8. The first year of the proposed three year project emphasizes the adaptation
of curriculum materials which were developed over the years by the proposed
staff and their colleagues. The goal of the first year of the project is to
assess the value of the materials to the participating teachers and their school
districts. The second year focuses on developing a program to train trainers to
use and adapt the materials in order to multiply the effect of the program. The
third year continues with the development of the leadership activities and
disseminates the course materials and instructional strategies beyond the
targeted districts. There is an active follow-up component in each of the years.
There is to be eight days of concentrated instruction during each academic year
and twelve days of instruction each summer. This proposal contains several
excellent attributes. It is to be conducted at an excellent academic
institution; the PI, as the guiding force behind the proposed activities, is a
world renown scientist; the proposed staff have formed a community of scholars
and are totally committed to the project goals; a very effective set of
materials have been developed and improved over the years; the staff has been
most successful in conducting workshops with the materials for teachers at the
middle school level and above; as an extension of past efforts the team now
intends to apply the materials and strategies at lower grade levels. Considering
the outside contributions, beyond what is requested from the NSF, there is every
indication that the project will receive support and attention from the
educational and scientific communities and hence is worthy of funding as
requested.