* 8751352
* The Leadership Institute for Teachers of Physics
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* George Pallrand, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 11/30/1989
* USD 170,143.00

The Leadership Institute for Teachers of Physics will enable twenty-four high
school teachers of physics to have background lectures, discussions of teaching
strategies, and on site visits to research laboratories during a four week
summer program before they introduce four physics modules of material of current
scientific interest into their own courses. High school science teachers have
worked with Rutgers University faculty, industrial scientists at AT&amp;T Bell
Laboratories and Bell Communications Research to develop the modules: Lasers and
the Nature of Light, Lightwave Communication, Magnetism and Magnetic Recording,
Semi-conductors and Transistors. After the summer institute, the Lead Teachers
will receive continuing logistic and scientific support through the Center for
Mathematics, Science, and Computer Education in their efforts to introduce the
modules into their own courses and to hold workshops for other science teachers.
High school science teachers have worked directly with scientists as a five
member team to develop science modules, bridging the gap between institutions
that are rich and science and technology and the schools. The project was funded
by the New Jersey Department of Higher Education jointly with AT&amp;T Bell
Laboratories, Bell Communications Research, Merck and Co., and Rutgers
University. The Leadership Institute will disseminate this material by providing
high school science teachers with teaching units of current scientific and
technological interest, provide the teachers with background scientific
knowledge related to the units, help teachers develop strategies and techniques
for better communication with illustration of scientific principles as well as
new developments in science and technology to students, establish continuing
relationships among teachers, university personnel, and industrial scientists.
Teachers, science supervisors, and other school administrators have been
involved in all phases of the planning from the beginning. A feature which is
particularly successful is the acceptance of teachers as colleagues and
collaborators by the industrial and university scientists. The teachers found
the work with the scientists to be professionally rewarding. The teachers are
themselves involved in the creation of the materials which they will use in
their classrooms.