* 8751472
* Bridging the Gap Between Theory and Practice in the Teachingof Elementary School Mathematics:  Using Research and       Technology to Reform Teacher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/1987,04/30/1991
* Horace Williams, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* David E. Jones
* 04/30/1991
* USD 465,122.00

Mathematicians, scientists, and teacher educators at Vanderbilt University will
cooperate with 15 selected exemplary classroom teachers to develop and evaluate
a model approach to the preparation of elementary teachers of mathematics. A
primary goal is to demonstrate how mathematics content and pedagogy are blended
in the design of effective mathematics instruction. Elementary teachers will
help mathematicians and mathematics educators plan instructional units and
classroom activities which the teachers will then model for videotaping in their
own classrooms. From these demonstrations videodisc materials will be produced.
Materials will be implemented and evaluated in the methods of teaching course,
and the preservice teachers will be placed in the classrooms of the exemplary
cooperating teachers for actual implementation of teaching ideas. The materials
and cooperative model are designed to ensure that participants are aware of
research based principles of effective mathematics teaching and that they have a
supportive environment in which to practice these strategies. Project evaluation
will include systematic formative and summative assessments of project
strategies, accomplishments, and consequences. It is expected that university
course materials, including print and videodisc/computer components, will
result. Further, plans have been made for disseminating the model and materials
throughout Tennessee as well as nationally.