* 8751360
* Refresher and Enrichment Program for High School Chemistry  Teachers of SW Missouri
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Vernon Thielmann, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 11/30/1990
* USD 113,810.00

The purpose of this proposal is to strengthen the background and preparation of
25 to 35 high school chemistry teachers in southwest Missouri. The program will
be carried out in two phases. Phase I will involve 25 secondary school teachers
who are teaching high school chemistry, but who have only a chemistry minor or
less of formal preparation. The program will involve an intense review of basic
chemical principles, a considerable amount of time spent on problem solving,
laboratory work involving experiments suitable for use in a high school
laboratory and laboratory demonstrations performed by the instructional staff
who will concurrently be encouraging participants in the development of their
own demos. The participants will work closely, both during the summer workshop
and during the academic year, with a mentor who will be one of the area's strong
high school chemistry teachers. The basic program will start with a three-week
summer workshop, followed by four Saturday workshops during the school year.
Phase II will commence the next summer, with the selection of 25 teachers, as
many as 2/3 of whom will have been participants the previous summer. This phase
is for teachers with a deeper background than Phase I teachers and will include
more in-depth discussion of several theoretical topics, such as organic,
chemistry, biochemistry, environmental chemistry and computer-aided instruction.
Lecture, laboratory, problem-solving and demonstration sessions will again be
scheduled for this group of teachers. It is expected that about thirty five
different teachers will be involved in the program in one or more of the two
phases. Evaluation will be carried out by pre and post-testing the participants
and their students and by the observations of the mentor teachers and University
personnel during their classroom visits. Letters were received from the high
schools being served supporting inservice time to implement and encourage
changes in the teaching of chemistry.//