* 8751478
* Preparing Teachers to Teach Mathematics:  A Problem-Solving Focus
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1987,12/31/1991
* John LeBlanc, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* David E. Jones
* 12/31/1991
* USD 966,592.00

This 3-year teacher preparation project will develop and evaluate materials and
strategies for preparing elementary school teachers in mathematics. As a joint
effort of the Mathematics and Mathematics Education departments of Indiana
University and the Dyer Elementary School of Monroe County, this project will
interface with an overall revision of the university's elementary teacher
education program. The new program will require that each student must complete
an 18-24 semester hour concentration (one choice is mathematics) and a three-
semester sequence of school -based field experiences prior to student teaching.
Specifically, this project will address the revision of two mathematics courses
required of all preservice elementary teachers in order to upgrade and modernize
the content and to integrate problem- solving emphases with computers and
calculators. In addition two new courses for the mathematics specialists will be
developed featuring instruction and internships in problem-solving approaches to
the teaching of elementary school mathematics. A Vital feature of this model
will be the development of a local elementary school faculty to offer an
exemplary mathematics program. The in-service teachers of the Dyer Elementary
School will cooperate in all phases of the field experiences of the preservice
teachers. The will receive intensive but sustained assistance to improve their
own teaching of mathematics to reflect the problem-solving goals and emphases of
the teacher education program. They will develop their capacities to serve as
significant teaching models and as clinical adjuncts to the campus-based
components of the teacher preparation program. They will collaborate with
project staff in the planning and evaluating of all phases of the school-based
activities. Project evaluation will include systematic formative and summative
assessments of project strategies, accomplishments, and consequences. It is
expected that university course materials, including print, video and
computer/calculator components, will result. Further, plans for disseminating
the model and materials throughout the Indiana University system, as well as
nationally, have been made.