* 8751555
* New York State Computer Equity Project
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1990
* Jo Sanders, Women's Action Alliance
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1990
* USD 275,561.00

This project will promote computer equity for girls in middle school. The first
phase of the project will develop training materials that will enable school
district computer coordinators to conduct faculty workshops on computer equity
and to guide the implementation of computer equity strategies in schools in
their districts. These strategies are based on the premise that the best way to
interest girls in computers is to introduce them first to elementary
applications,such as word-processing and computer graphics, and then to lead
them to higher-level uses. The training materials will consist of a workshop
Leader's Guide, a two-hour workshop that discusses the causes of the "computer
gender gap" and summarizes strategies for closing it, and a three-hour workshop
that examines these strategies in detail and develops a specific program for the
participants' school. In the second phase of the project, these materials will
be pilot-tested in four school districts in New York State. A computer
coordinator and an administrator from each district will first attend a two-day
training session that will prepare the computer coordinators to conduct the two
workshops for teachers in their districts. Each test school will then develop
and implement its own computer equity program. The project will be evaluated by
its impact on girls' interest and achievement in mathematics, science, and
computer science. Data will be collected about voluntary computer use by boys
and girls and about enrollments in elective courses in mathematics, science, and
computer science. The Women's Action Alliance and the participating school
districts are contributing an amount in cost-sharing that is equal to 26% of the
NSF award.