* 8751731
* Conceptual Aids for Learning the Calculus (CALC)
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Jack Robertson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Madeleine J. Long
* 09/30/1990
* USD 78,818.00

The main goals of the project are to provide inservice opportunities to thirty
high school mathematics teachers in the Pacific Northwest who have taught or
will be teaching calculus in either a standard twelve grade course or an
Advanced Placement course. The vehicle for the inservice experiences is a
collection of "mathematical jewels" dealing with captivating approaches to
calculus concepts that differ from those in ordinary textbooks. The jewels are
to be collected in a Handbook of Conceptual Aides for Learning the Calculus. It
should be emphasized that the approach taken in the Handbook is to offer
enriching activities the teachers can use to provide motivation to their
students so as to avoid a traditional way of teaching calculus which often
"...is commonly reduced to a technical journey through a textbook, lacking that
extra insight, example, illustration or application which brings the subject
alive..."?Page 10, of the proposal narrative.! The schedule calls for
development of the teacher handbook during the summer 1988 to be written
primarily by the project staff and based upon previous work with teachers. In
August, 1988 there is scheduled a conference for five teachers and the two
principal investigators. The teachers have already been selected and will be
instrumental in the field test efforts of the project. During October 1988 the
staff and field test teachers will, at the Northwest Mathematics Conference,
present ideas from the project work up to that point and recruit participants
for the summer conference. During the following winter term the staff will visit
the schools of the five pilot teachers and work extensively with students at
that time. Later that Spring there will be a two day conference of the pilot
teachers and the principal investigators to develop a detailed outline of the
materials to be revised. During the following Summer, 1989, there will be an
intensive conference for 25 participants in addition to the pilot teachers. The
goal is to provide the teachers with a deeper understanding of the calculus by
using classroom examples, illustrations, and applications that are compiled in
the handbook. It is not the intention that the workshop is to be a course in
calculus, as such, but rather an enriching and in-depth experience for the
teachers with the goal that they in turn will be able to provide similar
experiences for their students within the context of a full-year calculus
course. Also, during that Summer, the handbook will be revised according to the
reactions and input from the participants.