* 8751189
* Leadership Development, Content Enrichment, and Process     Skill Development (LDCPS)
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1987,10/31/1988
* Lawrence Bellipanni, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Jean Vanski
* 10/31/1988
* USD 104,577.00

Forty junior high school science teachers from eleven school districts will
participate in a four week workshop at the University of Southern Mississippi.
Instruction on leadership development, content enrichment, and process skill
development will be provided during the workshop. Field trips that will enhance
the instructional program for students will be taken by the participants in the
summer workshop. Materials development and evaluation of materials that are
effective for classroom use will be addressed during the workshop also. Each
participant will conduct a minimum of two in-service workshops for other
teachers in their local school districts during the academic year. A primary
objective of this workshop is to involve the participants in meaningful
activities which they can use in their classrooms rather than providing
additional theory only. Provisions are made for school administrators to
participate in these in-service activities that will be conducted by the
teachers. The participating schools districts and the university staff have made
strong commitments to support the in-service phase of this project. Some
districts are purchasing additional equipment while others are providing release
time and other forms of support. The university staff will visit classrooms in
each of the school districts and serve as a clearinghouse and resource center
for the area.