* 8760559
* Countercurrent Adsorptive Seperation Using Impeller         Fluidizers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1988,07/31/1988
* Michael Petrik, Helipump Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1988
* USD 48,591.00

A new technology is explored for contacting liquid and fine particle slurry
countercurrently. High mass transfer rates and simple equipment make this
technology attractive for continuous adsorptive separation of liquids. Present
technology simulates countercurrent plug flow of solid against liquid by
cyclicly moving feeds and outlets along a stationary packed bed. This method is
limited by slow, complicated equipment and by slow mass transfer rates. Also
greater than 100 micron diameter particles must be used to avoid excessive
pressure drop in the packed bed. This process used a countercurrent cascade of
newly developed particle fluidizers to contact liquid with a dense slurry of
fine adsorbent particles. Equipment is simple and inexpensive, even when a large
number of stages are used. Smaller particle sizes (<20 microns) allows 25 to 200
times faster mass transfer. This process offers an order of magnitude lower
capital and operating costs due to simplicity and miniaturization. Research is
conducted to determine the feasibility, limitations, and important
characteristics of the new process. Experiment shows the ability of the
fluidizer to concentrate adsorbent particle slurry and is used to determine the
effectiveness of the liquid-adsorbent contacting. A computer model is developed
that uses the experimental data to study the process as a whole.