* 8760911
* Application of the Stewart Platform in the High Speed High  Accuracy Domain
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1988
* Leonard Haynes, Intelligent Automation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1988
* USD 49,733.00

A critical need exists for small, universally applicable, high speed, high
accuracy assembly mechanisms for assembly of microelectronics and other similar
objects. High speed micropositioners are difficult to design, expensive to
build, and difficult to maintain in satisfactory working order. The Stewart
platform has potential for application as a six degree of freedom
micropositioner. It has been successfully applied in low speed, low accuracy
applications. It provides exceptional mechanical stiffness and is easy and cost
effective to manufacture. No research has been done in the application of the
Stewart platform as a high speed, high accuracy manufacturing or assembly
machine. This realm of operation develops significant nonlinear inertial terms
in the mass dynamics, which render control difficult. This project examines
kinematic synthesis techniques to decouple and linearize the mass dynamics. A
state variable model of the mechanism is being developed which is based upon the
linearized equations of motion. Control is simulated for high speed, high
accuracy motion. The simulation reflects commercially available components. The
influence of extra, redundant legs in eliminating backlash and enhancing
stability are also studied. The Stewart platform also has potential to
simultaneously act as a positioner and actively reject externally applied
vibration loads. The feasibility of this is also being developed.