* 8760286
* Generalized Data Compression Techniques for Testable        Design of Very Large Scale Integrated Circuits
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1988
* C Venkatraman, Compression Telecommunications Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1988
* USD 49,303.00

With the increase in our dependence on computers in all phases of our lives, it
is becoming imperative that, as far as possible, the computers be fault-
tolerant, i.e. be capable of performing in the presence of failures. One
critical aspect of fault-tolerant computing is the necessity to design testable
VLSI circuits. In this research project, a new technique for Built-in-test (BIT)
of VLSI circuits is presented. The technique is based on the generalized data
compression concept and assumes underlying Built-In-Logic Block- Observability
(BILBO) and Level-Sensitive-Scan-Design (LSSD) structures. The technique
addresses two main aspects of the testable design of VLSI, namely, i) Design of
reduced size test patterns through a new data compression algorithm generated
using a fault information data base. ii) Circuit modification or augmentation
for testability i.e. by proper selection of suitable finite state models,
implementations as programmable arrays with and without observable outputs are
realized. Then necessary heuristics for testing are generated. This technique
may be used for BIT test of certain crucial parts of a computer, such as a
"control unit", for ensuring system reliability and for reducing the overall
testing time and cost.