* 8760712
* Determination of Subsurface Conditions of Frozen Ground     Layers Using Surface Waves
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1988
* Larry Olson, Olson-Church Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1988
* USD 49,734.00

An innovative new seismic technique, the Spectral Analysis of Surface Waves
(SASW) method, has potential for locating frozen and unfrozen ground rapidly and
accurately through measurement of the seismic wave velocity profile. The
velocity of seismic waves is much faster in frozen ground than unfrozen ground.
The SASW method has already been used to predict the shear wave velocity and
thickness profiles for pavements, liquefaction investigations of soil sites,
earth dams, concrete dams, and fills. The method is based on elastic wave
propagation theory and spectral analysis methods for evaluating dispersion
curves for surface waves. One of the most exciting aspects of the method is its
capability to detect low velocity layers underlying higher velocity layers with
measurements made on the ground surface. This capability of the SASW method
overcomes the traditional limitation on the use of the seismic refraction
method. Thus, the SASW method shows strong potential for locating frozen and
unfrozen ground layers, even when the ground surface is frozen and the
underlying soils are thawed. Research will be performed at two sites in Alaska
with varying frozen and unfrozen ground conditions to develop measurement and
analysis techniques for using the SASW method at Arctic sites. As the research
progresses, the SASW method's capabilities for detecting other subsurface Arctic
conditions such as frozen roads, massive ice lenses, and lateral propagation of
permafrost will be researched. The potential benefits of accurate knowledge of
frozen ground conditions to engineers, contractors and the public are tremendous
for improved performance and economy of construction and maintenance of roads,
buildings, runways, and pipeline facilities. Research and development of an
automated SASW device to locate frozen ground would be of tremendous benefit to
the construction industry in Arctic regions.