* 8760919
* Catalysis of Diels-Alder Reactions Using Ultrasound
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1988
* Jeffrey Solash, Energy & Minerals Research Company
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1988
* USD 49,442.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the general
area of physical organic chemistry and in the subfield of catalysis. The goal of
this research is to ascertain the feasibility of catalyzing a commercially
important class of chemical reactions through the application of ultrasound.
Diels-Alder reactions represent a class of chemical processes that are
synthetically quite useful but which have such inherently slow rates of reaction
that they are of limited commercial utility. Energy & Minerals Research Company
will investigate whether the application of ultrasonic energy to Diels-Alder
reaction mixtures will accelerate their rates of reaction sufficiently to enable
their broader use in larger scale commercial synthetic chemistry. Four different
Diels-Alder systems, chosen to represent a broad range of reactivities, will be
studied under identical conditions as a function of sonic intensity. This Phase
I effort should determine whether the rates of a range of Diels-Alder reactions
can be promoted sonochemically. Additionally, the electric power requirements to
catalyze these reactions will be determined and the economic feasibility of the
approach evaluated. The successful and economically feasible catalysis of Diels-
Alder reactions by ultrasound would add significantly to the synthetic
capability of commercial synthetic chemistry.