* 8760094
* Microelectronic Information Processing Systems
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1988
* Michael Andrews, Space Tech Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1988
* USD 48,697.00

This project is for exploratory research to determine the implementation factors
and parameters for a new VLSI cell invoking redundant number arithmetic instead
of 1's/2's complement. A narrow application towards signal processing
(multiply/accumulate intensive) shall drive minimal area and speed designs.
Carry/borrow free designs may greatly enhance modular fault-tolerant
implementations. For further focus, the efficient Signed Binary Number
Representation (SBNR) as a tri-valued subset of general redundant number
representations affords more improved area/speed FOM's, thus making such cells
highly VLSI-regular. This application specific study shall identify critical
design parameters (minimal line widths, functional partitioning, VIA's , number
of gates, inter/intracell connections) to aid the design engineer. Focus is on
lower levels of computer architecture coupled to technology/implementation
issues where significant discoveries may be leveraged into practical systolic
arrays exceeding the design performance of GAPP and DAP devices while achieving
breakthroughs in minimal cell layouts. There is potential for an order of
magnitude speedup of signal processing circuits through the use of non-
conventional number system implementations. This project will focus on VLSI
enhancements of redundant number systems. The latter have been studied
extensively and the time is ripe to assess their merit in circuit design. This
research topic is an excellent one for a small business to pursue because of the
potential for making a meaningful advance in the theory and practice of signal
processing circuit design.