* 8760107
* Longitudinal Acoustical Resonance Measurement of Particle   Loading and Sizing in Gas-Solids Flow
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1988,07/31/1988
* Alan Vetter, Humbug Mountain Research Laboratories
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1988
* USD 50,000.00

The acoustical resonance measurement techniques in this project provide a
nonintrusive and realtime measurement of mass loading and sizing of particles
fluidized by a gas phase. The speed of sound in a two-phase mixture of particles
in gas decreases as the mass density of the particles increases. By measuring
the decrease in the resonant frequencies, which are linearly related to the
speed of sound, the mass density of the particles is determined. Because the
speed of sound is dispersive with the frequency dependence of the sound speed
provides a method of determining the particle sizing by measurement of the
frequencies of different resonant modes. For realistic applications, a
longitudinal resonance is required for the acoustical resonance measurement. A
first order acoustical analysis of this nonintrusive technique applied to
longitudinal resonances is used for the conditions found in the pneumatic
conveyance of pulverized coal in electrical utility power plants. The analytical
investigation includes evaluation over the full operating ranges of the plant.
Experimental measurements on a closed loop tests laboratory scale test stand and
at a power plant are conducted to verify the technique. The analyses are used to
interpret the results of the experimental measurements.