* 8760090
* Design of the System Architecture for a Chemical EngineeringWorkstation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1988,07/31/1988
* David Hamblen, Advanced Fuel Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1988
* USD 49,822.00

Due to the complexity of the calculations and the lack of effective standards,
chemical engineers and chemists have been left behind their mechanical and
electronic counterparts in having the benefits of a computer workstation
addressed to their requirements. A need exists for the means to integrate
existing and new applications through a common database, to provide an effective
user interface and to generate high resolution graphics for input and output.
The hardware and techniques to solve these problems for the chemistry profession
exists; it is the purpose of this research to make use of identified system and
manpower resources to investigate, define and test a system architecture which
will satisfy their needs. The innovations offered in this proposal include the
establishment of an interdisciplinary team of computer science and chemical
engineering experts to study, define, and test a system architecture considering
the special needs of the chemistry professional; the incorporation and test of
unique applications software; the establishment of an effective user interface
considering the use of "dynamic icons"; and determination of means to integrate
existing and new programs compatibly. A preliminary market study and Phase III
business plan has indicated the commercial viability of the system and the plan
meets the criteria of the Connect Product Development Corporation (CPCD) from
whom follow-on funding will be sought. SBIR Phase I funding of this program is
user/technology questions on which the system architecture depends. Phase II
funding will provide for demonstration of the capabilities and benefits of the
proposed workstation, without which, excessive time and funds would be required
to convince and gain the necessary widespread support of a body of users who are
preconditioned to expect complexity.