* 8760708
* Primate Environmental Enrichment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1988
* John Landon, SEMA Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 12/31/1988
* USD 50,000.00

Recent amendments to the Animal Welfare Act call for provision of physical
environments promoting the psychological well-being of non-human primates.
Criteria for evaluating the success of changes intended to promote psychological
well-being are not defined. No means for implementing such changes are
specified. This lack of definition and specificity is especially problematic for
research facilities where use of infectious agents requires contained housing,
or where experimental protocols do not allow animals to roam freely. In studying
the psychological well-being of non-human primates, an array of enrichment
strategies may be examined. From this array, it may be possible to select and
develop systems that will provide social enrichment for a particular species.
This Small Business Innovation Research project is to determine the feasibility
of a program in which systems for primate environmental enrichment can be
developed. The feasibility study will result in a plan to assess the value of
objective behavioral criteria for developing enrichment procedures of three
basic kinds: food, alternative caging, and implements of diversion or
entertainment. The Phase I effort will be to specifically review strategic
approaches, create objective behavioral protocols, postulate necessary
constraints due to a particular animal or study, followed by a feasibility
statement and recommended approaches. This research has potential for commercial
application through patents on new caging design, playthings, stimulus enhancers
and foods. A secondary application is that methods of environmental enrichment
would help in the defense of the use of primates for research in the face of
mounting pressures from animal-rights activists.