* 8761052
* Neutral Gas Xenon Laser for Infrared Measurement of Nitrous Oxzide
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1988,07/31/1988
* Paul Kebabian, Aerodyne Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1988
* USD 49,959.00

Nitrous oxide is an important trace atmospheric species which plays a key role
in the atmospheric greenhouse problem as well as the destruction of
stratospheric ozone. Its concentration in the atmosphere is rising due to
anthropogenic sources related to agricultural productivity and the burning of
coal and heavy fuel oil. This grant is to evaluate and develop a new, reliable,
cost effective, rugged and nonintrusive method of measuring nitrous oxide in
either the free atmosphere or in combustion exhaust gas streams. The proposed
measurement technique is based on a dual gaseous Xenon. This measurement method
could also be integrated with eddy correlation of flux measurement techniques to
yield both concentration and vertical flux measurements of nitrous oxide from
airborne or ground based platforms. If pursued through prototype development
(Phase II), the proposed research would result in a new instrumental capability
to perform nitrous oxide concentration and flux measurements from a wide variety
of airborne and ground based platforms. Commercial instrumentation for both
research and regulatory monitoring purposes would be less expensive, more
accurate, and more reliable than any current method. Instrumentation to measure
nitrous oxide concentration in exhausts from fossil fuel combustors would also
be developed.