* 9700456
* Integrated Structure/Actuator/Control Design of Trajectory  Pattern Tuned Computer Controlled Ultra-High Speed and      Accuracy Machine (GOALI)
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Jahangir Rastegar, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 05/31/2001
* USD 220,234.00

The GOALI industry-university collaborative research project deals with
simultaneous design of trajectory pattern tuned computer controlled machinery
for ultra-high speed and accuracy applications such as lithography, bonding, and
inspection in the electronics industry as well as for the production of high
quality optical components instruments. The mail goal of the project is to
develop a trajectory- pattern based, systematic methodology for simultaneous
design, optimization, and fine-tuning of all subsystems (structure, actuator,
control) of a computer controlled machinery to achieve ultra-high performance
for the classes of specified tanks. The project also involves the detailed
design, construction, and system integration of a testbed for high-performance
machinery. The testbed will be used to evaluate the effectiveness of the design
methodology, the performance of the constructed systems, its various components
and motion synthesis and control algorithms. By designing and tuning system
parameters for the actual trajectory patterns that a high-performance machine is
required to perform, one can fully take advantage of the interaction among the
machine structure, the actuators, and controllers to achieve ultra-high
performance with significant; cost savings. The multidisciplinary project is to
be carried out in a period of three years in collaboration with three companies
(Anorad Corporation, Morgan Matroc Electro Ceramics Division, and OmniTek
Research Development, Inc.) with expertise ranging from machine design,
dynamics, control, design of passive and active vibration damping elements,
system integration, as well as manufacturing of piezoceramic-based active
components. The project demonstrates how both universities and manufacturing and
engineering industry may benefit from cooperative research in the development,
application, and integration of available and emerging technologies in the field
of optimal design and operation of ultra-high performance production machinery.