* 9700909
* Vertex Operator Algebras and the Representation and         Cohomology Theory of Groups and Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Geoffrey Mason, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joseph P. Brennan
* 12/31/2000
* USD 75,000.00

ABSTRACT, MASON 97-00909 Abstract : PI will investigate the mathematical
foundations of the theory of vertex operator algebras, their automorphism groups
and representation theory, and related questions in the cohomology of groups and
algebras and in the theory of modular forms. Techniques are based on past work
of the PI and collaborators on the foundations of algebraic conformal field
theory, including the theory of Zhu's associative algebras, quantum Galois
theory, existence and modular-invariance of twisted sectors, and a cohomological
theory of discrete torsion and Dijkgraaf-Witten cocycles. In recent years,
mathematicians and physicists alike have been developing conformal field theory,
which incorporates infinite-dimensional symmetry, in order to understand certain
critical phenomena and also (via string theory) the first rigorous approach to
quantum gravity. This effort is a highly intensive mathematical endeavour, and
the PI will investigate a number of new phenomena in abstract algebra which are
part of this program. So-called vertex operator algebras constitute a rigorous
mathematical axiomatization of some of the main ideas of conformal field theory,
and the PI will continue his research into the symmetries inherent in these very
complicated objects in order to solidify the foundations of the subject and to
uncover new phenomena.