* 9700811
* Dissertation Research:  Mechanisms of Male Responses to a   Reduction in Paternity
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Michael Webster, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 06/30/1999
* USD 3,800.00

9700811 Webster One of the goals of parental investment theory is to explain
parental decisions based upon costs and benefits of the behavior. Recent use of
molecular techniques has reveal that, in many systems, offspring are not
necessarily sired by their social fathers Several studies have considered
whether this reduction in paternity affects male parental care, and mixed
findings have resulted. Few, however, have gone further to examine the
mechanisms behind the observed male behavior. This two-year project will examine
factors influencing male responses to reduced paternity in a North American
passerine, the Black-throated Blue Warbler. Variation in parentage within broods
has been detected in previous seasons; a combination of multilocus DNA
fingerprinting and PCR-amplified microsatellites will be used to identify
genetic fathers of all offspring in upcoming years. Focal observations and
experimental manipulations will both be used to distinguish between a set of
alternative hypotheses set forth to explain male parental care patterns in
response to reductions in paternity. This study will help explain the currently
poorly understood patterns of within- and between- species variation in parental
care provide information about factors influencing male adaptive responses, and
add to knowledge of the breeding ecology of this species.