* 9700837
* Applications of Effective Diophantine Approximation to      Diophantine Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,03/03/1999
* MICHAEL BENNETT, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Murray M. Schacher
* 03/03/1999
* USD 66,063.00

Bennett 9700837 This award provides funds for a project on the application of
effective techniques from Diophantine approximation (principally Pade
approximation to hypergeometric functions and the theory of linear forms in the
logarithms of algebraic numbers) to various Diophantine problems. Specifically,
Bennett intends to extend previous work on solutions of simultaneous Pell
equations or, more generally, intersections of quadric surfaces, combining the
aforementioned methods with recent work of Schlickewei and Wirsing and of
Voutier. These results have a number of interesting applications to bounding the
number of integer points or rational points of bounded height on certain classes
of elliptic curves. They also lead to parameterized families of elliptic curves
with rank at least two and, potentially, to families with rather higher rank.
The PI also plans to extend these techniques to the problem of absolutely
bounding the number of solutions to certain simultaneous decomposable ternary
quadratic form equations and to bound the number of common values of recurrence
sequences, as considered by Schlickewei and Schmidt. In the latter situation,
one would hope for rather stronger bounds than those obtained by Schlickewei and
Schmidt, though perhaps in less generality. In addition to the core program of
research outlined above, the PI intends to pursue three additional problems.
First, the PI will apply p-adic gap principles similar to those of Bombieri and
Evertse to attack a conjecture about the function g(k) in Waring's problem.
Second, the PI will continue his investigations of the hypergeometric method,
with reference to improving known bounds upon solutions to the Ramanujan-Nagell
and related polynomial-exponential equations and to cubic and quartic Thue
equations. Finally, the PI intends to extend his joint work with N.P. Dummigan
and T.D. Wooley on representations of integers by binary additive forms, to more
general decomposable forms. This research falls into the g eneral mathematical
field of Number Theory. It concerns the solutions to algebraic equations in
whole numbers and generalizations. Number theory is among the oldest branches of
mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons.
However, within the last half century, it has become an indispensable tool in
diverse applications in areas such as data transmission and processing, and
communication systems.