* 9700418
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Transportation Act of   1718, Punishment and State Formation
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1998
* Kai Erikson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/1998
* USD 7,500.00

970418 Erikson This Dissertation Research Improvement project is a case study of
the relationship between punishment and the development of the modern state. It
takes as a starting point the 1718 Transportation Act, which empowered
Parliament to banish criminals to the American colonies, as a critical attempt
by the English government to consolidate state power. Rather than focusing on
the coercive capacity of the state for waging war or imprisoning offenders, this
project situates transportation in a state-centered framework to explore why,
when, and how this specific penal policy was formed. This study examines the
ability of the state to realize its goals in an historical context, given the
competing demands of different social groups and classes and the relations
between the state and its publics. Data collection will be done in London and
Surrey national and local archives. State documents will be analyzed to
investigate the decision-making process leading to the implementation of
transportation, and local court records will be used to reconstruct the social
conditions surrounding judicial decisions to transport offenders. In addition
information gathered from state and court documents, this project will also use
media accounts to examine the relations between the English state and its
populace within the global-interstate system. ****