* 9700503
* Fundamental Studies of High Pressure Self-Sustaining        Synthesis of Silicon Nitride Based Ceramics
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Jan Puszynski, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 07/31/2001
* USD 210,000.00

Abstract - Puszynski This is a study of the fundamentals of high-pressure
synthesis of silicon- nitride-based ceramics in a self-sustaining regime.
Aspects investigated include particle-particle-gas interactions, product
morphology, and phase composition of combustion-synthesized ceramics. The effort
focuses on the effects of combustion conditions and various additives, factors
that may alter crystal growth and the formation mechanisms of silicon-nitride-
based ceramics. Quantitative data are obtained on the formation and crystal
growth of silicon nitride, silicon oxynitride, sialon, and silicon carbide
during self- sustaining, high-pressure nitridation of silicon powders containing
amounts of oxides, nitrides, halogens, and/or carbon. Models are developed to
describe the complex reaction and diffusion processes on a particle level during
formation of single-phase silicon nitride and other solid solutions. Widespread
application of advanced nitride ceramics is limited by high synthesis and
processing costs. Combustion synthesis is an attractive method for overcoming
this obstacle. Silicon-nitride-based ceramics are attractive for many high-
technology applications because of their chemical inertness, high- temperature
stability, fracture toughness and resistance to erosion, corrosion, and thermal
shock.