* 9700627
* Development and Application of Methods for the Calculation  of Accurate Structures, Energetics and Properties of        Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Peter Taylor, General Atomics
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 04/30/2001
* USD 361,384.00

Peter Taylor is jointly funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
Program in the Chemistry Division and the the New Technologies Program in the
Advanced Scientific Computing Division to continue his research in the
development and application of methods for the calculation of accurate
structures, energetics, and properties of molecules. Methods will be developed
for the computation of accurate, ab initio, small molecule, electronic
wavefunctions using contracted Gaussian geminals (predetermined linear
combinations of explicitly-correlated, two-particle, Gaussian basis functions).
Geminal parameters for molecules will be extracted from optimized atomic
wavefunctions. Scalable algorithms will be developed for implementation on
parallel computers. Taylor asserts that two-electron basis sets offer much more
rapid convergence and thus provide a route to higher accuracy for small systems,
and a way to extend existing levels of accuracy to larger molecules.
Applications include the determination of anharmonic frequencies and vibrational
intensities for small molecules, and studies involving the electronic
spectroscopy of organic and transition-metal systems and small elemental
clusters. Orbital-based concepts and computational methods play a central role
in modern chemical theory, but there is a practical limit to the accuracy
attainable in orbital-based computations using existing supercomputers. The goal
of this project is to develop improved computational methods using geminals
(explicit functions of the coordinates of a pair of electrons) rather than
orbitals. If successful, this will significantly increase the accuracy of
theoretical predictions of gas phase reaction rates such as those required for
improved computer models of the earth's atmosphere.