* 9700134
* Using Adaptive Computer Technology to Help                  Educators Prepare K-12
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Steven Gilbert, American Association for Higher Education
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence A. Scadden
* 04/30/1999
* USD 222,649.00

P. I.: Steven Wolfe Gilbert Children who do not get a solid foundation in
science and mathematics during their K-12 years will not be properly prepared to
study science, mathematics, engineering or technology (SMET) successfully in
college. Too often students with disabilities fall into this group of being
under-prepared for SMET study in higher education. This project is designed to
help educators prepare K-12 students with disabilities for further study and
work in the SMET fields. The project includes a component that focuses on
transitions from high school to post-secondary institutions so reference is
frequently made to K-16 students as well as K-12 students. The mission of EASI
(Equal Access to Software and Information) is to develop, organize, and
disseminate information and provide guidance about using adaptive computing and
electronic information resources to help students and faculty with disabilities
participate fully in academic life. EASI has acquired an almost ten-year
reputation for compiling and distributing the latest information about adaptive
technology for people with disabilities. Since January of 1995, EASI has been
working on an NSF project that compiled and disseminated the best available
information about adaptive computer technology use in the SMET fields in post-
secondary education. EASI is now extending this previous work, with a strong
focus on K-12 and the transition between secondary and post-secondary education.
Additional consultants with greater expertise in K-12 adaptive computing and
SMET teaching strategies are helping to build a new foundation of information
and create new dissemination materials and services. Outcomes will include
conference presentations, print materials, online workshops, etc. focusing on:
Adaptive computer technology appropriate for use with effective teaching
strategies for students with disabilities in SMET courses in K-12; Teaching
strategies that help students learn both the adaptive technology and th e
academic disciplines; Motivating K-12 students with disabilities for success in
SMET; Providing information on strategies and tools that will help students with
disabilities meet the emerging national standards for K-12 mathematics and
science; and Promoting better transition from high school to post-secondary
education for students with disabilities. The materials that AAHE/EASI develops
for this project will be designed primarily for the use of K-12 Individualized
Education Plan coordinators, SMET faculty, K-16 administrators, and special
education coordinators (and for those schools of education who work directly
with current and potential K-12 teachers).