* 9700430
* Domain Wall Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Marcel den Nijs, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/2001
* USD 282,000.00

9700430 den Nijs This grant is for theoretical work in statistical physics by a
senior PI. This follows a creativity extension of the previous award some five
years ago. There are three specific areas of research: In the first project the
PI plans to investigate the applications of general concepts such as conformal
invariance and methods like Coulomb gas mappings to the scaling properties of
dynamical processes in 1+1 dimensions. There are plans to consider the earlier
proposed "z theorem" and its validity beyond the KPZ type growth to directed
percolation. In the second project, the focus is on whether the strong coupling
conformal field theories with central charge c &gt; 1 exist. The third project
is an extensive study of crystal surface phase transitions. Here the PI plans to
extend his earlier work on preroughening , disordered flat phases and the
competition between surface roughening and reconstruction. %%% The senior PI
receiving this grant is considered an expert in the application of sophisticated
mathematical techniques to statistical mechanics. His recent contributions have
been in the general area of phase transitions at a crystalline surface and also
on a detailed understanding of complex growth processes at a surface. His
previous grant had received a creativity extension two years ago which permitted
him to explore more risky and speculative subjects. The present grant continues
the work begun during the creativity extension. ***