* 9700667
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Collaborative Research on  the Education of Science Teachers in the United States      and Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Joseph Riley, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 05/31/2000
* USD 36,000.00

9700667 Riley This award supports a two year collaborative research project
between Professors Joseph Riley and Michael Padilla of the University of Georgia
and Professor Shigekazu Takemara of Hiroshima University in Japan. The goal of
this project is to compare and document the preservice and inservice preparation
of science teachers and the effectiveness of this education on teacher
development and student achievement. The research will focus on three areas: 1)
What teachers need to know (content, pedagogy, knowledge of students); 2) What
teachers need to be able to do (ability to use various teaching strategies); and
3) How the program should be structured to mirror the best practice (school
experience and modeling good teaching). Researchers from each institution will
work together in six teams. Each team will be responsible for one of the
collaborative research questions. The teams will collect the research data and
then provide an analysis. The study will engage the expertise of the faculties
of Arts and Sciences and Education in two of the leading teacher preparation
institutions in Japan and the United States. A significant outcome of the
project will be the development of a critical mass of researchers, who will have
first hand knowledge and experience about science education in Japan. The
project will contribute to a growing dialogue and literature base on Japanese
science education. Specific outcomes include development of a Word Wide Web site
on science education practices in Japan and the United States which will be
continuously updated. ***