* 9700914
* Dissertation Research: Feeding Ecomorphology of Crotaphytid Lizards: Illuminating Casuality Through Integration
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Marvalee Wake, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 05/31/2000
* USD 10,000.00

Wake 9700914 Ecomorphology is a sub-discipline that has emerged from interest in
the relationship between organismal morphology and natural history. Morphology
includes both structure and function. Relating variation at these levels to
variation in whole-organism performance can help to reveal causality between
morphology and performance. This, combined with demonstration of the importance
of performance measures in organismal ecoloey or behavior, makes
ecomorphological inference more robust. This is a proposal to study the feeding
ecomorphology of the monophyletic lizard family Crotaphytidae. Crotaphytids show
trends in feeding apparatus structure, feeding behavior, and dietary ecology.
Bite force is an important performance variable influencing feeding behavior and
dietary ecology. Structural and functional analyses of the feeding apparatus of
three crotaphytid taxa will be used to construct computer models. These models
will generate predictions of bite force that will be tested by bite-force
measurement. Simulated structural and functional perturbations of the models
will help to identify causality between structural and functional variation and
biteforce variation. Identification of such causality links studies of
morphology to ecology and behavior and, ultimately, facilitates rigorous
evaluation of ecomorphological evolution.