* 9700771
* Theoretical Studies of Electronic Structure and Dynamical   Aspects of Electronically Nonadiabatic Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,12/31/2002
* David Yarkony, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 12/31/2002
* USD 430,500.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program is supporting Prof. Yarkony
at Johns Hopkins University over the next three years. Yarkony's research will
focus on fundamental questions concerning the electronic structure aspects of
electronically non-adiabatic processes. Of particular interest will be the locus
of points of the conical intersection, particularly of two states of the same
symmetry. The prevalence and impact of conical intersections will be studied in
the ensuing grant period to investigate their role in electronically non-
adiabatic processes. A second basic question concerns the diabatic bases
routinely used to study the dynamics of non-adiabatic processes. Although
routinely used, diabatic bases exist only in an approximate sense. Line
integrals of the derivative coupling can be used to determine the size of the
nonremovable part of the derivative coupling, that is the portion of the
derivative coupling that must remain even in the 'most diabatic' basis. Yarkony
will use this technique to identify systems for which the nonremovable part of
the derivative coupling is appreciable. For these systems he will use the ab
initio derivative couplings to construct the 'most diabatic' basis and compare
the results with commonly used but necessarily approximate diabatization
procedures. This work is expected to provide fundamental insights to the nature
of diabatic bases. The chemistry of molecules exposed to light, photochemistry,
is fundamentally different from the chemistry of ground state molecules. The
essential difference lies in the interconversion of electronic energy created by
the photoexcitation process into vibrational, rotational and translational
energy as the molecule relaxes non-adiabatically to the ground electronic state.
Although non-adiabatic processes are ubiquitous, occurring for example in
vision, photosynthesis, and stratospheric ozone degradation, many basic
questions concerning non-adiabatic processes need to be addressed. One of the
principal drivers of non-adiabatic processes is a topological feature known as a
conical intersection. Once thought to be rare occurrences attributable to
special, symmetry, properties of a molecule, it is now clear that like non-
adiabatic processes themselves conical intersections are ubiquitous. Yarkony
will use a unique system of computer algorithms developed at Johns Hopkins
University over the last decade to study fundamental issues related to conical
intersections and the way they influence non-adiabatic processes.