* 9700269
* Stoichiometric and Catalytic Transformations Using          Transition Metal Aryloxides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Ian Rothwell, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 03/31/2001
* USD 325,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
with a contribution for instrumentation from the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities supports research on transition metal aryloxides by Dr. Ian P.
Rothwell, Department of Chemistry, Purdue University. Titanium aryloxides are
catalysts for regio- and stereoselective coupling of unsaturated organic
molecules. Cyclodienes and various olefins and alkynes have been shown to
undergo this type of reaction. Here the synthetic usefulness of the reaction
will be exploited and the mechanism that controls product geometry will be
determined. In addition, low valent tungsten aryloxides will be tested as
4-electron reducing agents. A newly developed ligand, 2,6-diphenol-3,5-di-tert-
butylphenol, will be used to synthesize high valent early transition metal
organometallic compounds and highly electrophilic, low coordination transition
metal compounds. In contrast to analogous ligands used in the past, this ligand
does not undergo metalation. Chelation via ortho-phenyl substitutents within
these ligands opens the door for investigation of new types of metal-arene
bonding and reactivity, including CH-bond activation and stereospecific
coupling. Sterically bulky groups bound to transition metals are often effective
in preventing reactants of certain size and shape from accessing the metal
center. As a consequence, the reactions that do occur produce products with a
preferred geometry. In this study, bulky alkoxide groups will be used to effect
stereospecific reactivity to some titanium- and tungsten-promoted reactions of
utility in the synthesis of organic compounds.