* 9700910
* Dynamical Systems in Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Hal Smith, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 89,995.00

Smith 9700910 Dynamical systems that arise in the biological sciences, and
especially in population biology, often have special features that can be
exploited in the study of their asymptotic behavior. They are typically
dissipative and often the different components have a fixed feedback relation to
other components. Systems of competitive or cooperative type and monotone cyclic
feedback systems often arise. In this project the investigator exploits these
special features, particularly monotonicity properties, in order to describe the
asymptotic behavior of the system. He explores the possibility that some classes
of systems with definite feedback relations between components have simpler
long-term dynamics than their dimension implies. For example, the asymptotic
behavior of cooperative systems of differential equations is convergence to
equilibrium, while competitive systems behave like general systems of one less
dimension and monotone cyclic feedback systems satisfy the Poincare-Bendixson
trichotomy whatever their dimension. The application of these ideas to
mathematical models of microbial cultures in bio-reactors is pursued. Of
particular interest is a model of microbial competition for limiting resource in
a distributed environment mimicking the large intestine of a mammal. The central
questions of interest to physiologists are what factors determine the set of
micro-organisms able to colonize the gut and what are the chief factors
determining the stability of the colony to invasion by ingested organisms.
Modeling issues arise in order to model both advection of the lumen and the
effects of bacterial adherence to the intestinal walls. The model is intended to
focus on these questions. In a different direction, the investigator continues
earlier work aimed at simplifying complicated structured population models
(those models that take account of biological structure such as age, size,
physiological state, etc of a population) to simpler mode ls consisting of delay
differential systems, possibly state dependent. The rationale is that there are
fewer tools that apply to the hyperbolic partial differential equations that
arise in structured population models than there are for delay differential
equations. As a particular example, a model of microbial growth in a chemostat
incorporating effects of cell-cycle phase is investigated. Mathematical models
play a major role in the theoretical understanding of many issues in the
biological sciences. Mathematical models, as simple caricatures of the real
phenomena, allow an investigator to more easily and inexpensively answer the
kinds of questions: "what if we change this to that?" Many such models that
arise in physiology, population biology, bioengineering and epidemiology take
the form of differential equations where it is important for understanding the
applications to determine what happens to the solutions of these equations over
the long run. The equations that arise in the biological sciences typically have
special features not found in mathematical models in the physical sciences. This
project aims at developing methods that exploit these special features to
determine the long-time behavior of the solutions and to apply these methods to
problems of current interest in biotechnology, population biology and
physiology. Improved methods will lead to more accurate predictions from
existing mathematical models and the ability to analyze more complicated,
realistic models. As one example among several to be considered in the proposed
work, the investigator and P. Waltman propose to study a mathematical model of
microbial growth and competition for nutrients taking place in the large
intestine of a mammal. As the intestines are often a source of infection from
micro-organisms, it is important to understand the factors involved in
determining the kinds of bacteria normally present in the intestine and the
factors that determine whether an invadin g organism (e..g. a pathogen) can
successfully establish itself as a member of the colony. They intend to
construct a mathematical model based on a flow reactor that will exhibit the
main features of the intestine (flow of lumen through the intestine and
bacterial adherence to the walls of the intestine) in order to better understand
the answers to the questions posed above.