* 9700965
* Modular Representation Theory of Finite and Algebraic Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Leonard Scott, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 06/30/2001
* USD 210,003.00

PARSHALL/SCOTT, 97-00965 The goals of this proposal center on creating a viable
theory of irreducible modular representations for finite groups G of Lie type.
There are two cases to consider: (1) the describing characteristic theory in
which the representations are taken over a field k having the same
characteristic as the defining characteristic p of G; and (2) the non-describing
characteristic theory in which k has characteristic different from p. Over the
past decade the investigators have developed many new techniques (often in
collaboration with E. Cline) for attacking case (1). These methods have often
come about by adapting geometric methods, such as the theory of perverse
sheaves, to classical algebra (especially the representation theory of finite
dimensional algebras). In the proposed work they will continue in that
direction. At the same time, the investigators will integrate their approach
with high dimensional deformation techniques which have also been applied to
(1). In addition, the investigators have recently developed new endomorphism
algebra techniques for attacking (2). In particular, their introduction (with
Jie Du) of Kazhdan-Lusztig cell theory into the theory of Hecke endomorphism
algebras suggests that much progress can be made on developing a general theory
(i.e., valid for all types) for the non-describing characteristic theory. The
project involves, and/or will have applications to, many other areas of
mathematics, including cohomology, Lie theory, finite dimensional algebras, and
the maximal subgroup theory of finite groups. A mathematical group is an
abstract embodiment of symmetry. Its concrete realizations can provide powerful
constraints on the behavior of complicated physical and communications systems.
This project concentrates on determining the ways in which the most important
abstract finite groups find concrete representations as square matrices over
finite number systems. The groups and representati ons the investigators study
comprise the most important basic ingredients for creating a general theory of
all finite group representations. In this century, similar theories for
continuous groups over familiar continuous number systems have played a large
role in quantum theory and the theory of elementary particles. Their finite
analogs have already proved valuable in the design of communications and data
storage devices, though this finite theory remains very incomplete. In the next
century, one reasonably expects that the finite discrete worlds of computers and
communications will become even more important. The task of creating a viable
general theory of finite group representations -- as is the investigators' long-
term goal -- is, thus, a central problem for the future.