* 9700663
* An Investigation of the Chemistry of Model Extreme          Pressure Lubricant Additives
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1997,09/30/2000
* Wilfred Tysoe, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 09/30/2000
* USD 200,188.00

The detailed understanding of the mechanisms of action of extreme pressure
lubricant additives is the focus of the research of this project supported in
the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program. Professor Tysoe at the University
of Wisconsin- Milwaukee investigates these questions by using a combination of
ultra high vacuum surface spectroscopic measurements, thin film growth studies,
and tribological investigations of model systems. Building on the understanding
of chlorine containing extreme pressure lubricant additives developed previously
in this laboratory, this project explores the mechanisms of action of sulfur and
phosphorous containing additives. A connection between the surface chemistry of
these materials and their operation as lubricants is sought in this work. A
detailed microscopic understanding of tribological processes is of considerable
utility in a number of technologically important areas, including metalworking,
disk head lubrication, and the transportation industries. Understanding the
atomic level processes occurring when one material slides over another in the
presence of a lubricant molecule is the focus of the research of this project. A
combination of surface spectroscopic studies and direct measures of friction
forces for a series of model lubricant molecules will provide this
understanding. Friction and wear is a relatively underexplored area of surface
science, and the work of this project will contribute to our growing
understanding of this technologically important area.