* 9700950
* Eisenstein Series, Continuous Spectrum, and the Relative    Trace Formula
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Jonathan Rogawski, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 07/31/2000
* USD 75,000.00

Rogawski 9700950 This award funds the research of Professor Rogawski, who is
interested in developing the relative trace formula for a pair (G,H) consisting
of a quasi-split reductive group G and subgroup H, the fixed-point set of an
involution. The PI intends to investigate problems connected with the
contribution of the continuous spectrum to the relative trace formula. The first
goal of this project is the study of period integrals of truncated Eisenstein
series over H . The PI intends to develop a theory of such integrals, and in
particular, explicit formulas extending his current work with Jacquet on GL(n).
The second goal is to evaluate the contribution of the spectral kernel to the
relative trace formula for G. These integrals will be evaluated using
truncation, the explicit formulas, and a suitable theory of (G,M) -families.
These results will be applied as one ingredient in the comparison of the
relative trace formula with the Kuznetzov trace formula in certain cases. This
proposal is in the part of mathematics known as the Langlands program. This
program represents a fusion of Number Theory and Representation Theory , and it
has been a stimulus to a great deal of recent research in both fields. Number
Theory is one of the oldest branches of mathematics and is concerned with the
most basic of mathematical objects, the ordinary whole numbers. However, it
turns out that in order to express many of the patterns and relations discovered
by mathematicians, it is necessary to use some of the most advanced and
technical theories of twentieth century mathematics. On the other hand, the
problems of number theory have provided a powerful stimulus to research in other
diverse parts of the discipline. The Langland's program provides a framework for
investigating and vastly generalizing the so-called reciprocity laws of number
theory using the tools of infinite-dimensional representation theory. Although
very technical and deep, this program has found astonishing applica tions in
areas like theoretical computer science (construction of expanding graphs) and
coding theory (finding optimal Goppa codes). It has also played an indispensable
role in some of the recent spectacular developments in number theory itself,
such as the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.