* 9700796
* List Colorings and Other Combinatorial Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Fred Galvin, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 06/30/2000
* USD 60,000.00

Galvin 9700796 This award provides funds for an investigation into list coloring
problems and other problems in combinatorics. List coloring problems in graph
theory involve coloring the elements (vertices or edges) of a graph in such a
way that adjacent or incident elements receive different colors, and the color
of each element must be chosen from a prescribed list of colors associated with
that element. For example, the list chromatic index (or list edge-chromatic
number) of a graph is the least number n such that, given an arbitrary
assignment of a list of n colors to each edge, there is a proper edge-coloring
in which each edge is colored with a color from its list. The list (vertex-)
chromatic number and list total chromatic number are defined analogously. The
list coloring conjecture, due to Vizing, asserts that the list chromatic index
of any graph (or multigraph) is equal to its (ordinary) chromatic index. The
list coloring conjecture (LCC for short) is a notoriously deep and difficult
problem. One of the major recent advances in this area was the PI's proof of the
LCC for bipartite multigraphs, a result which included, as a special case, the
well-known Dinitz conjecture about partial Latin squares. In this project, the
PI hopes to make further progress on the LCC, by extending and applying his
result on the bipartite case, and by other means. While the main focus of this
project is on list colorings, the PI plans to investigate various other problems
in combinatorics and graph theory, possibly including, but not limited to, the
areas of Ramsey theory for paths, hypergraph games, cliques in factorizations of
graphs and hypergraphs, and Frankl's conjecture on union-closed families. This
research is in the area of combinatorics. Combinatorics is generally applicable
to various practical problems: routing, scheduling, and other management science
problems, communications, cryptology, etc. The mathematical formulation of a
scheduling problem is a graph coloring problem. List coloring theory, besides
being directly applicable to certain kinds of scheduling problems, is a useful
tool in the study of classical graph coloring problems. The educational
significance of a lot of work in combinatorics and graph theory, in particular
the kind of work planned for this project, is that the problems and results, and
even the methods used, are often accessible to bright undergraduate and high
school students, so that they can enjoy the excitement of direct contact with
current research.