* 9700877
* Dissertation Research: The Role of Adaptation in Structuring Communities: A Study of Larval Anuran Communities
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Mark McPeek, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 05/31/1999
* USD 9,950.00

McPeek 9700877 This project is designed to understand the evolutionary history
of how different groups of frogs have adapted to their environment. Different
species of frogs are presently found in different types of ponds: permanent
ponds with fish, permanent ponds without fish, vernal ponds that dry yearly.
Closely related species in three frog families (toads (Bufonidae), true frogs
(Ranidae), tree frogs (Hylidae)) segregate among these pond types. For example,
the green frog and the bullfrog evolved from a common ancestor, yet green frogs
are found only in ponds without fish, and bullfrogs are found primarily in ponds
with fish. Previous research has revealed that different predators and
competition for food cause this segregation of species. By quantifying traits
related to how well tadpoles evade predators and compete with other species,
this project will determine which traits are essential for successfully
inhabiting each pond type. Study of the relationships between these traits, pond
type and the evolutionary history of species, will also reveal the role of
adaptation (acquiring traits that increase survivorship in a new habitat) in
forming the present-day frog fauna. This project is important to furthering our
understanding of factors that influence the ability of species to utilize a new
habitat.