* 9700370
* Complexity and Optimization Issues in Constraint Query      Languages
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Oscar Ibarra, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2001
* USD 341,396.00

This project focuses on three problem areas concerning linear constraint query
languages. Constraint database systems integrate database technology with
constraint solving techniques to deal with applications involving spatial or
geographical datasets and arithmetic computations. Linear constraint databases
are generally represented by quantifier-free logical formulas over some
arithmetical domain such as the real numbers (the real closed field) with
addition. Conceptually, constraint queries are evaluated in closed form using
quantifier elimination algorithms. The first part of this project aims at
developing efficient query evaluation algorithms for linear or dense order
constraint queries and syntactic forms for representing constraint databases so
that efficient query evaluation becomes possible. The second part aims at
showing the complexity of properties of constraint query languages including
query containment, equivalence, satisfiability, and disjointness using a new
technique based on abstract machines. The third part aims at developing
incremental evaluation techniques for recursive (non-first-order) and
topological queries. This project will provide complexity results and efficient
algorithms as a theoretical foundation for the design of constraint database
models, query languages, and systems.