* 9700999
* Molecular Thermodynamics of Fluids in Porous Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Peter Monson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/29/2000
* USD 170,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY CTS-9700999 Monson, P.A. U. Massachusetts Amherst This proposal
seeks support for research in the molecular modeling of two important aspects of
fluid behavior in porous materials. Both concern the role of the adsorbent
microstructure. Traditionally this has been analyzed in terms of the behavior of
fluid in single pores. Although this analysis has led to important insights into
the problem, recent research in this group and others has shown that important
effects occur which cannot be understood on the basis of single pore behavior.
Effects associated with confinement, wetting and adsorbent disorder are all
significant in determining the behavior and these effects are coupled. A program
of research using computer simulation and theory is planned. Among the issues to
be explored are: extending the range of adsorbent microstructures considered;
analysis of hysteresis loops in adsorption/desorption isotherms; further
development and application of theoretical techniques; and investigation of
fluid mixture phase separation in such systems. The second area for study
involves the role of structural deformations in the absorbent microstructure
during adsorption. In almost all thermodynamic treatments of physical adsorption
it has been assumed that the adsorbent is a rigid matrix that is not
structurally altered upon adsorption. While this is an excellent approximation
in most circumstances there are now important examples where experiments provide
evidence of significant structural deformations on adsorption. A program to
study these phenomena using Monte Carlo computer simulation is suggested. The
goals are to evaluate different models for adsorbent flexibility, develop
methods for calculating the thermodynamic properties needed for a study of phase
transitions in such systems and to develop insights into when such structural
deformation may have a significant impact on the system.