* 9700089
* Nondestructive Testing of Masonry Using Transient Stress    Waves
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Mary Sansalone, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 09/30/1999
* USD 121,844.00

This research project seeks to determine the applicability of using transient
stress waves generated by short-duration elastic impact to nondestructive
evaluation of masonry structures. A preliminary study has established the
feasibility of using transient stress wave propagation techniques for evaluation
of masonry and laid the basis for the work to be performed. The objectives are
to: <fontfamily><param>Symbol</param>=85 </fontfamily>demonstrate how acoustic
properties of brick, block, mortar, and grout affect the impact-echo response of
masonry structures; <fontfamily><param>Symbol</param>=85 </fontfamily>show the
effects on impact-echo signals due to cores in brick and determine if it is
possible to test walls made from brick with cores;
<fontfamily><param>Symbol</param>=85 </fontfamily>show the effects on the
impact-echo response due to the shrinkage cracks at the interfaces between brick
and mortar; <fontfamily><param>Symbol</param>=85 </fontfamily>determine if
stress wave techniques can be used to establish the degree of mortar joint
completeness in brick walls; and, <fontfamily><param>Symbol</param>=85
</fontfamily>determine if voids in various types of masonry structures, such as
voids in grout joints between brick wythes, concrete masonry cells, or in brick
pavement systems, can be detected. These objectives will be accomplished through
the use of finite element simulations of stress wave propagation in models of
masonry components and structures, extensive laboratory testing on masonry
specimens with flaws placed at known locations, and field testing on masonry
structures where the results obtained nondestructively can be verified by
invasive testing. This research will provide a fundamental understanding of how
stress waves can and cannot be used in the nondestructive evaluation of masonry
structures. It will result in applications where stress wave techniques can be
used for flaw detection, quality control, and in pre- and post-event studies.
The results of this research will also help address the pressing need to develop
techniques for nondestructive testing of masonry. Currently, almost all
evaluations must be conducted using test methods that in some way damage the
structure.=20 With success in this research, impact-based stress wave techniques
will be an important tool for structural engineering consultants in evaluating
masonry structures.