* 9700426
* Finite Element Analysis of Strain Localizaion in ExcavationsResearch into Network Algorithms and Related Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Ronaldo Borja, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 09/30/2001
* USD 178,730.00

This project involves the study of strain localization on the stability and
deformation behavior of open and supported excavations. Previous studies have
demonstrated the usefulness of the standard finite element (FE) method in
modeling the process of sequential excavation and construction particularly when
the soil mass is deforming homogeneously. However, when a narrow band of intense
shearing forms within the soil, the standard FE interpolation becomes inadequate
because it is incapable of representing the effect of shear bands which could
form across the finite elements. Therefore, in the regime of intense shearing,
the standard FE method would predict a stiffer structural behavior even though a
bifurcated response is already in order. In braced and tied-back excavations,
this implies that the predicted movements and support loads will be smaller, and
so the standard FE solution will err on the unsafe side. This research will
address this problem by modeling strain localization as a problem of strong
discontinuity, which involves jumps in the displacement field. The idea of slip
lines in soil mechanics is consistent with this analysis. Within the context of
FE analysis, problems involving strong discontinuities result in solutions that
are completely independent of the FE mesh, in particular showing a sharp
resolution of the discontinuities even in unstructured meshes. Furthermore, this
approach admits the use of traditional rate-independent models of continuum
mechanics, even those which do not offer a characteristic length scale, since
the discontinuities are now assumed to correspond to sets of measure zero in the
mathematical sense. The investigation will cover drained and undrained behavior
using a finite deformation theory based on multiplicative plasticity, and will
involve the use of J2 plasticity and modified Cam-Clay plasticity models. There
are numerous field cases where strain localizations are known to have formed
during the process of sequential excavation, and these will be used to test the
accuracy of the proposed analytical methodology.