* 9700871
* Arithmetical Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Douglas Ulmer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Walling
* 05/31/2001
* USD 75,000.00

9700871 Ulmer A fundamental problem in number theory is to construct rational
points of infinite order on elliptic curves defined over global fields. To date,
the most successful general method has used Heegner points. Briefly, one defines
certain divisors on a modular curve by specifying points in the upper half-
plane; the theory of complex multiplication allows one to show that these
divisors are defined over a number field, and using a modular parameterization
one gets rational points on the elliptic curve. One needs then to test whether
these points have infinite order, which can be done by comparing their heights
with special values of L-functions using the method of Gross and Zagier. The
first project Ulmer will pursue is extending these methods to the case of
elliptic curves defined over the fields of functions of curves over finite
fields. Specifically, he proposes to develop the analogues of the results of
Gross and Zagier relating values of L-functions to heights of special points on
Shimura curves. This will allow one to prove that certain Heegner points, a
priori rational, have infinite order and thereby prove the conjecture of Birch
and Swinnerton-Dyer for elliptic curves over function fields whose L-function
vanishes simply. The second project Ulmer will investigate is also related to
elliptic curves over function fields. As in the number field case, the group of
rational points on such an elliptic curve is finitely generated. On the other
hand, the group of local points is very big--it is a Zp-module of infinite rank.
He proposes to construct a submodule of the local points which is of finite Zp-
rank and which contains the global points. In contrast to the Heegner point
construction, this method yields points which are a priori of infinite order; in
some cases one can identify a Z-module of points which are conjecturally
rational over the ground field, thus offering the hope of an alternative
construction of global points of infinite order. The third project deals with
the mod p Galois representations attached to classical modular forms.
Specifically, Ulmer plans to use the existence of a large supply of congruences
between modular forms proved in his previous work to study the geometry of a
parameter space of p-adic modular forms constructed by Coleman. He also hopes to
relate a property of modular representations (``twisted ordinarity'', which is
roughly speaking the condition that the representation be reducible when
restricted to a decomposition group at p) to ``slopes'', i.e., to the valuations
of Hecke eigenvalues. This project falls into the general area of arithmetic
geometry - a subject that blends two of the oldest areas of mathematics: number
theory and geometry. This combination has proved extraordinarily fruitful,
having recently solved problems that withstood the efforts of generations. Among
its many consequences are new error correcting codes which are used in computer
storage devices like compact disks and hard drives and secure information
transmission schemes which are used for financial transactions on the internet.