* 9700288
* GOALI: Method of Tuning and Automatic Regulation for        Injection Molding
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* David Kazmer, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/2001
* USD 180,000.00

9700288 Danai The objective of this GOALI research is to develop an efficient
and robust method of tuning and regulation for injection molding processes, so
that the desired quality of injection molded parts can be readily achieved and
consistently ensured for commercial production. An important feature of this
method will be its ability to select the machine inputs that will minimize
production cost while satisfying the part quality constraints. The research will
be conducted at both theoretical and applied levels with close interaction with
industry partner. At the theoretical level: (1) the form of the I-0 model will
be revised to allow for incorporation of qualitative measures of part
properties; (2) process dynamics will be integrated in the I-0 model in order to
enhance robustness in presence of process transients and external variations;
and (3) an optimization strategy will be adopted in the virtual search method
(VSM) to trade off product quality for reduced product costs. At the applied
level, an extensive industrial collaboration program will be conducted at GE
Plastics with other industry liaisons to identify the stringent requirements of
production. The solutions obtained to the application requirements in this phase
of research are expected to prepare VSM for wide area dissemination. This
project will provide valuable leveraging to contribute fundamental knowledge in
the area process controller for the injection molding industry