* 9700966
* Local Atomic Structure and Properties of Transition Metal   Oxides using Pair Distribution Function Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Simon  J. L. Billinge, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9700966 Billinge The local structure of transition metal oxides (TMOs)
exhibiting interesting electronic properties will be studied using the pair-
distribution function (PDF) analysis of powder diffraction data. This technique
utilizes Bragg and diffuse scattering over a very wide range of momentum
transfer (Q) and yields the atomic short-range order directly. It goes beyond
the approximation of perfect crystallinity and allows the local structure to be
solved on length-scales from 1-20 angstroms. This type of structural analysis
will be applied to a variety of transition metal oxides such as high-Tc
materials, layered manganites and nickelates and the colossal magnetoresistant
manganites. In these materials, the structure can respond to the electronic
state and we will look for correlations between changes in electrical properties
and local structural effects. In this way, the nature of localized electronic
states, such as polaronic, bipolaronic and charge-phase-separated states, will
be elucidated. %%% The great materials scientist F.C. Franck is reported to have
said "crystals are like people -- it is the defects which make them
interesting". Indeed, many of the most interesting, and useful, new materials
exhibit a high degree of atomic disorder; and it is often the defects which give
them their interesting properties. This presents special challenges for solid
state physicists and materials scientists because of the difficulty of studying
atomic level defects in materials. We will be using the technique of atomic
pair- distribution function (PDF) analysis of neutron and x-ray diffraction to
characterize transition metal oxides; an important group of materials which fall
into the above category. We will use novel data analysis and modeling
techniques, developed both by us and by others, to extract quantitative
structural information from the data and correlate these observations with the
measured electrical properties. A number of these material s show great
technological promise, such as the high-Tc superconductors and colossal
magnetoresistant manganite materials which may have an application in computer
read/write heads for example. We are attempting to understand the role that
atomic defects play in their interesting electrical properties. ***