* 9700297
* Formal and Computational Studies of Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Donald Kouri, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 08/31/2000
* USD 301,051.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program is supporting Professor D.
Kouri of the University of Houston. In this next grant period he we will
continue to pursue computational implementation and testing of the Time-
Independent Wavepacket Divide-and-Conquer (TIWDC) approach. The immediate
objectives are: a) Testing the DC-procedure whereby the initial arrangement is
also uncoupled from the strong interaction region. b) Testing the DC strategy
for uncoupling the vibrational-rotational, pure rotational, and elastic final
state interaction regions so that the maximum benefit of the approach can be
realized. c) Applying the DC procedure to H+O2 -&gt; OH+O in order to try and
carry out the first ever completely ab initio calculation of state-to-state
reaction cross sections for the system as a function of energy. He also will
carry out the first full 3D tests of the TIWDC method for photodissociation of
HOD, with emphasis on a comparison with experiment when the HOD is vibrationally
hot. Secondly, he will continue development of the distributed approximating
functionals (DAFs), including the exploration of a new class of DAFs that are
related to various interpolation schemes. These investigations will also study
the fitting of multidimensional potential energy surfaces using finite amounts
of ab initio input data, with particular emphasis on electronically non-
adiabatic systems. Third, he will continue studies of a new method being
developed for diagonalizing extremely large matrices with very dense
eigenspectra. Finally, he will begin work on developing and testing new
approximation methods for solving the quantum equations for reactions involving
more than 4 atoms in order to simulate more complex chemical systems. The
research supported here focuses on developing robust, efficient, and highly
stable methods for solving the partial differential equations which are used to
describe fundamental chemical reaction processes. Because of the enormous
complexity of the equations, solutions are feasible only by using the most
powerful, high-speed, large-memory computers. However, the development of a
detailed understanding of the elementary chemical reaction process can open up
the possibilities of controlling chemical reactions in order to maximize desired
products. These studies are also used in simulating numerically fundamental
processes that occur in the earth's atmosphere, in order to understand and
better deal with pollution. Such studies also find application in modeling the
detailed chemistry of combustion in order to develop pollution-free propulsion
systems. In addition, some of the techniques being developed can also be used to
solve other, enormously important partial differential equations. Thus, the
techniques being developed show great promise for making it possible to solve
equations ranging from long term weather forecasting, to other equations used to
model combustion.