* 9700143
* The Dynamics of Structures With Tuned Subsystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Steven Shaw, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 07/31/2001
* USD 245,330.00

This research project deals with developing a deeper understanding of the
behavior of systems with multiple tuned vibration absorbers and to use this
knowledge to offer improved guidelines for the design of absorber systems. From
a fundamental dynamics viewpoint the work concerns the dynamic response of
structures to which are attached multiple tuned subsystems for the purpose of
vibration attenuation although the focus of research is on applications to
rotating machinery, the techniques developed are more widely applicable, for
example, to translational vibration absorber systems. In the area of multiple
absorbers, recent results for a special absorber system have shown that the
desired unison motion can become dynamically unstable, resulting in a drastic
reduction in operating range. The thrust of the analytical portion of the
proposed work will focus on the dynamic performance of more general multiple
absorber systems, including: the dynamic performance of multiple
absorber:systems with general paths (including: the mistuned circular paths most
commonly found in industrial applications), the effects of imperfections in the
absorber paths, and the effects of rotor flexibility. this research will
significantly expand the knowledge base for tuned absorbers as applied to
rotational systems and will offer an improved understanding of the dynamics of a
general class of systems which have attached tuned substructures. Such
understanding can be distilled into improved design guidelines that will include
dynamics of a general class of systems which have attached tuned substructures.
Such understanding can be distilled into improved design guidelines that will
include dynamic bifurcation's and their effects on system performance. Exchange
of information with industrial liaisons will be carried out in order to focus
the research in the proper direction and to transfer the understanding gained by
the proposed research. Specifically, manufactures of automotive engines (Ford
Motor Company) and light aircraft/helicopter engines (Textron Lycoming) will be
kept appraised of the results of this research and consulted for direction.