* 9700869
* US-India Cooperative Research: Structure Property           Relationships Among Modified Electrodes of Metal            Hexacyanoferrates and Their Analogues
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* G. Rao, Central Electrochemical Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/29/2000
* USD 9,677.00

9700869 Rao Description: This award is for a US-Indo research collaboration in
the field of electrochemical sensors based on new cyanometalate modified
electrodes. The co-investigators are Andrew Bocarsly of Princeton University and
Prabhakara Rao of the Central Electrochemical Research Institute (CERI) in Tamil
Nadu. Their studies will focus on the structure and reactivity of platinum(II)
and palladium(II) complexes with cyanometallates that form polymeric structures.
These materials form hydrogel-like structures with unusual photochemical and
electrochemical properties. Bocarsly's interest is the solid-state properties of
these materials, while Dr. Rao will pursue the potential sensor applications of
these systems. Both groups are strongly grounded in electrochemistry and the use
of electrochemical methods. The expertise and facilities available at these two
laboratories are complementary and should be enhanced by the collaboration.
Scope: This research will add an international component to domestic research
that is currently funded by the NSF Division of Chemistry. The discussions
leading to this collaboration have been thoughtful, deliberate and point to the
potential that solid scientific work of mutual benefit will result. CERI is a
research facility of the central government that is managed by the Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR). The mission of CSIR laboratories is
to conduct research consistent with national priorities and India's development
as an industrial nation. ***