* 9700982
* Dissertation Research: A Novel Method to Distinguish Between Selective and Mutational Hypotheses to Account for Substitution Rate Lineage Effects in Mitochondria, and Its ...
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1998
* Richard Lewontin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 05/31/1998
* USD 7,940.00

9700982 Lewontin ATP is the high-energy molecule used to drive nearly all
metabolic processes and is produced in subcellular compartments called
mitochondria, which have small circular DNA molecules determining some of the
proteins required for its synthesis. The remainder of the proteins needed for
ATP synthesis are specified in chromosomal DNA which resides in the nucleus. The
pattern of mitochondrial DNA sequence change varies dramatically in related
groups of vertebrate species, which could be due either to variation in mutation
rate or to variation in functional constraint on proteins specified by that DNA.
The funded research is intended to distinguish between these two hypotheses by
examining the rate of DNA change in some of the nuclear (chromosomal) genes
encoding proteins involved in ATP synthesis in these same vertebrate species.
The mutational hypothesis predicts no relationship in rate of substitution
between nuclear and mitochondrial genes, since the nuclear genes are not exposed
to mitochondrial mutation rates, while the functional hypothesis does predict a
relationship, since proteins responsible for ATP synthesis function in the same
context irrespective of gene location. The distribution between nuclear and
mitochondrial locations of the DNA specifying the proteins involved in ATP
synthesis raises many interesting questions about the coordination of function
of these proteins. This research explores one aspect of this coordination by
asking whether patterns of similarity and difference in mitochondrial DNA
sequence between species are echoed in functionally related nuclear DNA sequence
between those same species. In addition, this research introducing a novel
approach to the problem, one based on variation in rate of DNA sequence change.