* 9700701
* Dissertation Research: Fine Scale Evolutionary Adaptation   to Temperature: A Comparative Approach Using Porcelain Crabs(genus Petrolisthes)
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1999
* George Somero, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 05/31/1999
* USD 9,450.00

Somero 9700701 Marine porcelain crabs of the genus Petrolisthes occur over a
wide geographical range--from extremely hot tropical environments to cold north-
and south temperate regions--and at widely different heights in the intertidal
and subtidal zones. Thus, congeners of Petrolisthes encounter substantial
differences in mean temperature and temperature range, making these crabs an
excellent study system for examining evolutionary adaptation to temperature
within a relatively narrow taxonomic group. The PI's initial studies of two
congeners, P. eriomerus and P. cinctipes from low- and high intertidal zones,
respectively, indicate pervasive adaptations to temperature and emersion stress.
The proposed studies build on this work, and include, for several additional
congeners: (1) determination of upper lethal temperature limits; (2) examination
of the temperature sensitivity of structural and kinetic properties of lactate
dehydrogenase; (3) determination of the function of leg membrane structures in
gas exchange; and (4) development of a molecular phylogeny, using the sequence
of the large subunit ribosomal RNA gene The latter experiments will enable
analysis of the interspecific differences in physiological-biochemical-molecular
traits to be analyzed in a phylogenetic context, thus enabling putative
"adaptive" differences to be distinguished from changes not due to evolutionary
responses to temperatures. .