* 9700713
* Dissertation Research: Higher Order Avian Systematics: Contributions of DNA Sequences to Questions in Avian Biology
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1999
* Richard Harrison, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 04/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9700713 Harrison This award will provide funds for travel and for materials and
supplies to enhance the dissertation research of Mr. Scott E. Stanley, a
doctoral student at Cornell University who is working under the supervision of
Dr. Richard Harrison. Mr. Stanley's dissertation research involves acquisition
of DNA sequences from both mitochondrial and nuclear genomes in order to study
phylogenetic relationships among higher orders of birds and among families of
pelecaniform birds. Pelecaniforms include pelicans, cormorants, boobies, frigate
birds, and tropic birds. The phylogenetics of orders of birds are controversial,
particularly those between orders of large water birds, including pelecaniforms,
procellariiforms (tube-nosed seabirds), gaviiformes (loons), podicipediformes
(grebes), and sphenisciforms (penguins). The work by Stanley and Harrison will
address many of the more long-standing taxonomic/phylogenetic issues, and in
addition, test the performance of the mitochondrial and nuclear eenes with
respect to phylogenetic reconstruction. Generation of such a large molecular
data set also will provide an historical framework within which hypotheses
concerning early avian evolution and morphological and behavioral evolution in
birds can be tested rigorously. Support for training of graduate students in
modern technologies is critical to maintain the workforce of scientists capable
of addressing questions and issues in global biology.