* 9700029
* Approximation Algorithms via Linear Programming
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* David Shmoys, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Sloan
* 06/30/2001
* USD 213,514.00

Most combinatorial optimization problems are NP-hard, and hence unlikely to have
a polynomial-time algorithm that finds an optimal solution. This project
investigates the design of algorithms that find near-optimal solutions but also
come with a guarantee that the solution is not too much worse than optimal. This
research investigates algorithms that produce solutions guaranteed to be nearly-
optimal by relying on information contained in the optimal solution to linear
programming relaxation. One consequence of such results would be to provide a
theoretical justification for the strength of the bounds given by these linear
programming relaxations. By giving algorithms for which one can prove that the
solution found has value relatively close to the LP bound, one also shows that
relative error of the solution(compared to the integer optimum) is also small.
Furthermore, past experience has shown that the insight needed to devise
algorithms with such performance guarantees can also lead to algorithms with
superior empirical performance. The research focuses on several specific areas
in which computational experience has indicated that particular linear
programming relaxations provide strong bounds and attempts to build on this to
design approximation algorithms with good performance guarantees and good
practical performance. Scheduling problems arise in a cross- section of
applications, and the proposal focuses on several basic scheduling models, with
the aim of developing algorithmic techniques that are not particularly
application specific. Facility location problems are a type of network design
problem in which the aim is to build a distribution network consisting of
facilities and routes used to serve clients from the facilities. Known
relaxations produce extremely high-quality bounds and the research will attempt
to provide some theoretical justification for this, as well to devise new
algorithms that also build on these. The traveling salesman problem is per haps
the canonical optimization problem, and this investigation will try to resolve a
well-known conjecture on the strength of the so called Held-Karp lower bound.
For the bin-packing problem, this research will focus on a conjecture that there
exists a polynomial-time algorithm that uses at most a constant extra bins, and
is based on the cutting-stock LP formulation. For some other problems, such as
the maximum acyclic sub-graph problem, in addition to the LP-based approach
described above, this investigation will also explore algorithms based on convex
programming relaxations, which have recently been used to strengthen linear
relaxations in some settings. The ultimate goal of this research is to devise
algorithms that will not just complement the ongoing computational work in
polyhedral combinatorics with a theoretical foundation, but will also develop
algorithmic implementations to solve these applications more easily.***