* 9700026
* Engineering Researh Equipment: Experiments in Control of    Constrained Nonsmooth Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Prabhakar Pagilla, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 06/30/1999
* USD 36,500.00

This REG award provides funds for the purchase of research equipment related to
experiments in control of constrained non smooth mechanical systems. The
equipment comprises of a two axis direct drive motion setup, digital
oscilloscope, force sensor, deburring tools, data acquisition cards, power
supplies and amplifiers, and computers for simulations and real time control.
The research addresses applications of the results from the theory of non-smooth
differential equations to the modeling and control of constrained mechanical
systems, which are characterized by nonlinear differential-algebraic equations
and often such phenomena as Coulomb friction,saturation dead zones and backlash.
The equipment will facilitate experiments in automation of surface finishing
operations,utilizing the unique methodology developed for such operations, and
will identify new research directions in the area of control applications of non
smooth mechanical systems. In addition, it will be used as a testbed for
automated deburring, grinding, and other edge finishing operations, the behavior
of which can be accurately described by non-smooth mechanical system dynamics.
The knowledge base developed from the proposed experiments on the test-bed will
provide significant insight towards solving some of the problems associated with
complex real-world automated surface finishing operations in the industry.
Besides advancing the fundamental knowledge in control theory and its
applications, experiments conducted on the proposed equipment will also prepare
students for industrial employment with added training in mechatronics, i.e.,
integration of system dynamics, control theory, process dynamics and real-time
control implementation.