* 9700763
* Dissertation Research: Sensory Drive for Multi-Modal Communication
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* John Endler, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 05/31/2000
* USD 10,000.00

Endler 9700763 The proposed research addresses several key issues in animal
communication and signal design using wolf spiders of the genus Schizocosa.
Building on strong evidence that male wolf spiders have evolved morphological
and behavioral traits used as signals during courtship, a series of experiments
will be conducted to examine 2 key factors in shaping signal design: (1)
preexisting preferences for signals (2) environmental constraints. This study
also examines the importance of a motion-based visual display in female
preferences and signal efficacy. To test the influence of preexisting preference
for signals, the phylogenetic relationships among Schizocosa spiders will be
determined using DNA sequence data. By overlaying morphological and behavioral
traits (male signals and female preferences respectively) onto the phylogenetic
tree, it is possible to determine the order in which they appeared
evolutionarily. If signals used by males during courtship evolved to qtimulate
preexisting preference in females, the female preference will precede the male
trait on the tree. In addition, a correlation between display and habitat
characteristics, independent of phylogenetic history, is predicted if the
environment plays a role in shaping signal design. Finally, be presenting
females with 3-dimensional animations of courting males, this research tests how
specific behavioral traits may influence female mate preferences.