* 9700584
* Synthesis and Properties of Quasicrystalline and Crystalline Intermetallic Compounds with Bandgap
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2001
* Joseph Poon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 11/30/2001
* USD 255,000.00

9700584 Poon A comprehensive study of electronic properties in intermetallic
alloys is proposed, the goals are to understand the nature of the insulating
state, the metal- insulator transition and the strong electronic anisotropy
recently observed in some quasicrystalline alloys as well as to explore the
roles of atomic-scale order and chemistry in electron transport and bandgap
formation in inermetallic compounds. The spin-off of the project will be to
identify new thermoelectric materials for high-temperature applications. The
project is a widely collaborative one, it involves experts from several areas to
study structure- chemistry-property relationships. The principal investigator
will carry out synthesis and structural characterization of alloys, measurements
of conductivity, specific heat, Hall effect, and thermopower. Other
collaborators will utilize optical conductivity, x-ray spectroscopy, electron
tunneling, and nuclear magnetic resonance to probe electronic structure. Effects
of structure on properties will be studied by advanced electron microscopy and
nuclear magnetic resonance techniques. %%% Physicists and materials scientists
are interested in unusual crystal structures because unusual atomic arrangements
in solids provide new challenges for understanding organization and order in
nature. Equally important, unusual physical properties are expected to be seen
in novel materials. Our research project focuses on comprehensive study and
further exploration of electronic properties of metallic alloys including those
that exhibit noncrystalline structures, known as quasicrystals. The project is a
widely collaborative one, involving several groups world-wide to contribute to a
variety of experimental measurements. It has been shown that some of the titled
alloy compounds based on metals can become nonmetals, several of them even
exhibit electronic phenomena similar to those observed in semiconductors such as
silicon and germanium. The re are indications that the new alloys are
potentially good thermoelectric materials. ***