* 9700852
* Research in Large Deviations and Applications to Queueing Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Richard Ellis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2000
* USD 82,488.00

9700852 Ellis This research will focus on two broad areas: (1) a weak
convergence approach to the theory of large deviations and (2) large deviations
for jump Markov processes and applications to queueing networks. In area (1) the
research is based in part on a new book written jointly with Paul Dupuis. It
consists of the following: (a) deriving representation formulas for new classes
of processes, including jump Markov processes; (b) proving the Laplace principle
for diffusions and other processes having discontinuous statistics with various
geometries; (c) proving the Laplace principle for a random walk model with
state- dependent noise; (d) proving the Laplace principle for empirical measures
of Markov chains and related processes, including measure-valued processes with
state dependencies; (e) generalizing a new formula on the Legendre-Fenchel
transform of compositions of convex functions. Research in area (2) consists of
the following: (a) using a new representation formula for large deviation
probabilities together with weak convergence methods to obtain an explicit
formula for the rate function for a number of queueing models of interest; (b)
extending a recent paper on the large deviation analysis of general queueing
systems to other queueing models, including state-dependent queues; (c)
evaluating the exact large deviation rates and determining the overflow paths
corresponding to certain overflow events in a number of queueing networks. This
research program in large deviations is motivated by applications to queueing
networks, which are of fundamental importance in communication and high
performance computing. The work of the Principal Investigator over the past few
years, which culminated in a number of important papers and a research-level
book, develops a set of new and powerful techniques for studying the behavior of
such networks. For example, a critical problem in the design of high speed
networking technologies is to size the buffe rs at communications switches
within these networks so that certain overflow probabilities are suitably small.
Another critical problem in the design of very large multiprocessor systems is
to estimate the probability that the system will fail in some time interval.
This research will be adapted to studying these and related problems.