* 9700916
* Dissertation Research: Host Movement and Disease Dynamics:  Interactions between Monarch Butterflies and a Protozoan    Parasite
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Donald Alstad, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 06/30/1998
* USD 7,500.00

9700916 Alstad In natural populations, disease spread is likely to be affected
by ecological, environmental, and genetic factors. Many groups of animals have
seasonal migrations, which may strongly affect host-parasite interactions. This
research examines interactions between monarch butterflies, Danaus plexippus,
and an obligate protozoan parasite, Ophryocystis elektroscirrha. Three
populations of North American monarchs exhibit varying degrees of migratory
behavior, providing a unique opportunity to examine how geographic variation in
disease prevalence relates to host movement patterns. For these populations,
disease incidence is inversely related to host migratory distance. A non-
migratory population in southern Florida shows 100% infection, the western
migratory population is 60% infected, and the eastern migratory population,
which travels the farthest distance, is less than 10% infected. This study will
examine how population variation in disease prevalence is affected by host
movement behavior, environmental differences between sites, and genetic factors
related to host susceptibility or pathogen virulence. This study will produce
data important for the conservation of monarchs, which have been threatened in
recent years by habitat destruction at many overwintering sites. It will also
improve understanding of how parasites interact with their hosts.