* 9700358
* Lattice Curvature and Crystal Plasticity:  Theory and       Computation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1997,12/31/2001
* David Parks, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2001
* USD 233,938.00

9700358 Parks A program of constitutive and computational research in crystal
plasticity is proposed which is based on the concept of geometrically necessary
dislocation density, proportional to certain spatial gradients of crystal shear
strain, as providing a physical means to introduce size- dependent plastic
response in crystals. The proposed formulation fits nicely with the underlying
physical concepts, most clearly described by Ashby over 20 years ago. Among the
host of applications where scale-dependent plasticity driven by this mechanism
is encountered are the grain-size dependence of flow strength and work-hardening
in polycrystals (Hall-Petch effect), size dependence of indentation
microhardness, particle-size effects in the dispersion strengthening crystals.
and others. In each case, the attainment of locally inhomogeneous shear
strain,,over a characteristic geometric length scale,,results approximately in
the storage of a geometrically necessary dislocations, where b is the crystal
lattice constant. These "geometric" dislocations, which relieve the lattice
incompatibility which would otherwise be introduced by conservative dislocation
movement in producing the strain gradient, act as obstacles to other (glissile)
dislocations, producing very enhanced local hardening. A review of the field
shows that the computational methods proposed for dealing with this class of
problems are both feasible to implement and are methodologically in good
agreement with the materials science understanding. Preliminary computational
results on a multi-crystalline aggregate have shown a clear Hall-Petch effect,
based on "first principles." The effects of the extra dislocation density, which
is concentrated near grain boundaries struggling to deform compatibly, also give
rise to distinct patterning of strain within the grain. The proposed extensions
of the work will address less idealized versions of the Hall-Petch phenomenon,
the deformation of thin metallic layers constrained between ceramics, including
thermally-induced misfit strain, and particle size effects in the dispersion
strengthening of crystals. The results will be of fundamental scientific value,
being a first computational thrust into quantifying scale effects in crystal
plasticity and the interactions of statistically stored and geometrically
necessary dislocations. Among the industrial applications which could benefit
from a robust computational capability to account for scale-dependent plasticity
are the mechanical behavior of multi-layer electronic devices and thin films.