* 9700828
* Combined Research-Curriculum Development Program            High Speed Local Area Networks:  Systems and Applications
* CSE,EIA
* 06/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Sudhir Aggarwal, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 12/31/1999
* USD 249,851.00

CDA-9700828 Aggarwal, Sudhir Ghose, Kanad Gupta, Vipul Phatak, Dhananjay SUNY-
Binghamton CRCD: High Speed Local Area Networks: Systems and Application
Technological advances in microelectronics have made it possible to implement
low latency and high bandwidth links for local area networks (LANS) but this
does not automatically translate into high speed communication at the
application level. Bottlenecks arise due to the protocol stack, operating system
and the I/O-network-memory subsystem. It is also necessary to understand how
novel applications make use of tight coupling and how mobile applications
exploit the capabilities of high speed LANs for their computing needs. This
award will help to develop a two-semester course sequence, with appropriate
laboratory exercises, that integrates into the curriculum new results relating
to the design, implementation and use of high speed LANs. In the traditional
computer science and engineering curricula, the requisite information is only
partially covered in a number of separate courses, making it difficult to
understand the tradeoffs in the systems and applications design. The main thrust
in this project will be to abstract out and convey the key concepts, reinforcing
them with a series of laboratory exercises that involve the design of key
hardware and software systems components that lead to a full working high speed
LAN supporting one or more targeted applications. Relevant topic will be gleaned
from recent advances in the industry as well as the recent research literature.