* 9700921
* Infinite Dimensional Lie Algebras, Quantum Groups, and      their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Nicolai Reshetikhin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Robert Perlis
* 06/30/2000
* USD 272,565.00

RESHETIKHIN The main theme of this proposal is the study of quantized universal
enveloping algebras, their representations and their applications to low
dimensional topology and to quantum integrable models. Among specific goals of
the proposal are: q-W algebras their quantization and their role in the
representation theory of quantum affine algebras, the duality aspects for q-W
algebras, tau- functions as spherical functions on Poisson Lie groups and their
quantization, various aspects of interrelations between quantum and classical
integrable systems and representation theory. Recent decades were characterized
by intense and productive interaction of mathematics and physics. Large part of
this process was initiated in the study of classical and quantum integrable
systems and developed from there to various questions related to conformal field
theory and to a very productive developments in the string theory. On the
mathematical side of this interaction are various aspects of algebra, geometry
and topology. My research is focused mostly on the study of algebraic structures
resulted from this interaction and inspired by it. They are remarkable not only
because they are quite exceptional but also because they have important
applications ranging from low dimensional topology and geometry to solid state
physics.