* 9700111
* Engineering Research Equipment:  Precision Semiconductor    Parameter Analysis System
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1999
* Arnost Neugroschel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/1999
* USD 62,000.00

9700111 Neugroschel The Solid-State Electronics laboratory at the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering of the University of Florida proposes to
purchase semiconductor parameter analysis stations to support fundamental
research in deep-submicron transistors for advancement of future technology of
American integrated circuit manufacturers. The equipment will be used for
several projects, such as the NSF grant (ECS-9220382) supported investigation on
the properties of thin Ge(x)Si(1-x) layers for state-of-the-art GeSi
heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTS) for analog-digital telecommunication
applications beyond the 2GHz bands. A follow-on proposal to NSF on this subject
is being prepared to meet the NSF-GOALI initiative with industrial partners.
Another current research project that will use the equipment is a Semiconductor
Research Corporation contract on investigating the fundamental reliability
limits of deep submicron silicon metal-oxidesemiconductor and bipolar junction
transistors (MOSTs and BJTS). Other ongoing and planned investigations include
deep submicron thin-film silicon-on-insulator (TFSOI) MOST and BJT technology
for low power applications, fundamental limits on extending Si MOSTs to
<0.1-micron and <IV, and fundamental reliability limits in support of the
development of high-voltage and smart power integrated circuits. These projects
are all undertaken in close collaboration with Texas Instruments, Motorola,
Intel, and several other American manufacturers. The proposed instrument
stations are not available and are unique. With this equipment, we expect to
significantly improve the understanding of the fundamental limits imposed on
future transistors at smaller dimensions. In addition, we expect the results
obtained from the proposed equipment to contribute significantly to the advances
of future manufacturing technology. ***