* 9700945
* Strong Correlation Effects in Double Layer Two-Dimensional  Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2001
* James Eisenstein, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 01/31/2001
* USD 277,500.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9700945 Eisenstein This experimental research
project utilizes double layer two- dimensional electron systems to study two
exciting topics in quantum Hall research: composite Fermions (CF) and quantum
Hall ferromagnetism (QHF). CF's, which are electrons with two magnetic flulx
quanta attached, have provided a framework for understanding the diversity of
fractional quantum Hall states. QHF, on the other hand, offers a beautiful and
useful analogy between quantized Hall states in systems with discrete internal
degrees of freedom (like spin or layer index) and ordinary magnetic materials.
Remarkable new phenomena, like textural phase transitions and skyrmionic
topological excitations, have been discovered in QHF's. In double layer 2D
electron gases, simply changing the thickness of the separating barrier allows
interpolation between a system best described as two weakly coupled composite
fermion liquids to a single quantum Hall ferromagnet. In addition to
conventional magneto-transport, novel experimental probes requiring separate
electrical contact to the individual layers (e.g., Coulomb drag, tunneling
spectroscopy, and counterflow transport) will be employed to uncover important
new information in both the CF and QHF limits and, uniquely, on the transition
between them. %%%% This experimental research project is devoted to basic
properties of two conducting electron systems, each confined into a two-
dimensional planar region, when the two systems are parallel and in close
proximity separated only by a thin planar tunnel barrier. Such coupled parallel
sets of two-dimensional electrons at low temperatures and with high magnetic
fields exhibit unusual characteristics. In each layer the effective charge
carriers are "composite Fermions", which are electrons with two magnetic flux
quanta attached. As the spacing between the two layers is reduced, which
increases the interaction, a crossover in behavior is expected from a case of
weakly interacting composite Fermion systems to a state called a single quantum
Hall ferromagnet. A ferromagnet is a system in which electron magnetic moments
are aligned parallel, as in a bar magnet or compass needle. On the one hand the
experiments will provide new basic information about electron systems when they
are in interaction in confined layers at low temperatures. For example, one
experiment will measure the degree to which motion (electrical current) in one
system "drags" the second system. On the other hand the device structures which
are used in these experiments are similar to those used in the most advanced
microelectronic devices in the GaAs technology, and indeed fabricating these
devices may lead to innovation in the GaAs technology. This research will
involve students who will be well trained in the area of physics and will also
gain familiarity with semiconductor device technology, and who will be
excellently trained for employment in industry, government, or education. ***