* 9700417
* Connections between Space-Bounded Molecular Computation and Classical Complexity Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1997,10/26/1998
* Richard Beigel, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 10/26/1998
* USD 114,000.00

With its exponential parallelism, molecular computing offers the hope of solving
important problems that have resisted solution on conventional computers.
Various molecular operations have been proposed as feasible; because it is
unclear which operations will be usefully implementable, algorithms that use the
simplest operations are to be preferred. In particular, communication between
processes may be impossible. Parallelism and running time are resources to be
exploited efficiently. It is known that molecular computers with limited
operations sets, polynomial time, and exponential parallelism can solve any
problem in the class NP. By further limiting the parallelism, various bounded-
nondeterminism subclasses of NP are obtained. This project investigates the
relationships among molecular computation classes and these NP subclasses. While
many molecular algorithms for important problems use 2n parallelism, this
severely limits the size of problems that those algorithms can solve. In the
last two decades there has been an improvement from 2n to 2cn for various c<1 in
the running time of classical serial algorithms for important NP-complete
problems like 3-SAT, graph coloring, and independent set. Using bounded
nondeterminism as an algorithm design technique, this project will develop more
efficient molecular algorithms for important NP-complete problems, such as
3-SAT, graph coloring, and independent set. ***