* 9700897
* Statistics for Correlated Data: A Conference in Celebration of the 50th Anniversary of the Department of Statistics at  Iowa State University; Ames, Iowa; October 16-18, 1997
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Yasuo Amemiya, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 02/28/1998
* USD 11,900.00

DMS 9700897 Statistics for Correlated Data: A Conference in Celebration of the
50th Anniversary of the Department of Statistics at Iowa State University Yasuo
Amemiya October 16-18, 1997 Scheman Building, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa
50011 Abstract: The Department of Statistics at Iowa State University, in
conjunction with its 50th anniversary, plans to host a conference that will
contribute to the advancement of statistical science and to the future
infrastructure of statistics. The scientific theme of the conference is
"Statistics for Correlated Data", which covers many of the currently important
theoretical and applied research topics, and which corresponds to the areas of
the department's strength and tradition. The plan for the conference is to make
it as accessible as possible to the diverse statistics community, and to
encourage and support researchers in early stages of their career. Correlated
data arise in modeling temporal and spatial processes, in analyzing repeated
measures, in complex sampling and experimental schemes, and in a wide range of
applied problems. In this broad subject, researchers tend to form separate
groups defined by sub-topics or the areas of application. This conference
attempts to gather statisticians with interest in any of the theoretical or
applied sub-areas of correlated data statistics, and to serve as a place for
communicating and exchanging knowledge. Sub-areas covered by the main theme
include time series, spatial statistics, sampling, longitudinal analysis,
multivariate analysis, applications to engineering, life, and agricultural
sciences. It is planned to have 10-15 invited speakers from outside Iowa State.
The conference also plans to have a special invited poster session for young
researchers. This program will be announced and advertised widely to obtain a
large pool of applicants. At least ten young researchers will be selected as
invited participants, and will be feat ured in the poster session. In addition,
the participation of graduate students and young faculty members will be
promoted through the network of the Midwest departments of statistics.