* 9700147
* Phase Separation and Interfaces of Confined Aqueous         Colloidal Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Marc Robert, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2002
* USD 260,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9700147 Robert Marc/Rice U. It is proposed to study the phase
separation, tension and structure of interfaces of confines aqueous colloidal
systems. Confined colloid systems play important roles in several technological
applications, such as paper, pesticides, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, the
processing of materials from ceramic powders, and the formulation of coatings
(paints) for wood and masonry (brick, concrete, cement, stone, stucco). The
study of aqueous colloidal systems is motivated by current stringent
environmental and safety laws enforcing, in particular, the reduction or
elimination of VOC (volatile organic compounds). In the project, emphasis is
given to technologically important aqueous formulations such as those containing
the nonionic water-soluble polymer HEC (cellulose ether hydroxyethylcellulose)
and its hydrophobically modified from HMHEC specifically designed for aqueous
dispersions. HEC and HMHEC are the most widely used thickeners/stabilizers in
latex paints and essential additives in numerous materials such as inks,
cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, foods, and ceramics. The systems to be studied are
aqueous colloidal suspensions stabilized by non-adsorbing, water-soluble
polymers. Phase separation (reversible flocculation) is investigated for
confined systems as a function of composition and particle/polymer size ratio,
and experimental results are compared with predictions of statistical mechanics.
For confined systems, the interfacial structure, i.e., the variation of the
colloidal concentration and the pair distribution (correlation) function in the
interfacial region, are determined by digital videomicroscopy. These
experimentally determined interfacial structures will be compared to those
predicted by statistical mechanics. The tensions of the fluid interfaces will be
determined for confined and unconfined colloidal systems, by the capillary rise
and sessile drop methods and by digital videomicroscopy, in the latter case from
the shape of the meniscus away from the sample cells walls. Together with its
potential beneficial impact on energy and environmental issues, this research,
if successful, will contribute to the advancement of knowledge by providing for
the first time the determination of fluid phase separation of colloidal systems
in confined geometries, the determination of interfacial tension of confined and
unconfined colloidal systems, as well as the experimental determinations of
interfacial structure and of critical interfacial tension of a confined, two-
dimensional fluid. ***