* 9700331
* CRB: Collaborative Research: The Direct and Indirect        Effects of Biological Invasions on Biodiversity in New      England Kelp Beds
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,07/23/1999
* James Coyer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/23/1999
* USD 28,766.00

9700331 Coyer Human introductions of species outside their natural range are
rapidly homogenizing the earth's biota, and are a major threat to biodiversity
in terrestrial, aquatic and marine habitats. Although the potential impact of
biological invasions on biodiversity has been recognized for decades, until
recently, most research has focused on terrestrial or freshwater rather than
marine habitats. Anthropogenic introductions of marine species are numerous and
have had a dramatic impact in some locals. While much has been learned about
introduced species over the last 15 years, generalizations relative to marine
systems are elusive. This study will address the effects of introduced species
on kelp bed communities in the northwest Atlantic Ocean. Specifically, this
research will examine the interactive effects of herbivory and competition on
the introduced alga Codium fragile and the native kelp community of the
northwest Atlantic, the indirect effects of a bryozoan on kelps in these
communities, and the impact of increasing Codium and decreasing kelp biomass on
the demography of fishes and decapods that use seaweed beds as nursery habitats.
The kelp bed communities of New England shift between two alternate states: a
species-rich community dominated by laminarian kelps, and a species-poor
community dominated by sea urchins and crustose coralline algae. Recently, a new
community consisting of a monoculture of the introduced green alga, Codium
fragile tomentosoides, is now prevalent in the region. In addition the
introduction of a bryozoan also appears to have severely impacted kelp bed
communities. Using a series of multi-factor experiments and descriptive studies,
this research will elucidate the causes of this shift in community structure,
and therefore explain the mechanisms underlying the dramatic, human-induced loss
of biodiversity in these kelp communities.