* 9700814
* Dissertation Research: Taxonomy, Systematics, and Evolution of the Trapdoor Spider Genus Aptostichus (Araneae,          Cyrtaucheniidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Brent Opell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 12/31/1999
* USD 9,763.00

9700814 OPELL Aptostichus is the most diverse genus of trapdoor spiders in North
America. Most species are in California, where they occupy at least 13 of the
state's 16 biological regions, including desert environments. Since many of
these habitats are threatened, studies of Aptostichus can contribute
significantly to an understanding of the conservation biology and ecology of
these regions. Despite its extraordinary diversity and interesting geographic
and ecological distribution, this group has received little attention and only
four of its estimated 25 species have been described. In this research, Brent
Opell and doctoral candidate Jason Bond will revise the taxonomy of Aptostichus
and test hypotheses about how these species arose. The phylogenetic history of
the genus, and species boundaries within the genus, will be evaluated using both
morphological and molecular (mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequence) data. The
morphological data will also contribute to knowledge of the distributions,
variations in morphological features, and natural histories of these spiders,
while the sequence data will provide insights into their biogeography,
speciation processes, and desert adaptations. The approach is novel in that it
integrates morphological and molecular approaches to questions of species
delineation, phylogenetic history, and natural history in spiders.