* 9700394
* Synthesis and Studies of Lanthanide-Transition Metal        Complexes (Extended Arrays); Reactions of Metal Complexes   with New Borane Ligands
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Sheldon Shore, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/1999
* USD 308,000.00

Dr. Sheldon G. Shore, Department of Chemistry, Ohio State University, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division to synthesize and study lanthanide-transition metal complexes
that form extended arrays and for the study of the reactions of metal complexes
with new borane ligands. Materials that have direct lanthanide transition metal
bonds and a series of compounds with cyanide and cyanate bridged lanthanide-
transition metal backbones will be prepared. This phase of the program is
designed to develop and expand avenues for the synthesis of polymeric, extended
array complexes that incorporate both lanthanide and transition metals into a
one, two, or three dimensional arrangement of metal moieties. Secondly, the
reactions of lanthanide ions with new borane anions that are isoelectronic with
nitrogen donors and that can function as ligands will be examined. This aspect
of the program will uncover a new aspect of borane chemistry and yield routes to
new types of lanthanide boranes. Lanthanide-transition metal complexes can be or
can serve as precusors to electronic, superconducting, and magnetic materials.
In addition there are a number of commercially important catalysts that contain
both types of metals. Nonetheless, complexes containing both lanthanide and
transition metals are not common. This project aims at extending the number and
types of compounds that contain these types of metals joined to each other in
unique large `arrays,` designed to be logical forms from which the materials or
catalysts mentioned above may be obtained.