* 9700766
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Status and Power in Social Exchange Networks
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1998
* Michael Lovaglia, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/1998
* USD 7,230.00

9700766 Markovsky This Doctoral Dissertation Research project will
experimentally test a new theory of power that connects research from two
sociological traditions: power and status. This research (i) tests a new
theoretical argument that connects Network Exchange Theory (Markovsky et al.
1988, 1993) with the theory of Status Characteristics and Expectation States
(Berger et al. 1977; Wagner and Berger 1993) and the theory of Status Value
(Berger et al. 1972); (ii) establishes the baseline effect of status information
on exchange outcomes for networks having no advantageous position; and (iii)
determines if status information is sufficient to negate weak structural
advantages that occur in one class of structures. This theory explains how
individual traits or status characteristics lead to the development of power in
social exchange networks. The argument is that the possessions of high status
actors acquire a degree of status value that is independent of any economic or
consumatory potential they may otherwise carry. For example, baseballs are
valuable but Cal Ripken's baseball confers a unique sense of status value that
ultimately stems from his prestige as a player. Thus, this theory predicts that
high status creates a sense of status value that attaches to goods controlled by
high status actors. exchanges. All experiments are conducted at the Center for
the Study of Group Processes at the University of Iowa. Subjects interact via
networked PCs, each negotiating to receive a share of the profit pool in each of
their network relations. All subjects are first or second year college students
and only same-gender subjects were included in a given session. Subjects are
assigned randomly to their network positions where they remain for the entire
session. First, subjects provide information on their age, gender, education,
and high school grade point average. The experimenter then reports predetermined
information about each subject's partners. Subjects connected to a "higher
status" par tner believe they are working with a 27 year old engineering
graduate student with a superior GPA. Those connected to a "lower status" person
believes that their partner is a 16 year old high school student with an
inferior GPA. Several status undifferentiated tests in which each subject
believed they are connected to an equal status partner comparable to the real
subject in terms of age, GPA, year in school and academic major are ran. Each
subject is then assigned a commodity-colored poker chips-to control in the
negotiation phase. Subjects are told they will negotiate with their partners for
poker chips, and each will receive chips different from their own in color to
help the experimenter keep track of the interactions. Following the status
manipulation and chip allocation, subjects begin the negotiation and exchange
phase. In each experiment, subjects complete 60 rounds of negotiation, making a
maximum of one exchange per round. All are encouraged to gain as many chips as
they can for themselves and told that their pay will be determined by the number
of poker chips they earned. Data collected will be used to test several
statistical models using regression analysis. ****