* 9700757
* Double Dirichlet Series and Generalized Metaplectic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Jeffrey Hoffstein, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 05/31/2000
* USD 118,500.00

9700757 Hoffstein In this proposal we put forward two new techniques for the
study of automorphic, Dirichlet and Hecke L-series. The first technique involves
the use of double Dirichlet series, associated groups of functional equations
and a convexity principle for functions of two complex variables. Our purpose is
to study the properties of L-series of number theoretic interest in one variable
s that arise in these double Dirichlet series as coefficients in the expansion
as a Dirichlet series in another variable w. Such double series often arise in
the theory of metaplectic Eisenstein series on higher rank groups. A good deal
of our efforts in past years have been devoted to obtaining information about
collections of L-series that appear in these double series. The main tool has
been generalizations of the Rankin-Selberg method applied to metaplectic
Eisenstein series and cusp forms. A major obstacle to progress, however, has
been the difficulty of analyzing the archimedian factors associated to these
L-series that are created by the Rankin-Selberg process. It is our belief that
the technique described above should be applicable in all the cases that are
theoretically accessible by the Rankin-Selberg method, but the difficulties of
working at the infinite place should be avoided. We hope to use this method to
prove the entirety of the symmetric fourth power L-series associated to an
automorphic form on GL(2) . This would have as a consequence an improvement of
the best known exponent in Fourier coefficients estimates for Maass forms from
5/28 to 1/6 . Other applications should include the entirety of the symmetric
cube L-series, non-vanishing of infinitely many cubic twists of a GL(2)
automorphic L-series at arbitrary points, and mean value estimates for arbitrary
order twists of Hecke L-series. The second technique is connected to certain
generalizations of metaplectic forms. Metaplectic forms on GL(2) transform under
the action of a congruence subgroup of the fu ll modular group. In this project,
the investigator and his collaborators will construct a new kind of metaplectic
group with the Kubota symbol replaced by a representation of the congruence
subgroup. This could then be used to construct an Eisenstein series. The
investigator hopes that the Artin L-series associated to extensions of the base
field with Galois group a subgroup of G will be connected to this Eisenstein
series. If true, an investigation of integral transforms of the Eisenstein
series could lead to new information about certain classes of Artin L-series. At
the very least, an investigation of such generalizations of metaplectic forms
should prove interesting, as they appear to be completely new objects. This
research falls into the general mathematical field of Number Theory. Number
Theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole numbers, addressing
such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of one whole number by
another. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics and was pursued for many
centuries for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within the last half century it
has become an indispensable tool in diverse applications in areas such as data
transmission and processing, and communication systems.