* 9700632
* Symposium on the Centennial of the Electron:  Today's       Science Sparking Tomorrow's Technology
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Koblar Jackson, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 08/31/1997
* USD 20,000.00

9700632 Jackson This project is funded by the Divisions of Materials Research,
Chemistry and Physics. The funds will be used to partially support a symposium
to celebrate the centennial of the discovery of the electron to be held at
Central Michigan University on April 9, 1997. The symposium will feature four
distinguished speakers who will address various aspects of the impact of the
electron on science and technology, as well as prospects for the future. The
symposium will be broadcast live via satellite to high schools and colleges
nationwide. Instructional materials that address the content of the symposium
will be developed in a separate project and distributed to high school teachers.
%%% This project is funded by the Divisions of Materials Research, Chemistry and
Physics. The funds will be used to partially support a symposium to celebrate
the centennial of the discovery of the electron to be held at Central Michigan
University on April 9, 1997. The symposium will feature four distinguished
speakers who will address various aspects of the impact of the electron on
science and technology, as well as prospects for the future. The symposium will
be broadcast live via satellite to high schools and colleges nationwide.
Instructional materials that address the content of the symposium will be
developed in a separate project and distributed to high school teachers. ***