* 9700665
* Scattering and Recoiling Imaging Spectrometry (SARIS) for   Surface Composition, Structure, and Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* John Rabalais, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 05/31/2001
* USD 454,000.00

A method for the determination of the structure and composition of solid
surfaces in real time and in a spatially resolved manner is the subject of this
research project in the laboratory of Professor J. Wayne Rabalais at the
University of Houston. The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program provides
support for these studies of scattering and recoiling imaging spectrometry
(SARIS) for the real time analysis of solid surfaces. Development of modelling
and interpretive methodology is a focus of the present research, and application
to a wide range of surface analysis and thin film growth problems is being
carried out. Completion of a new instrument for SARIS studies is expected
shortly, and applications in several areas of materials science form the focus
of the work of this research project. Real time, spatially resolved information
about the structure and composition of solid surfaces is crucial to the
understanding of a very wide range of important technological problems, ranging
from semiconductor device fabrication to heterogeneous catalysis. Ion scattering
spectrometry is being developed as a method for the real time spatially resolved
analysis of solid surfaces. This research combines instrumental development,
calculational modelling for the interpretation of experimental results, and
application to a wide variety of important surface analysis problems to provide
a wide ranging project of significant technical import. Significant applications
of this methodology in the analysis of electronic materials are to be expected.