* 9700818
* Acquisition of Instrument for the Study of Artificial Atoms
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Marc Kastner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/2001
* USD 161,080.00

9700818 Kastner The power of computers has increased exponentially with time in
large part because the size of devices has decreased exponentially with time,
resulting in a higher density of transistors on a chip. Unfortunately, the cost
of facilities for producing these devices has also increased exponentially, and
although the market for devices has grown rapidly, it has not grown
exponentially. Thus we are rapidly approaching the time when facilities for new
generations of conventional devices may be too expensive to build. In the past
it seemed that novel devices could not compete with conventional ones. However,
the economic limitation to future fabrication facilities provides a new
motivation for research into classes of devices that may have cost advantages.
Single- electron devices may be one of these classes. Whereas single- electron
devices have, in the past, operated only at very low temperatures, recent
reports of operation near room temperature bring useful applications much closer
to reality. This project builds upon past work at MIT in which it was discovered
that when a transistor is made very small it behaves in an unusual way. Whereas
a conventional transistor turns on only once as electrons are added to it, and
whereas such a transistor requires the addition of about 103 electrons to change
from the off-state to the on-state, the new transistor turns on and off again
every time an electron is added to it. The single electron transistor is made by
isolating a very small droplet of electrons in such a way that electrons can
move into and out of the droplet only by quantum mechanical tunneling. The MIT
work has shown that such a transistor behaves like an artificial atom, in that
the number of electrons in the droplet and the energy are both quantized. The
transistors made so far have used the semiconductor GaAs with metal electrodes
on the surface, patterned using electron-beam lithography, to confine the
droplet of electrons. Beca use the electrons in such GaAs structures are
typically 100nm below the surface, the droplet of electrons has typically been
~100nm in radius r. The energy for adding an extra electron to the droplet
scales like r-1, and this limits single electron operation to temperatures below
~1K for r=100nm. The goal of this project is to explore ways of increasing the
operating temperature of single electron transistors and to better understand
their physics. In particular, the MIT group has recently discovered a series of
phase transitions in the droplet of electrons confined in the artificial atom at
high magnetic fields. The acquisition of a higher-field magnet and dedicated
refrigerator are proposed here to study these phase transitions further. %%% New
artificial atoms will be fabricated using Si instead of GaAs. Since the
electrons in these devices can be as close as 5nm from the surface, much smaller
droplets and, consequently, much higher energy and temperature scales are
expected. The devices will be fabricated in collaboration with MIT Lincoln
Laboratory using the outstanding electron- beam and optical lithography
capability developed there under Air Force sponsorship. In this way, the effect
of the NSF funds will be strongly amplified. In addition to higher operating
temperatures, Si offers the advantage that single electron devices can be easily
integrated with conventional ones. It is expected that single electron devices
in Si can be made to operate well above liquid nitrogen temperature. Higher
magnetic fields are required for the study of the state of electrons in these
smaller structures. It is also proposed to fabricate devices in GaAs in which
the droplets of electrons will be smaller. This will be accomplished by growing
structures in which the electrons are closer to the surface. A collaboration has
been established with the Weizmann Institute in Israel where the expertise in
making such structures has already been developed. Like the col laboration with
Lincoln Laboratory, this amplifies the impact of NSF funding. Single electron
devices have the advantage that they can be capacitively coupled. It has been
proposed that, because of this, an array of such devices may function as an
associative memory. That is, any set of input voltages close to, but not exactly
equal to, a special set will give the same output. It is proposed that such an
array be fabricated and studied. Although the first such memories will be read-
only, understanding their physics may lead to ways of writing as well. ***