* 9700758
* Dissertation Research: Convergent Evolution of Mollusc      Crushing in Teleost Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Peter Wainwright, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 9,489.00

Wainwright 9700758 The proposed dissertation research will investigate the
convergent evolution of pharyngeal jaw molluse crushing in teleost fishes. Five
groups of percomorph fishes will be studied to determine whether the same suite
of functional, morphological, and physiological modifications underlie this
trophic specialization in such case. An integrative approach will be used to
compare the molluse crushing capacity of the pharyngeal jaw apparatus in
molluscivores and closely related generalist predators: 1) Functional
Morphology; comparison of the pharyngeal jaw mechanism including mesurements of
the musculoskeletal system, electromyography, and in vivo stimulation
experiments, 2) Physiology; biochemical assays will determine the physiological
nature of the muscles will be measured in the laboratory. The significance of
this research will be threefold. First, it will reveal the relationships among
different levels of organismal design and performance in the repeated evolution
of a novel feeding behavior. Secold, it will increase our understanding of how
rigorously the physical demands of mollusc crushing constrained the evolutionary
modification of the teleost pharyngeal jaw apparatus in multiple origins of this
behavior. Third, this research will elucidate presumed musculoskeletal
adaptations for pharyngeal mollusc crushing by testing hypothesis of convergence
among several teleost lineages.