* 9700929
* Dissertation Research: The Effect of Water on Carbon        Cycling and Soil Carbon Storage in High Precipitation       Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Pamela Matson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 04/30/1999
* USD 7,930.00

9700929 Matson This research proposal is designed to determine the effect of
water on biological processes involved in carbon cycling in high precipitation,
non-wetland ecosystems. While the influence of water on carbon dynamics is well
studied in dry to mesic terrestrial systems, it remains poorly defined in mesic
to wet ecosystems although patterns of soil carbon storage suggest that it is
important. The experimental approach uses a naturally occurring rainfall
gradient in Hawaii; all other state factors that can affect carbon dynamics are
held remarkably constant among sites, while rainfall alone changes
systematically from 2500 mm to 6000 mm. This study focuses on the effect of
water on decomposition and net primary productivity as the primary mechanisms of
soil carbon storage. The main hypotheses are that net primary productivity and
decomposition are negatively affected by water in these terrestrial systems;
that the effect on decomposition rates is stronger relative to the effect on net
primary productivity; and that water directly suppresses both oxygen and
nutrient availability. The effect of increasing water will be evaluated across
the gradient by directly measuring changes in net primary productivity and
decomposition rates, by using 13C mass spectroscopy of soils and plant tissue as
integrated measures of carbon fluxes, and by analysis of the soil atmosphere and
nutrient availability. Understanding the mechanistic controls over soil carbon
storage is important for predicting the transient response of the global soil
carbon pool to climate change; though soil carbon storage increases linearly
across the axis of precipitation, this masks real changes in the processes that
control storage. This research will provide a robust empirical test of the
effect of water on production and decomposition in high precipitation
ecosystems, and will link changes in these carbon cycling processes to patterns
of soil carbon storage. NSF Form 1358 (1/94)