* 9700116
* Investigations into the Laser Ablation Process and the      Pursuit of New Chemical Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1997,10/31/2000
* W. Lester Andrews, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 10/31/2000
* USD 374,500.00

W. Lester S. Andrews of the University of Virginia is supported by the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to continue his matrix-isolation Fourier
Transform Infrared studies of reactive species. In previous work, laser ablation
was used to generate hot atoms which subsequently reacted at or near the matrix
to form the species of interest. In this award, the emphasis is on a)
understanding the laser ablation process itself and b) pursuing new chemical
applications. In the former case, e.g., the PI will investigate the source for
the activation energy of the reaction in which laser ablated Fe reacts with O2
to form OFeO, a reaction that does not occur thermally. Is the activation energy
due to excess kinetic energy, electronic excitation involving metastables or
radiation from the laser plasma? Additions to the apparatus involving magnetic
or electric fields will allow manipulation of charged species, which should lead
to an understanding of some of the underlying mechanisms. Laser ablation
experiments with beryllium and oxygen in a neon matrix will be carried out in an
attempt to isolate the first neutral neon compound NeBeO. Finally, the isolation
of reaction intermediates in semiconductor growth processes will be attempted.
Given current interest in pulsed laser ablation to grow semiconductor thin
films, reactions of GaAs, GaP and InSb with H2 will be emphasized. Density
functional theoretical studies will be done in collaboration with Bauschlicher,
although the emphasis in this proposal is on the experimental aspects. Pulsed-
laser ablation is rapidly becoming an extremely important physical technique and
is currently employed in such diverse areas as plasma physics, analytical
chemistry and the growth of superconductors. Better understanding of the laser
ablation process would help foster further applications of this technology.