* 9700034
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Polymeric Liquids in Extension-Dominated Fluids
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,10/31/2000
* L. Gary Leal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 10/31/2000
* USD 350,000.00

9700034 Leal The ultimate objective of this GOALI award (supported jointly by
the Division of Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities) is the development of a predictive basis to describe the behavior of
solutions of linear-chain, flexible polymers in flows that are either
extensional or extension-dominated. The primary emphasis is on solutions that
are sufficiently ent angled that reptation-based theories are expected to apply.
The proposed experimental studies utilize a novel combination of flow cells,
known as 2- and 4- roll mills, that are designed to produce pure extensional, or
extension-dominated, two-dimensional flows, that can also be either steady, or
time-dependent; and optical techniques that can probe the chain configuration
and the actual velocity gradient at any point within the flow cell. Chain
configuration is inferred from two-color birefringence measurements of the
degree of optical anisotropy in the fluid. A unique implementation of dynamic
light scattering provides a pointwise measure of the velocity gradient for
either steady or transient flows. Comparisons with theoretical models are made
via full-field fluid dynamics simulations for the dilute, Boger-type fluids. For
reptation-based models of monodisperse and bi-disperse entangled solutions,
measured biorefringence data is compared with model predictions using the
measured velocity gradient data as input. %%%% From a technological point of
view, the ability to predict the behavior of polymeric liquids in extensional
flows would allow an understanding of the relationship between material
characteristics and processing. From an educational standpoint, this GOALI
project offers enhancements to the normal Ph.D. program. Graduate students will
spend up to a year in residence at the Exxon Corporate Research Laboratory,
where they will work directly with Scott Milner, as well as visiting the Exxon
Research Labs at Baytown where work is being carried out on both polymer
synthesis and polymer processing issues that are directly related to the
fundamental objectives of this project. ***