* 9700669
* US-Pakistan Cooperative Research: The Biology of            Butterflies of Northern Pakistan, Gilgit to Khunjerab
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* David Smith, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/2000
* USD 24,793.00

Description: This award is to support a cooperative research project by Dr.
David Spencer Smith of Florida International University and Dr. S. Azhar Hasan
of the Pakistan Museum of Natural History in Islamabad. The research is to
extend the study of butterfly fauna of the Karakoram region in northern Pakistan
to include the region between Gilgit (elevation 4,500 ft) through Nagar/Hunza to
the Sino-Pakistan border (16,000 ft). Until recently, this region was
inaccessible, and it remains a conspicuous gap in knowledge of the biology of
Pakistan more poorly known than the adjacent areas of Central Asia including
Afghanistan and the eastern Himalayan. The terrain is an extremely complex
system of high mountains and valleys, with vegetation substantially restricted
to glacier-fed stream courses and irrigated land at lower elevations, with
extensive arid mountain slopes. The study area comprises the Indus valley and
selected side valleys, to assess evolution of faunal diversification through
isolation, including genetic study. Diversity of species/subspecies will be
assessed in the context of altitudinal/ecological zonation, range, phenology and
ingress of Oriental taxa into a largely Palaearctic biogeographical zone. Scope:
The project includes field and laboratory studies intended to extend the
knowledge of biodiversity of the Himalayan region in general, and in particular
will contribute to the research and training programs of the cooperating
institutions. It will help with the conservation strategies of the Pakistan
Museum of Natural History. The project brings the expertise and skills of the US
scientist with the domestic resources available to the staff of the Museum of
Natural History in Islamabad. These resources include access to and familiarity
with the terrain, the habitat, and the use of lands in the region to be studied,
as well as the experiences of the Museum staff. Dr. Hasan is the Curator of the
Zoological Sciences Division of the Museum. He has a Ph.D. degree from Oxford
University and has numerous publications on butterflies of Pakistan. The
collaboration should benefit the US and Pakistani researchers. This project
meets INT objective of supporting U.S.-foreign collaboration when it is mutually
beneficial. The project is partially supported by the Division of Environmental
Biology.