* 9700165
* A Study of Bifurcation and Chaos in Hunting Stability of    High Speed Rail Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Mehdi Ahmadian, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 06/30/2000
* USD 89,988.00

In this research project, chaos and bifurcation theory will be used to analyze
the nonlinear lateral and yaw stability (commonly called `hunting`) of high-
speed rail vehicles. A major challenge in designing rail vehicles in general,
and high-speed passenger rail transportation in particular, is the velocity-
dependent dynamics of the vehicle. As velocity increases, the vehicle becomes
less stable, experiences violent oscillations, and eventually derails. In
addition to safety concerns, hunting imposes significant operational costs to
the railroads. Increased hunting contributes to more wheel and rail wear,
causing millions of dollars of damage to the nation's rail system each year.
Through using chaos and bifurcation theory, this research will investigate and
provide a better understanding of the effects of dynamic nonlinearities on rail
vehicle hunting. The nonlinearities that will be considered include elements
such as the primary and secondary suspensions, the vehicle constraints, and the
wheel/rail interface. This research will also examine design conditions that
yield safer and more cost-effective operation of rail vehicles at high speeds.
The techniques developed during this research will be applicable to the design
of general nonlinear systems, including high-speed passenger and freight rail
vehicles.