* 9700150
* MPPPD:  Developing Accessible Science Experiments
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* John Goldthwaite, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Scadden
* 06/30/1999
* USD 99,943.00

PI: John Goldthwaite The project will develop resource materials to assist
science teachers provide students with disabilities the ability to participate
in the conduct of science laboratory experiments. Staff from Georgia Tech's
Center for Rehabilitation Technology will work with the institution's Chemistry
and Physics Departments in setting up twelve computer controlled lab experiments
that are representative of first year chemistry and physics lab exercises. Staff
will test the combination of computer access and computer controlled laboratory
technology and develop a resource guide that will permit teachers to learn to
operate these technologies independently. The resource guide will provide
teachers the information they need for modifying existing labs and for operating
computer controlled systems. It will also cover use of computers equipped with
software needed by blind, visually impaired and mobility impaired students. The
project's activities and resulting resource guide should be valuable as well to
the many schools that do not have modern science laboratories. Many teachers are
developing simulations of laboratory experiments to use as supplements to, or
substitutions for, chemistry and physics laboratory experiments. Although
simulations are not a replacement for fully accessible laboratories, they may be
a good alternative in the absence of well-equipped laboratories, and they should
be appropriate for some students with severe disabilities who would not
otherwise be able to participate in laboratory experiments. Project staff will
identify and document existing laboratory simulations and low tech tools and
techniques for making laboratory experiments accessible. Staff will test a
sample of twenty simulation programs with computer access software to be sure
that the simulations are fully usable by students with disabilities. The
resource guide will contain a comprehensive list of these simulations and other
low tech tools and techniques used as laboratory accommodations.