* 9700866
* Combined Research-Curriculum Development:  Indoor Wireless  Project
* CSE,EIA
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2003
* Evaggelos Geraniotis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 03/31/2003
* USD 399,986.00

CDA-9700866 Papamarcou, Adrianos Farvardin, Nariman Geraniotis, Evaggelos
Tassiulas, Leandros Tretter, Steven University of Maryland-College Park Indoor
Wireless Project This project addresses the problem of effectively educating
seniors and beginning graduate students in the fundamentals of wireless
communication technology. The project will provide hands-on learning in the
context of a course title Indoor Wireless Project. The course will be taught by
the team of PI's who are actively engaged in research in wireless communications
and have significant experience in hardware implementation of communication and
digital signal processing systems. The project will carry two credits per
semester and will require a two-semester commitment from participants. It will
be offered in two sections accommodating a total of 24 students, who will be
working in teams of three. Graduate students involved in parallel research
efforts will also participate. The overall goal will be to design, implement and
test an indoor wireless network for two-way voice communication, data transfers
and (eventually) video transmission on an adaptable hardware platform based on
programmable digital signal processor chips. The first-year goal will be to
implement and test a simplex wireless link between two portables, i.e., one
transmitting and the other receiving. For the second year, the goal will be to
implement a working wireless network consisting of a base station and four
portables in a star configuration. For the third year of the effort, the goal
will be to refine the platform to enable simultaneous real-time voice, data and
video transfers among the portables, possibly using different system
implementations. The project will continue evolving after the third year as a
regular course in the electrical engineering curriculum. The Indoor Wireless
Project will generate software and written reports which will be electronically
disseminated to the academic community. It will also result in the creation of a
virtual wireless lab site on the World Wide Web. The effectiveness of the
project will be evaluated in terms of the project's output, the participants'
subjective evaluation and long-term career profiles, and the project's impact on
the academic community at large.