* 9700330
* Process-Oriented Basis Representations for Multivariate     Process Diagnosis and Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Russell Barton, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 04/30/2001
* USD 164,921.00

9700330 Barton Advances in the sophistication of sensoring devices have led to
production systems that simultaneously monitor many product quality
characteristics. The availability of these data provide a great opportunity for
process monitoring and control. This research, a collaboration between the
Pennsylvania State University and the University of Puerto Rico, investigates
ways to link patterns in multivariate quality data with patterns associated with
certain kinds of production problems or process parameters. The researchers will
develop new statistical process control tools to assist quality engineers in
directly diagnosing the likely causes of production irregularities. Their
methodology uses a process-oriented basis approach, whereby quality measurement
vectors are correlated with hypothesized problems in the manufacturing process.
For a given measurement vector, the methodology will identify a small set of
potential causes, i.e. those basis elements with large coefficients. Process
engineers can then select appropriate control actions in either a manual or
automated fashion. All manufacturing industries recognize that quality
monitoring and control are critical elements in enabling fast and efficient
production. As production processes become more sophisticated, it becomes
increasingly important not only to monitor product quality, but also to quickly
and accurately adjust process parameters when quality metrics degrade. This
research addresses fundamental statistical problems in multivariate quality
control and process rectification, and as such is expected to have considerable
impact on the ability of engineers to accurately diagnose production problems
caused by process variables. The investigators will work closely with three
manufacturers of electronic components and/or systems in the conduct of this
research, thus ensuring that the research is relevant to industry needs.