* 9700218
* MOTI:  Innovation and the Transformation of Clean           Technologies:  A Life-Cycle Approach to the Management of   Gas Turbine Systems
* ENG,IIP
* 07/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Mark Sharfman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Donald Senich
* 09/30/2001
* USD 432,886.00

9700218 Meo This investigation will test the effectiveness of a modified total
physical system, total life-cycle assessment (LCA) framework as a guide to the
management of technological innovation of environmentally clean systems through
a two-phase study. The first phase consists of a retrospective analysis of a
series of commercially successful gas turbine technologies and the management
strategies that guided their development and application in different markets
and system configurations. In cooperation with the General Electric Company
(GE), the investigators will construct a set of retrospective tracks that
document key developments leading to GE's efficient combined-cycle gas turbine
and its systems. It is hypothesized that the environmental benefits that accrue
from innovations in the design, manufacturing, and deployment processes can be
adequately accounted for by a series of individual tracks. The research on units
upstream and downstream of the focal combination in any system is extremely
important because any configurations that are especially environmentally
unclean, costly to erect and/or operate, or profligate in energy consumption can
markedly degrade the attractiveness of the focal units. Transferability of the
technologies, including GE's gas turbines and the fuel supply elements developed
both privately and with government-sponsored research, represents a tremendous
opportunity for generating power and mitigating environmental impacts in
developed and less developed countries (LDCs). In the second phase, the
researchers will critically examine typical systems to identify core innovations
and resulting configurations with respect to potential use by LDCS. The studies
will be carried out with GE and based on studies currently underway such as
those at the Battelle Columbus Laboratory, the Institute of Gas Technology, and
the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. These research findings will improve
the understanding and application of an LCA framework to guide improve ments in
environmentally friendly technology management, public and private sector
R&amp;D partnerships, and the development of innovative clean technology
configurations applicable to a broad number of other industries.