* 9700419
* Theory of Chemical Reactions in Solution, in Clusters, and  at Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1997,08/31/2001
* James Hynes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 08/31/2001
* USD 329,100.00

James Hynes of the Chemistry Department of the University of Colorado is funded
by the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division to study the kinetic
theory of prototype reactions in solutions, small clusters and at surfaces.
Quantitative predictions and qualitative interpretations will be provided for
experiments. The calculations will be carried out using quantum electronic
structure methods, molecular dynamics, analytic theories and models. The
solution phase research will focus in two areas: (1) Excited photon transfer
reactions (ESPT) in which acidity is dramatically increased by photoexcitation.
(2) Reaction dynamics in electrolytes. The dynamics of prototype unimolecular
SN1 ionization reaction of tertiary butyl chloride in salt solutions will be
studied. Furthermore, heterogeneous surface chemical reactions responsible for
the depletion of the ozone in the upper atmosphere will be investigated. By far
the majority of reactions which are of interest to chemists take place in the
solution phase, and the most important solvent is water. The effect which the
presence of aqueous solvent has on a chemical reaction is still not fully
understood. Hynes is applying a combination of theory and computer simulations
to determine the molecular nature of solvent-solute interactions and their
effect on the rates of chemical reactions in solution. He is also applying these
theoretical methods to studies of important environmental problems such as acid
rain and ozone depletion.