* 9700170
* A Diffusing Wave Spectrometer for Studying Complex Fluids   in their Quiescent State
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Thomas Mason, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/1998
* USD 45,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY Complex fluids, which are solutions containing surfactants,
polymers, colloids or a combination of these components, are ubiquitous
throughout the chemical and materials processing and biotechnology industries.
These fluids often display unusual dynamical properties, typically probed by
mechanical rheometry. However, since the shearing forces induced by a mechanical
rheometer can lead to gross structural changes, techniques are lacking to probe
biologically and industrially relevant complex fluids in their quiescent state.
Optical techniques offer a noninvasite, accurate approach to fill this void. The
objective is to construct a diffusing wave spectrometer (DWS) for performing
these quiescent measurements. The experiments will focus on five model systems
in the initial studies to be conducted with this instrumentation. These systems
include: (1) wormlike surfactant micelles or 'living' polymers with an eye
towards investigating their high frequency dynamical properties; (2) polymer
gels and (3) solutions with the goal of establishing a means of determining the
relaxation time spectrum and the effective mesh size, each of which have great
implications for separations applications (i.e. electrophoresis); (4) colloidal
dispersions, especially the onset of glassy behavior, and (5) actin filament
networks where our interest lies toward determining the validity of mechanical
rheometry measurements of such systems and whether our optical technique is
capable of resolving biologically important dynamical processes which may also
occur in vivo.