* 9700732
* Combined Research-Curriculum Development Program            VESL: Visions for Embedded Systems Laboratories
* CSE,EIA
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Diane Rover, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 05/31/2002
* USD 406,657.00

CDA-9700732 Mutka, Matt W. Rover, T. Diane Wey ,Chin-Long Cheng, Betty Michigan
State Combined Research-Curriculum Development Program (CRCD) VESL: Visions for
Embedded Systems Laboratories The VESL (Vision for Embedded Systems
Laboratories) project addresses three needs in undergraduate computer
engineering education: (1) providing students with hands-on, real-world
experiences in embedded computer system development in an active, collaborative
learning environment; (2) increasing accessibility of specialized laboratories
to students to allow different learning paces and approaches and to support
different contexts and types of interaction; and (3) sharing costly laboratory
resources with other universities. The focus for the curriculum development is
embedded computing systems. Research results in real-time computing, software
engineering, and wireless systems, including such topics as ubiquitous
computing, scheduling, monitoring and debugging, codesign, testing, and software
prototyping, will be transferred to the instructional domain. Instructional
modules will be developed according to the "Open You I's" paradigm, which views
learning as a process of Introduction, Instruction, Illustration, Investigation,
and Implementation. Laboratory development will impact introductory courses
through senior design project courses via an array of laboratory experiences,
including a radio-controlled cars project and industry-sponsored projects.
Realistic design experiences will provide students with greater insight about
the functionality, reliability, and other properties of an embedded system.