* 9700764
* Dissertation Research: Systematics, Cladistics, and         Biogeography of the Genera of the Abariform Generic Complex (Coleoptera: Carabidae, Pterostichini)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* James Liebherr, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 06/30/1999
* USD 7,175.00

9700764 LIEBHERR Ground beetles, those classified in the family Carabidae and
tribe Pterostichini, often are large and may have unusual shapes and striking
colors. Moreover, these beetles are often very abundant, and as generalized
predators constitute essential regulatory components of ecosystems in which they
are found. Numerous general principles of phylogenetic history, ecology and
animal behavior have been developed from studies of these beetles. A group of
ground beetles, classified in a set of four genera known as the abariform
generic complex and most commonly found in Central and South America, share a
combination of features (metallic color, pectinate claws, large eyes) that is
unique within the tribe. These features suggest that the abariform beetles are
diurnal, visually oriented predators, a mode of life, not often found in the
Pterostichini, that may have a different history from that of diurnal beetles
belonging to other groups. In this research, James Liebherr and doctoral
candidate Kipling Will are to conduct a taxonomic revision and phylogenetic
analysis of species in the abariform generic complex. Characters from adult and
larval morphology will be analyzed; morphological characters of the female
reproductive tract and larvae will be investigated for the first time for these
taxa. The resulting hypotheses of relationship will be utilized to develop
classifications, to determine whether diurnality has appeared in one lineage of
these beetles or in more than one, and to test historical biogeographic
hypotheses that try to explain the distribution of these beetles in Central and
South America. Broader investigations of exemplars from the tribe Pterostichini
will focus on defining the limits of the tribe, generic relationships within the
tribe, and testing biogeographic patterns at the continental level.