* 9700794
* High-Performance Digital Electronics Using Superconducting  Integrated Circut Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Mark Bocko, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 07/31/2001
* USD 375,056.00

EEC-9700794 ABSTRACT This award provides funding to the University of Rochester
under the direction of Dr. Marc J. Feldman, for the support of a Combined
Research-Curriculum Development project entitled, "High-Performance Digital
Electronics Using Superconducting Integrated Circuitry Technology." This project
is aimed toward students who seek careers in both the superconductor and
semiconductor integrated circuitry industry. The superconducting electronics
"industry" is still quite small, limited to specialized niche applications,
however superconducting electronics provides an ideal training ground for
engineers preparing to join the forefront of semiconductor electronic and
integrated circuitry technology; the design principles and testing methodology
employed in superconducting circuitry development will clearly have a growing
importance to semiconductor technology as current trends toward faster and lower
power semiconductor circuits continue. A two-semester lecture/laboratory course
will be developed for Senior undergraduate and beginning graduate students.
Superconducting digital electronics is presently practiced at a modest level of
integration, thousands of active elements, so that students may manage the
entire development and testing of a superconducting integrated circuit with
state-of-the-art performance.