* 9700797
* MOTI:  Innovation under Technological Confluence Managing   the Converging Flows of Technological Tributaries
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Sandeep Bhatt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Donald Senich
* 06/30/2001
* USD 303,372.00

9700797 George A clear understanding of the processes of innovation is an
imperative precondition for improving performance in technology-intensive
environments. The ability of researchers to analyze these processes, and
practitioners to manage them, has been steadily improving over the last few
decades. The confluence of multiple technologies in a single product stream and
consequent cross-organizational locus of innovation is acknowledged as important
in managing the processes of innovation. Such technological confluence occurs,
albeit at differing intensities, in all technology-intensive fields. The
objectives of this study are: the development of measurements for representing
technological confluence, and related coordinational, informational and
synergistic interactions within and across organizations; the adoption of
available network visualization techniques for innovation studies; the
development of structural parameters using a combination of algorithms for
directed graphs and general heuristics, and the testing the usefulness of the
visualization and structural parameters and the validity of the analytic
approach using the data collected at a research site with the managers at the
site. The practice of management of technological innovation is expected to be
significantly enhanced by the use of technology confluence diagrams.
Visualizations of interdependencies of associated processes, and parameters that
characterize their structures will be of additional help in influencing these
processes to one's advantage. Use of methods based on directional networks and
new techniques in visualization adapted to the processes of innovation will
generate a new class of literature bringing with it new insights. The linking of
overall technological confluence to internal processes of the firm will
encourage new trajectories in research that would bring together works of
scholars who have examined separately issues internal and external to the firm.
These new methodological approaches an d its insights "ill be taken into the
educational process where instruction related to innovation and social network
analysis will include these concepts.