* 9700860
* CAREER:  Electrohydrostatics, Electrohydrodynamics and      Microstructural Evolution During Electrodispersion          Precipitation
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2002
* Sandra Greer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2002
* USD 417,808.00

9700860 Harris The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development project is
to study the fundamentals of electrohydrodynamics and mass transfer with
chemical precipitation that occur in electro dispersion precipitation processes.
This proposal addresses the physical, chemical and engineering issues that
govern electro atomization in liquid-liquid systems and the formation of solid
particles from microdroplets. The drawback to improving electrodispersion
precipitation processes in liquid-liquid systems is the lack of a fundamental
understanding about the electrohydrodynamics of the atomization process and the
mass transfer with chemical precipitation that occurs in the dispersed phase. A
tremendous amount of literature has been generated on the electroatomization of
pendant and sessile drops in liquid-air systems. However, very little research
has been done to understand the effect of static and pulsed electric fields on
conducting pendant/sessile drops and liquid streams emanating from a nozzle and
immersed in a low dielectric constant liquid. Specific questions include the
effect of static and pulsed electric fields on pendant drops and the conditions
under which shells form rather than microspheres. Additionally, this research
project will be integrated into a series of graduate- and undergraduate-level
courses that the PI is developing on the "Science and Engineering of Colloidal
Systems." The courses will discuss the fundamentals of hydrosol and organosol
synthesis, surface science and engineering, and the effect of electric fields on
colloidal systems and surfaces. The PI also will spend at least two weeks per
year during the summer conducting science and engineering camps to encourage
junior high and high school minority students to pursue degrees in science and
engineering. %%% This work will have a significant impact on increasing the
throughput of all liquid-liquid electroatomization processes and on the
production of microparticles with co ntrolled morphologies, size, and
composition. Improvement of this technology will lower the cost of ceramic
starting powders for high technology applications. ***