* 9700718
* Dissertation Research: Chemical Signals on Leaf Surfaces: Keys to Recognition by Ovipositing Insects
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Paul Feeny, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 05/31/2000
* USD 10,000.00

Feeny 9700718 Ovipositing insects generally make final host-selection decisions
on the basis of compounds present on the leaf surface. Little is known about the
chemistry of leaf surfaces and how variation in surface-chemical profiles is
related to host selection by insects. The goal of this project is to examine the
leaf-surface chemistry of a single plant species (Daucus carota) with particular
reference to compounds already identified as oviposition stimulants for one of
its specialist insect herbivores (Papilio polyxenes). Plant surfaces will be
extracted with a combination of chloroform and near-boiling water, and the
resulting extracts fractionated and analyzed using high performance liquid
chromatography. The project will include: (1) comparisons of the surface-
chemical profiles of leaves differing in age, form, life history and genotype;
(2) comparisons of the surface-chemical profiles of plants differing in
acceptability as oviposition substrates; and (3) comparisons of larval
performance on plant genotypes differing in oviposition acceptability. These
experiments should determine the extent to which leaf-surface chemical variation
is correlated with oviposition preferences of an insect species and subsequent
larval performance. This research will reveal whether chemical signals on leaf
surfaces can serve as keys for recognition of quality host sites by ovipositing
female butterflies.