* 9700737
* Dissertation Research: Invasion of Non-Indigenous Grasses   into a Hawaiian Dry Woodland and the Ecosystem Consequences of Changes in Community Structure
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Carla D'Antonio, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 04/30/1999
* USD 6,360.00

9700737 D'Antonio This proposal examines the links between biological invasions,
changes in community composition, and alteration of ecosystem processes that
contribute to changes in the global nitrogen (N) cycle. The objectives of the
proposed research are to define mechanisms by which non-indigenous grasses in
Hawaiian seasonal submontane woodlands have altered ecosystem N cycling and how
these changes affect N availability to plant growth and ecosystem N
accumulation. The hypothesis that insertion of grasses increases rates of N
cycling and decreases rates of loss will be tested by comparing N dynamics among
unburned woodland with grasses removed, unburned woodland with grasses, and
burned sites that are grass dominated. Measurements of mineral nitrification,
soil trace gas emissions, plant production, and ecosystem N partitioning using
an 15N tracer will be made. This research provides a unique link between
community and ecosystem processes by addressing the role that a new growth form
plays in ecosystem N dynamics. This research will differentiate mechanisms
through which grasses effect N dynamics, and it will simultaneously compare the
physical, chemical, and competitive effects of a growth form on nutrient
dynamics. This research also addresses feedbacks between growth form of invading
species and local rates of resource supply that may influence competitive
interactions and ultimately, the success of the invaders.