* 9700360
* Theoretical Stereochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Kurt Mislow, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 05/31/2001
* USD 327,000.00

The Organic Dynamics Program supports Professor Kurt Mislow at Princeton
University for his studies of theoretical stereochemistry. Professor Mislow
addresses a number of basic questions in stereochemistry by use of both non-
numerical and computational methods, with special emphasis on topological
aspects. An algorithm will be developed to implement a measure of topological
chirality which is based on the least number of cut-and-paste operations that
relate a chiral construct to the nearest achiral one. The Protein Data Bank will
be explored, specifically to correlate biological function with a sense of
topological chirality of non-heme iron-sulfur proteins, and, more generally, to
search for the presence of additional knots and links in protein structures. The
existence of flype groups, related by operations which transform one knot or
link projection into another, will be assayed. In conjunction with a study of
the rotatory power of knots as a function of conformation, the relative
stabilities of knotted hydrocarbon chains will be computed in order to determine
their dependence on chain size and number of crossings. Professor Kurt Mislow's
studies in the Department of Chemistry at Princeton University address the
often-intriguing issues presented by molecules displaying unusual three-
dimensional structures resulting from the way in which the component atoms
making up the molecules are interconnected. Molecules displaying the property of
chirality, whereby mirror image forms of a molecule are not identical but rather
are related as a right hand is to a left, are analyzed, providing a quantitative
measure of chirality. Still more unusual molecular topologies, including
molecules containing knotted or inter-linked chains, are also studied. Far from
esoteric, these studies bear direct relevance to biological molecules such as
proteins and nucleic acids, structural analysis of which has revealed the
possibility of naturally-occurring knotted and linked structures. In addition to
providing insights into these biological systems, theoretical analyses of non-
trivial molecular topologies will prompt the preparative chemical community to
prepare real molecules displaying these unusual topologies.