* 9700482
* Spectroscopy of Coulomb Interactions in Disordered          Electronic Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Mark Lee, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2001
* USD 255,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9700482 Lee This experimental research project
focuses on elucidating Coulomb interaction effects in disordered electronic
solids. The project will concentrate on doped silicon, but will include work on
quasicrystals and perovskites. Three complementary spectroscopies will be used.
First, previous work on electron tunneling measurements of the single-particle
density of states will be extended down to 0.1K and to more insulating
materials, where observation of strong interaction effects such as multiple-
electron excitations and spin correlations will be possible. Second, noise
spectroscopy will be pursued to characterize the random charge fluctuations in
disordered solids.. Third, the finite frequency electrical conductivity will be
measured through the microwave regime (0.05 to 20 GHz) in order to probe the
transport density of states. This frequency range is of particular interest
because some existing DC conductivity results suggest the presence of a
correlation gap of width 8 to 12 GHz. %%% This experimental research project
uses three complementary techniques to study the effects of the Coulomb forces
between electrons, and between electrons and charged impurities, on the
conduction behavior of disordered electronic conductors, with some emphasis on
the important semiconductor silicon. Electrical conduction in silicon results in
part from dopant atoms which contribute a free carrier, and in this process the
impurity site also becomes charged. The random distribution of the charged
impurity sites alters the motion of the free carriers in ways that are of
interest in this study. Experimental techniques include electron tunneling
spectroscopy, electrical noise measurement, and finite frequency conductivity
measurements. Results from this research may include unusual new effects or m
aterials which may find new application in technology. This research project is
interdisciplinary in nature and involves both graduate and undergraduate
students who will be excellently trained to enter positions in industry,
government or education. ***