* 9700716
* Inelastic Light Scattering Studies of Kondo Insulators and  Other Low Carrier Density Kondo Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,07/31/2001
* S. Lance Cooper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 180,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9700716 Cooper This experimental research project
focuses on inelastic light (Raman and Brillouin) scattering studies of the
electronic, magnetic, and vibrational excitations of Kondo insulators and
related low carrier density Kondo systems. The symmetry, anisotropy, and
temperature dependencies of spin and charge excitations will be studied to
elucidate the unconventional ground and low-lying excited states of Kondo
insulators. Studies of the magnetic field and pressure dependencies of the
charge and spin excitations will be performed. Finally, studies of the phonon
anomalies in Kondo insulators will be carried out to clarify the nature of the
strong interaction between charge and phonon degrees of freedom. %%% This
research project involves experimental light scattering measurements from "Kondo
insulators", a poorly understood class of insulators containing rare earth and
actinide elements. These compounds display unusual magnetic and electrical
properties, believed to be due to the interaction between tightly bound
electrons on the heavy rare earth or actinide elements, and the outer shell
electrons from the lighter elements. It is desirable to carefully measure the
novel behavior, and, ultimately, to extend the theory of crystalline solids to
cover these cases. If this is done the theory can be more confidently applied to
the wider range of solids which includes semiconductors, metals and others,
which find wide application in technology. Results from this research may
include unusual new effects or materials which may find new application in
technology. This research project is interdisciplinary in nature and involves
both graduate and postgraduate students who will be excellently trained to enter
positions in industry, government or education. ***