* 9700906
* Dissertation Research: Forest Regeneration in Agricultural  Windbreaks: Effects of Connectivity and Remnant Trees
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Todd Dawson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 12/31/1998
* USD 7,339.00

9700906 Dawson The goal of this research is to characterize the dynamics of
windbreak colonization by tropical forest trees and to examine how the
positioning of windbreaks within the landscape influences the colonization
process. In particular, the effects of windbreak connectivity and remnant trees
within the windbreaks will be evaluated. Preliminary research indicates that
windbreak connectivity and remnant trees increase the abundance and richness of
forest trees in windbreaks. It is hypothesized that these factors enhance forest
regeneration by increasing seed dispersal into the windbreaks. To understand the
dynamics of forest regeneration, a combination of vegetation surveys, seed
trapping, soil seed bank studies, and seed predation trials will be conducted in
windbreaks and pastures in Monteverde, Costa Rica. The seed rain entering
different windbreak types (connected, non-connected, and with remnant trees) and
pastures will be characterized for a one-year period using seed traps. The soil
seed banks of windbreaks and pastures will be assessed using the seedling
emergence technique. Seed predation in windbreaks and pastures will be evaluated
through seed removal experiments. This research will enhance our understanding
of the dynamics of forest regeneration in agroecosystems and also provide useful
information for reforestation and conservation programs in the tropics.