* 9700623
* Topological Minors of Graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Guoli Ding, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 06/30/2000
* USD 51,912.00

Ding 9700623 This award provides funds for an investigation of three
fundamental problems involving topological minors. The first problem is
Robertson's double-path conjecture, which states that if a class G of graphs is
closed under topological minors and is free of arbitrarily long double-paths,
then G does not contain infinite antichains with respect t o the topological-
minor relation. This is a fundamental conjecture in graph theory. It relates
structural graph theory, combinatorial optimization, and classical
combinatorics. The PI has made significant progress towards solving this
conjecture, which includes, but is not limited to, proving the conjecture for
all minor-closed classes of graphs and for the class of graphs of cutwidth at
most three. He hopes that his past experience on this problem together with some
of his new ideas will help him to settle this conjecture completely. The second
problem is the edge version of Hajos' conjecture. Recently, the PI has
established the edge version of Hadwiger's conjecture by identifying all minor-
minimal graphs with chromatic index greater than n. Now he proposes to study
topological-minor-minimal graphs with chromatic index greater than n. This is
exactly the edge version of Hajos' conjecture, which claims that K_n is the only
topological-minor-minimal graph with chromatic number greater than n. This
problem relates not only to Hajos' conjecture and Hadwiger's conjecture, but
also to Vizing's planar graph conjecture and several well-known results in this
field. The third problem concerns unavoidable graphs of large crossing number.
Crossing number is a typical graph parameter that is monotone with respect to
the topological-minor relation but not with respect to the minor relation. A
natural problem concerning this parameter is to understand what makes the
crossing number big. One obvious cause is a high genus for the graph. There are
also other causes. For example, for some large n, the containment of a
topological minor D_ n can make the crossing number large. The PI proposes to
characterize the complete list of unavoidable graphs of large crossing number.
This research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely
important to modern communications. For example, the design of large networks,
such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in
computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of
combinatorial research.