* 9700626
* Dynamics and Predictability of Mesoscale Rainband in Lee    Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Steven Koch, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/2001
* USD 485,325.00

9700626 Koch Progress in forecasting of precipitation and severe weather
associated with mid-latitude cyclones has been slow, compared to advances in
understanding and ability to forecast the synoptic-scale aspects of cyclones. A
major reason for this has been the lack of data with sufficient spatial and
temporal resolution to resolve mesoscale processes associated with precipitation
bands. One of the mesoscale phenomena that has been suggested to play an
important role in the formation and modulation of precipitation bands is
mesoscale gravity waves. Gravity waves present a real challenge to weather
forecasters, because they have been nearly impossible to detect with standard
synoptic observations and are not routinely predicted by operational models. The
major observational and modeling improvements being brought about by the
National Weather Service Modernization now affords the opportunity for the
research and operational meteorological communities to work together to develop
improved understanding of these mesoscale phenomena. Additional research is
needed on wave dynamics and generation mechanisms, and to differentiate them
from the presence of other mesoscale phenomena, notably cold fronts aloft A
definitive identification of gravity wave generation mechanisms and vertical
structure, their interactions with convection, and their role in the
cyclogenesis process remains elusive. One cause for this confusion is that the
evidence often suggests more than one mechanism may be operative. Recent
research by the Principal Investigator has focused on understanding the forcing,
dynamics, and vertical structure of weather-producing mesoscale gravity waves
using primarily surface, wind profiler, and mesoscale model data obtained during
the STORM-FEST project. The Principal Investigator has found there to be a
predilection for strong waves to be generated in regions of dynamic imbalance
during lee cyclogenesis as a jet streak encounters the Rocky Mountai ns.
However, in at least one of these cases, the evidence also suggests that a cold
front aloft occurred in close proximity to the waves. The research to be
performed under this award represents both a continuation of the Principal
Investigator s past efforts and an extension into new but related directions.
The ultimate goal is to incorporate observed precipitation band structure and
dynamics into a new conceptual model for lee cyclones in the central U. S. The
first objective is to resolve the role of cold fronts aloft versus gravity
waves, or perhaps their interactions, in the generation of rainbands. Secondly,
the research will help to remove ambiguities concerning the role of unbalanced
dynamics in gravity wave formation. The third objective, will be to address the
issue of mesoscale predictability, in terms of what data and data assimilation
techniques are required for mesoscale models to reliably produce observed
gravity waves. Lastly, the Principal Investigator will complete an ongoing
investigation of solitary waves and bores generated by cold fronts. Results from
this research potentially will have direct and immediate impact on the ability
to predict mesoscale gravity waves. ***