* 9700047
* Playtime is Science for Children with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Barbara Sprung, Educational Equity Concepts Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence A. Scadden
* 03/31/2000
* USD 264,541.00

P. I.: Merle Froschl This project is building on and expanding Playtime is
Science, EEC's early childhood, hands-on, parent/child science activity program,
providing a major focus on the needs and capabilities of children with
disabilities. Playtime is Science has been piloted in schools and community-
based settings at four national sites with funding from the NSF, the Toyota USA
Foundation, and the Dewitt Wallace-Readers Digest Fund. During this national
pilot, Playtime is Science was found to be effective for children with
disabilities. The sample, however, was small and further development is needed
to adapt the program successfully in a variety of settings, to test the
activities with children with a wider range of disabilities, and to create
disability awareness training to address attitudinal barriers. The goals of
Playtime is Science for Children with Disabilities are (1) to increase the
ability of teachers, staff and parents to motivate and empower children with
disabilities in grades Pre-K through the third grade to develop their science
skills in a supportive environment; (2) to help children with disabilities build
on their strengths and develop confidence and skill in science which will
persist beyond school, and will inform later career options; and (3) to provide
opportunities for parents of these students to become involved in their
children's early science learning and to convey positive messages and
expectations to their children about science. Specific objectives are: (1) to
pilot test and adapt the activities in inclusive and special education settings;
(2) to build science skills based on the problem-solving abilities already
developed by many children with disabilities; (3) to conduce training in program
facilitation for teacher, staff and parents; (4) to develop, field test, and
publish a Facilitator's Guide which will enable Playtime is Science for Children
with Disabilities to be used in schools and after-school programs throughout the
country; (5) to in stitutionalize the program in participating sites; (6) to
disseminate project results and materials through training, conferences,
networks, and publications; and (6) to conduct ongoing evaluation. EEC will work
with teachers, staff, parents and children in three different types of setting
in New York City: (1) four early elementary public school classrooms inclusive
of children with and without disabilities; (2) three early childhood programs,
including an inclusive Head Start center, a special education program serving
children with a range of disabilities, and a child development center serving
pre-school children with visual impairments; and (3) a large, inclusive after-
school program. By fostering positive science experiences, and by increasing
parent and staff expertise in enthusiasm for and encouragement of science
activities, this project will enable children with disabilities to gain
confidence and skills which will help them succeed in science. By acknowledging
and building upon the individual strengths of children with disabilities, it
will create an inclusive environment that says "science is for everyone".