* 9700059
* GOALI/IUCP:  Concurrent Optimization-Based Design of        Multi-Component Systems with Multiple Views
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Shapour Azarm, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/2000
* USD 260,251.00

This project is for the development of a decision support tool for concurrent
design of multi-component systems, such as power tools, that are subject to
multiple views, such as design, manufacturing, and marketing considerations. The
developed numerical tool will determine design attributes of a product system
such that, given the product market demand, the highest possible utility of the
design is achieved. The utility of the product design at the system's level will
be modeled by a single utility (or objective) function. This function will be
formulated to meet the goals of a business. The objective function at the
systems level will be a function of the objectives at the subsystems (or
components) level. The objective functions at the subsystems level will be
formulated based on performance, quality, and cost metrics. Appropriate
constraints will be imposed. The model will allow interactions and tradeoff
explorations by a top-level decision maker, at the system-level, and by decision
makers at the subsystems level. An application of the model to the design of a
power tool will be demonstrated in order to obtain a compromise collaborative
design solution. If successful, the results of this research will lead to
increased level of concurrency in the engineering design process, reduce product
design development time, reduce cost, and as a result make the US industry more
competitive in the global marketplace.