* 9700887
* Dissertation Research:Phenotypic Selection on the Timing of Life History Events in Psilocorsis quercicella (Lepidoptera: Oecophoridae) Resulting from Multi-Trophic Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Robert Marquis, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 05/31/1999
* USD 7,996.00

9700887 Marquis The PIs' research will explore how two forces, food quality and
parasite attack, act as selective forces influencing the pattern of variation in
development time in a population of oak-feeding caterpillars. As such, this
study contributes to a basic goal of population biology, elucidating the
ecological and selective forces that shape patterns of variation within
populations of organisms. The PIs' research is important because few studies
have examined how multiple forces interact to produce such patterns in natural
population. Within our study population, caterpillars vary considerable in when
they begin feeding and how long it takes them to complete development.
Caterpillars that feed on low quality leaves may take longer to complete
development, increasing their risk of being attacked by their natural enemies,
parasitic wasps whose offspring feed on the body of the caterpillar, eventually
killing it. Additionally, a caterpillar's risk of being attacked depends on the
time during the season during which it develops. By manipulating these two
factors (the timing of feeding and the quality of leaves caterpillars feed on),
the relationship between each of these factors and the rate of parasitism will
be determined. The results of this study will contribute to our understanding of
how ecological forces interact to influence timing in the life cycle of insect
herbivores. By documenting the consequences associated with feeding at different
times or for different durations, this study will provide important evidence
regarding the relative importance of plant quality and parasitism as two
biological forces impacting natural herbivore populations. In particular, this
study will be one of the first to demonstrate that parasitic wasps represent an
important selective force influencing the timing of life cycle events of
caterpillar populations. Additionally, since these parasitic wasps represent an
important selective force for economically important pests, this study will pr
ovide data relevant to the success of long-term biological control programs.
Such programs have been developed to control outbreaks of economically important
pest insects which feed on agricultural products. In contrast to the relatively
simple agricultural systems, natural systems are highly complex, often involving
multiple parasite species attacking a single herbivore resulting in a decreased
likelihood of outbreak. Understanding how natural populations of herbivores are
effectively regulated by their parasites is thus critical to control efforts in
highly managed agricultural ecosystems.