* 9700995
* Dissertation Research: Global Biogeography and              Migration in Pipits (Aves: Genus Anthus)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Scott Edwards, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 06/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9700995 Edwards This award will provide funds for materials and supplies to
enhance the dissertation research of Mr. Gary Voelker, a doctoral student at the
University of Washington who is working under the supervision of Dr. Scott
Edwards. Ms. Voelker's dissertation research involves acquisition of
mitochondrial DNA sequences from 40 species of the avian genus Anthus in order
to generate a well-resolved phylogenetic hypotheses among species of the genus.
Species of this genus are distributed world-wide, providing Mr. Voelker and Dr.
Edwards an unprecedented opportunity to investigate the relative roles of
dispersal and vicariance on a global scale. Those roles are the subject of
intensive debate, and the work proposed in this study represent one of the few
situations where the effects of dispersal can be adequately assessed. The
research also will permit rigorous testing of two long-standing and competing
hypotheses concerning the evolution of migration in avian groups, and in
addition, provide the first phylogenetically-controlled study that will examine
the evolution of morphology in relation to migratory behavior. Consequently,
results from the work will be of general interest across taxonomic and
organismal groups. Support for training of graduate students in modern
technologies is critical to maintain the workforce of scientists capable of
addressing questions and issues in global biology.