* 9700585
* Applications of Probability to Problems in Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Rodrigo Banuelos, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/2001
* USD 204,232.00

Banuelos 9700585 The Principle Investigator will investigate several concrete
open problems in different areas of analysis where probabilistic ideas and
techniques have already had considerable success and where he believes further
progress is possible. These include 1) applications of martingale inequalities
to investigate the operator norm of the Beurling- Ahlfors operators in two and
several dimensions, 2) the use of Brownian motions to investigate sharp bounds
for the fundamental frequency and fundamental gap of the Laplacian in Euclidean
domains, and 3) the use of asymptotic expansions for Wiener functionals to
investigate the asymptotic expansion in the trace of Schrodinger operators and
how the signs of the coefficients in such expansion depend on the sign of the
potential. Probability Theory has its roots in various fields of applied
sciences and hence it should not be surprising that modern stochastic analysis
draws many of its technical tools from several distinct areas of mathematics.
What is often far from obvious is that probabilistic ideas and techniques can be
effectively used to investigate problems and applications which on the surface
do not seem to be related to probability at all. The problems discussed above
fall in this category. The Beurling-Ahlfors operators are (singular) integral
operators which describe regularity (smoothness) properties of solutions to
various nonlinear equations arising from, among other topics, elasticity. The
computation of their operator norms is a fundamental problem with many
applications. On the surface this operator appears to be very far from
probability. The Principal Investigator, in collaboration with G. Wang and A. J.
Lindeman, has successfully used the theory of martingales (fair games) to study
this problem. The first part of the project describes various new probabilistic
approaches for further work in this direction. Bounds on the fundamental
frequency and fundament al gap of the Laplacian operator are basic quantities in
the theory of vibrating membranes. The trace of Schrodinger operators plays a
fundamental role in various problems in mathematical physics related to, among
other things, scattering theory. Here, too, the connection to probability is not
transparent. In the second part of the project the PI proposes to use the theory
of Brownian motion and stochastic calculus to investigate several open problems
in this areas. It is expected that these investigations will lead, as it has
happened many times in the past, to new and surprising applications of
probability to analysis, geometry, partial differential equations, and the
application of these subjects to mathematical physics. Several students will
most likely participate in these investigations.