* 9700765
* Representation of Infinite Dimensional Lie Algebras and     Algebraic Structures of Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Igor Frenkel, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph P. Brennan
* 06/30/2000
* USD 274,293.00

FRENKEL, 97-00765 Igor Frenkel plans to continue his work on representation
theory of affine Lie algebras, and related algebraic structures such as vertex
operator algebras and quantum groups. The author proposes several specific
problems that should contribute to the development of these subjects and to
better understanding of their interrelations. Frenkel also plans to study
representation theory of a new class of Lie algebras and groups, recently
introduced by him and his collaborators. Besides its intrinsic mathematical
significance the new theory has important applications to four-dimensional
quantum field theory in physics. Representation theory of Lie algebras and Lie
groups initially developed at the turn of the century studies the structure of
symmetries and their realizations. This theory encompasses many areas in
mathematics and has fundamental applicaitons to theoretical physics. In the past
twenty years the study of representaiton theory of a special class of affine Lie
algebras and Lie groups led to many new unexpected discoveries in mathematics
and theoretical physics as well as to a synthesis of many established areas in
both disciplines. In particular, it yielded a pure mathe- matical description of
a simplest quantum field theory -- a prototype theory of fundamental
interactions. It is expected that representation theory of new classes of
infinite-dimensional Lie algebras and groups might substantially deepen our
understanding of mathematics and theoretical physics during the next decade.