* 9700674
* Local Atomic Arrangements at Alloy Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Mark Asta, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* K. Linga (KL) Murty
* 04/30/2001
* USD 341,745.00

9700674 Cohen The local atomic arrangements at surfaces of alloys is the major
theme of this research. Of particular interest is how changes in the
environment, such as reconstruction or interplanar spacing normal to the surface
or segregation ,affect phase transitions such as ordering and clustering. Strain
plays an important role in such reactions, and a beam line at Argonne
Laboratory's new Synchrotron (the Advanced Photon Source, or APS) is used
employing an X-ray glancing incidence technique. The X-rays sample a shallow
range of depths producing diffuse scattering that is analyzed in a position-
sensitive detector. From these data short range order parameters and distortions
are obtained. Samples include single crystals of aluminum alloys that are
prepared featuring a few facets with different possible relaxations. After heat
treatment to produce zones, concentration profiles vs. depth are determined and
Auger electron spectroscopy and low energy electron diffraction are used to look
for evidence of surface reconstruction or relaxation. Diffuse scattering is
measured vs. depth, and the surface structures and displacements modeled and
compared to the bulk structure. %%% An understanding of surface structure aids
in analysis of related phenomena, such as corrosion of metal alloys and crack
initiation. ***