* 9700318
* Ultrasound to Decontaminate Dredged Sediments
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2000
* Jay Meegoda, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 04/30/2000
* USD 118,365.00

9700318 With passage of the Ocean Dumping Act and the lack of containment
facilities, the disposal of nearly 7 million tons of dredged sediments per year
become a major problem for the New York/New Jersey metropolitan area. The
dredged sediments in a slurry form need to be dewatered, remediated, and
disposed. The contaminants (heavy metals and organics) in the dredged sediments
are usually attached to the clay and silt fractions. The action of applied
ultrasound techniques, coupled with extraction under partial vacuum, is proposed
in this study to remove contaminants and water from dredged residues. A complete
treatment technology with three different processes is proposed for commercial
implementation/. In this research, two processes involving ultrasound will be
evaluated. In the first process, the fines near the ultrasound probe are
separated from the bulk dredged suspension and are removed using sub-atmospheric
pressure. In the second process, the fines are decontaminated and contaminants
in water are removed using sub-atmospheric pressure. The remediated soil can be
ocean- dumped as clean material or used in construction. The extracted organic
and inorganic waste will be concentrated using membrane technology and disposed
of in hazardous waste landfills. This technology can be easily added directly
into a dredging vessel to minimize material handling. ***