* 9700372
* Development of a High Stiffness/Large Travel Multiple       Degrees of Freedom Magnetic Suspension Actuator
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Chia-Hsiang Menq, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* KAMLAKAR P RAJURKAR
* 06/30/2001
* USD 213,481.00

Crucial to the success of ultra-precision fabrication systems are advancements
in tool actuation technologies that provide large workspace volume of tool
motion at nanometric accuracy with high dynamic stiffness. Recent developments
in the Magnetic Suspension Actuator (MSA) are characterized by narrow gap
operation and low dynamic stiffness. This has resulted in a suspension actuators
that possess either multi-degree-of-freedom actuation with low workspace volume
or large travel in small (one or two) degrees of freedom with low dynamic
stiffness. This research plan is to develop an MSA with six degrees of freedom
with large travel range, high stiffness, high bandwidth, and nanometric
trajectory tracking accuracy. The approach to accomplish this goal consists of
two basic components: (1) development of magnetic actuation technology that uses
a rational basis for the optimal location of the electromagnets based on dynamic
force balance, and (2) development of nonlinear control strategies that utilize
nonlinear model of the electromagnetic field to obtain large travel. The
development of MSA is valuable to motion applications which require dynamic
interactions with the environment. The fine motion control and large travel
properties of the MSA development has the potential of enabling accurate
electrical and mechanical probing of the silicon wafers in semiconductor
manufacturing over large areas at high velocities. High-stiffness, high-
bandwidth properties of the MSA are critically important to ultra precision
metal cutting, non-circular turning, and micromachining where nanometric
tracking accuracy at high bandwidths in face of significant external forces is
required.