* 9700451
* Metallapolyynes: Archetypes for Understanding and           Rationally Designing Conjugated Transition-Metal            Compounds and Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Michael Hopkins, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 03/31/1999
* USD 214,000.00

Dr. Michael D. Hopkins, Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division for the study of conjugated transition metal compounds and
materials. The project aims to answer two questions: (1) How does metal-for-
carbon substitution affect the electronic structures of pi-conjugated organic
compounds? and (2) What implications does this hold for improving the
technological properties of these materials? A series of polyynes in which
carbon atoms are systematically replaced by metal centers will be prepared and
their bonding probed by electronic and vibrational spectroscopy,
electrochemistry, and X-ray crystallography. Initially the study will
concentrate on simple compounds in order to establish fundamental structural and
bonding properties of metal-ligand multiple bonds. Then increasingly complex
compounds, which potentially contain metal atoms within conjugated pi systems,
will be studied in order to assess the nature and extent of a metal atom's
participation in delocalized bonding networks. Variables to be investigated
include the nature of the metal, its ligands and oxidation state, the length of
the polyyne chain, and the number and distribution of metal centers within the
pi network. This work is significant at a fundamental level because the proposed
compounds represent a rare opportunity to examine systems that can be
theoretically described both using models commonly employed for organic and
others that are more appropriate for inorganic systems. The outcome will be
conceptual bridges to link the two ways of considering the electronic structure
of molecules. From a more practical viewpoint, the results will be applicable to
the design of optical and electronic materials. Because of close structural and
electronic relationship between the metallapolyynes prepared in this
investigation and the conjugated organic materials currently used in a number of
applications, the correlations established during this project will allow the
technologically valuable properties of latter to be extended in a rational
fashion to the former. Two specific properties of metallapolyynes that will be
developed are intramolecular electronic coupling and nonlinear optical
responses.