* 9700544
* Dissertation Research:  Anthropogenic Landscapes?  The      Effect of Prehistoric Human Populations on Fire Frequency   and Vegetation on the Northern Columbia Plateau
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1997,09/30/1999
* Donald Grayson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1999
* USD 11,947.00

Under the direction of Dr. Donald Grayson, MS Elizabeth Scharf will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. MS Scharf wishes to determine the effect that
prehistoric Native Americans had on their environment. This is a very strongly
debated topic and the answer is important because it helps to determine the
natural environmental baseline against which human actions should be measured.
Many scientists have argued that the level of prehistoric technology was so low,
that prior to European colonization, vegetation was maintained in an essentially
pristine condition and that the changes which are clearly indicated in the
environmental record were due to climate change or other non-human causes.
Others however have maintained that even without metal implements and large
scale forest clearance, actions by prehistoric Native Americans had a
significant effect, primarily through accidental and purposeful burning. When
present in significant numbers, humans cause fires and these occur more
frequently than those resulting from other actions such as lightning strikes.
The ecological effects of more frequent burning are very different from
situations where such episodes are more widely spaced in time. To examine this
question MS Scharf will collect cores from a series of lake basins in Washington
State. She has chosen a region where extensive archaeological research has been
conducted and changes in prehistoric population densities can be calculated over
time. Through the study of volcanic tephra and radiocarbon determinations,
segments of the cores can be accurately dated. Analysis of oxygen isotope ratios
will provide information on climate change. Pollen and charcoal respectively
will provide the bases for reconstructing vegetation and fire history. Counts of
the spore Sporomiella serve to monitor herbivore density since these relate to
the amount of dung being washed into each basin. Through statistical analysis of
these complementary data bases, the effect of human agency on vegetation can be
addressed. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
information on long term human-environment interaction, an issue of interest to
geographers, paleoecologists and archaeologists. It will also assist in training
a promising young scientist.