* 9701710
* Collective Mode Dynamics in Superfluid 3He
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* David Lee, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9701710 Lee This experimental project is related to
the internal degrees of freedom of Cooper pairs in superfluid 3He, which are
largely resonsible for the fascinating behavior of this liquid including the
occurrence of collective modes. The collective modes observed in ultrasound
experiments are sometimes known as Cooper Pair Vibrations. The experiments in
this project mainly deal with the non-linear excitations of two well
characterized collective modes of 3He B, namely the real squashing mode and the
squashing mode. The studies will take advantage of the fact that the line widths
of these modes become very narrow at low temperatures where the quasi-particle
scattering rates are small. The planned investigations will emphasize saturation
studies and a search for phonon echoes, in analogy to pulsed nuclear magnetic
resonance effects. Pulse time of flight studies with large excitation pulses
will be employed. In addition, a search for soliton behavior and in particular
self induced transparency will be undertaken using similar techniques. Because
of the large coupling between the squashing mode and ultrasound, it is expected
that it will be more advantageous to study the squashing collective mode. In
addition, an experimental approach to find magnetic resonance signals
corresponding to transition between Zeeman sublevels of both the squashing and
real squashing collective modes in magnetic fields. %%%% This experimental
project is devoted to the superfluid behavior present in the liquid formed by
cooling helium atoms of isotope mass three, at low temperatures. Liquid helium
when cooled below 4.2 Kelvin degrees (about -270 Centigrade) becomes a
superfluid, which flows with no viscosity, permitting persistent flow patterns
such as rotating inside a container. The superfluid formed by the isotope o f
helium of mass 3 is even more interesting in its properties, which are the
subject of this experimental project. In liquid helium three the superfluid is
associated with "pairing" of the helium atoms, and the pairs of helium atoms
have a characteristic rotational motion about each other, in contrast to pairing
of electrons in conventional superconductors in which the pairs do not have
"orbital angular momentum". The consequences of this unconventional pairing in
the helium three superfluid include collective modes, known as squashing and
real squashing modes, which are the subject of this research, which will be
carried out in part using nuclear magnetic resonance methods. Liquid helium
three, one of the simplest liquids known, is a testing ground for developing a
thorough understanding of the properties of condensed matter. Even with its
simplicity it offers complex behavior which may, if correctly understood,
provide insight into the behavior of very different materials, including high
temperature superconductors, in which unconventional pairing may also occur in
the superfluid (superconducting) phase. This experimental work is carried out in
part by graduate and postdoctoral students who receive an excellent training in
physics and in other areas also, in the pursuit of the cryogenic measurements
using nuclear magnetic resonance and other sophisticated methods. This is an
excellent preparation for a career in industrial research, government
laboratories or in academia. ****