* 9701007
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny and Character Evolution in the Genus Sphaerocardamum (Brassicaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Jeffrey Doyle, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 06/30/2000
* USD 10,000.00

9701007 Doyle Graduate student Carl Bailey, under the direction of Professor
Jeff Doyle at Cornell University, is studying the mustard-family genus
Sphaerocardamum of Mexico, to improve taxonomic classification of the group,
construct a phylogeny of the eight or so known species, and explore variation in
floral development genes. Additional field collecting in Mexico will augment
materials assembled from the field and herbarium. New molecular data from DNA
sequencing of both nuclear and chloroplast genes will provide evidence for
phylogenetic analyses, and these data can be combined with traditional
morphological characters in delimiting species, assessing hybridization in areas
of sympatry, and studying the historical biogeography of the group. Gene probes
from the Arabidopsis model system, a related plant in the family, will be used
to explore variation in genes affecting floral development and other features
distinguishing related species. The significance of the project includes
contributions to the taxonomy and phylogeny of the Brassicaceae (mustard)
family, evaluation of the reliability and stability of key morphological
characters in the genus Sphaerocardamum and close relatives, the development of
new sources of DNA data for phylogenetic reconstruction, and the exploration of
variation in genes affecting flower development, making use of probes from the
Arabidopsis model system.