* 9701940
* Non-point Sources of Dissolved Organic                      Matter to the Ocean:  Groundwaters from Coastal Soils and   Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2002
* Miguel Goni, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Elthon
* 05/31/2002
* USD 349,998.00

P.I.: Goni Proposal Number: 97-01940 Institution: University of South Carolina
Title: CAREER: Non-point sources of dissolved organic matter to the ocean:
groundwaters from coastal soils and sediments It is well established that rivers
are an important source of dissolved organic matter (DOM) to the coastal ocean.
However, recent studies have shown that groundwater inputs might contribute a
significant amount of terrigenous DOM to the coastal ocean in areas such as the
southeastern U.S. The primary research objective of this proposal is to
understand how the diffused flow of groundwater constituents affects the
dynamics of carbon, nitrogen and other nutrients in coastal environments. The
research efforts are designed to answer three specific questions: 1) What are
the sources and characteristics of groundwater DOM?; 2) What are the seasonal
dynamics of groundwater DOM production and transport? and 3) What are the
impacts of groundwater DOM on the coastal ocean? Another important goal of the
proposal is to link the research objectives outlined above with the education of
students at different stages of their careers. This proposal makes students key
participants of the investigations designed to understand the role of
groundwater in DOM cycling. The vehicles for such participation include new
field summer courses at the Baruch Laboratories in North Inlet (SC) and new
laboratory-based graduate and non-major undergraduate courses.