* 9701797
* Observations of Ice-Ocean Momentum and Heat Fluxes          at the SHEBA Ice-Camp
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Robert Pinkel, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Michael T. Ledbetter
* 05/31/2000
* USD 484,483.00

9701797 Pinkel This research project is a key component of a large, coordinated,
multi-investigator program called SHEBA (Surface Heat Budget of the Arctic)
Ocean. The SHEBA program will simultaneously measure, over an annual cycle, the
various fluxes and properties of the atmosphere, ice pack, and upper ocean that
determine the aggregate mass and energy budgets of Arctic sea ice. Its goal is
improved understanding of how and to what extent, the ice covered Arctic Ocean
affects climate variability in lower latitudes and in global climate models
(GCMs). Towards that goal, two potentially important radiation/climate feedback
processes have been singled out for study: Ice-Albedo Feedback and Cloud-
Radiation Feedback. This proposal addresses an oceanographic component of SHEBA
dealing with ice-albedo feedback mechanisms. Two specially constructed acoustic
Doppler current profilers (ADCP)s will be deployed to investigate the roles of
wind and ocean currents in moving ice from place to place. A Deep Profiling
System consists of a 140 kHz, four beam coded pulse sonar. This will profile to
400 m with 3 m spatial resolution. It will provide an accurate picture of the
Ekman layer, the deep mixed layer, meso and large scale flows. A second, five
beam 560 kHz Flux Sonar deployed from the ice, will provide direct estimates of
the turbulent momentum flux in the under-ice boundary layer. When coupled with
co-located measurements of temperature and salinity, turbulent heat fluxes can
be estimated as well. The intention is to run these two instruments for the full
12-13 month duration of the SHEBA camp. The combined set of measurements in
SHEBA will allow refinement of climate models for the Arctic region. Those
improved models will lead to better predictions of the climate and the
permanence of the Arctic ice cap under a proposed global warming that could
occur if atmospheric carbon dioxide levels are increased above present levels.