* 9701330
* Dissertation Research:  Natural Selection and Genetic       Constraints on the Evolution of Tolerance to Herbivore      Damage in Ipomoea purpurea
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Mark Rausher, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 05/31/1999
* USD 6,650.00

9701330 Rausher The response of plants to herbivory has long been of interest
to biologists. The majority of work in this area has focused on how plants
defend themselves against herbivores - plant "resistance". However, plants may
also tolerate herbivory (i.e. minimize the effect that herbivory has on
productivity). Although plant tolerance to herbivore damage may dramatically
alter how biologists think about plant-herbivore interactions, little is known
about the ecology or genetics of tolerance. We will use field experiments and
quantitative genetics to study the tolerance of the common morning glory,
Ipomoea purpurea, to three types of herbivore damage. Specifically, we will i)
measure genetic variation for tolerance, ii) characterize the genetic
relationship between tolerance and other ecologically important traits,
including resistance, and iii) measure the relationship between tolerance and
plant productivity. The study of plant tolerance to herbivory may have important
implications for agriculture. Herbivores are a major problem in modern
agriculture leading to loss of productivity and requiring large inputs of
expensive and environmentally harmful pesticides. Developing strains of crop
plants that are more tolerant of herbivory may minimize the need to eliminate
herbivore pests and therefore may contribute to more economically and
environmentally sustainable agriculture. This study will provide important
information on the genetics and ecology of tolerance which will be necessary for
evaluating the role that plant tolerance may have in agricultural systems.