* 9701531
* High Risk Exploratory Research:  Late Mousterian Caves at   Almonda, Portugal
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Anthony Marks, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1999
* USD 17,181.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Anthony Marks and his colleagues
will conduct test archaeological excavations in the mouths of collapsed caves at
Almonda, Portugal. These form several of many entrances to an extensive case
system which has been mapped and explored. On the basis of archaeological
materials recovered from surface contexts within the caves themselves it is
likely that the entrances to these systems contained buried cultural deposits of
Middle Paleolithic age. Prehistoric peoples most often lived in the well lighted
and ventilated entrances of caves rather than their interiors. Exploration has
revealed the surface position of several entrances. In a brief field season Dr.
Marks and colleagues will excavate from an exterior cliff face to remove large
blocks of limestone roof-fall as well as sediment which has washed into the
openings to expose in situ deposit. Test excavations will then be conducted to
determine whether they contain Middle Paleolithic industries. This exploratory
work will, if successful, provide the basis for a larger, longer term research
project. Archaeological evidence indicates that approximately 40,000 years ago
Neanderthal peoples who inhabited Western Europe were replaced by anatomically
modern humans. However the process by which they occurred is unclear. Relatively
late in the Neanderthal period changes in material culture foreshadow
adaptations which characterized the succeeding modern humans. Archaeologists do
not know whether these represent borrowings or an independent development. The
question is difficult to resolve because it is likely that ca. 40,000 years ago
the two groups were in potential contact across much of Europe. Portugal is
important because modern humans enter this region relatively late and thus
Neanderthal peoples survived for at least 10,000 years longer here than
elsewhere. Because of this isolation Portugal provides an excellent arena to
examine the issue of Neanderthal adaptation, and what this may reflect about
underlying behavioral abilities. This research is important for several reasons.
It will, if successful, provide data of interest to many archaeologists and shed
new light on the prehistoric human record. It will also set the stage for a more
extensive research project.