* 9701513
* CAREER: Research and Education in Microsensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* David Galipeau, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 05/31/2002
* USD 230,000.00

9701513 Galipeau This project is a four-year early career development plan that
integrates microsensor research with educational activities in microelectronic
devices, sensors and materials. The goals of this plan are to significantly
strengthen the research and educational programs in microsensors at South Dakota
State University. This will be done by expanding current research into new and
interdisciplinary areas, integrating this research into undergraduate and
graduate curriculums, and significantly increasing the design component of
courses being taught in the microelectronic devices and materials areas. Four
areas that are important to chemical sensor development will be the primary
focus: The development of a novel technique for measuring the effects of surface
properties on sensor response and sensing film adhesion; The development of
novel bio-sensors for the detection of airborne endotoxins; The optimization of
hazardous gas sensors; and The characterization of electronic polymer films. The
novel technique for measuring surface properties is of high importance in the
sensor area and also has wide applicatiols in the fields of biomaterials,
microelectronics and adhesives, therefore it will be the prime focus area of the
scientific part of this plan. The three remaining areas involve the application
of sensing science and form the engineering design part of this plan. The
activities described in this proposal are expected to advance sensing science,
engineering, and education. The science will be advanced by providing a new
method for surface characterization that has high sensitivity to surface free
energy, wettability, and contamination, and high degrees of correlation with
biological interactions. This work is also expected to provide a better
understanding of the gas sorption processes in chemical sensing and aid in the
optimization of thin films used as chemical sensing elements. Other important
applications in microelectronics include the analysis of surface treatments
designed to improve film adhesion and the attachment of analities to a sensor
surface and measurements of surface cleanliness prior to encapsulation.
Important applications in biomaterials include: insuring surface reproducibility
in biomaterial investigations and commercial medical devices, establishing
correlations between surface tension of materials and biocompatability, and
bioadhesion. Engineering design will be advanced by new chemical sensor designs
and applications that will be investigated. The proposed educational activities
will advance engineering education by providing instructional and research
opportunities in microsensors. In addition, a comprehensive program which is
designed to better prepare students for the workplace, reduce student attrition,
and encourage students to pursue graduate studies is proposed. The activities
include incorporating significant engineering design components in all courses
with an emphasis on microsensors; integration of industrial, cross disciplinary,
and research activities into the curriculum; laboratory development; the
incorporation of new ideas in learning styles and assessment in the classroom;
and by outreach activities directed toward underrepresented groups. ***