* 9701680
* Fundamental Studies in Nonlinear Chromatography
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Georges Guiochon, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 04/30/2000
* USD 562,516.00

This is a renewal award for the work of Professor Georges Guiochon at the
University of Tennessee-Knoxville for his on-going research in non-linear
chromatography. The work, supported by a grant from the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program, will investigate theoretical and experimental aspects of the
operation of chromatographic columns in an overload condition. Working mainly on
problems involving the separation of pairs of enantiomers and of protein
mixtures, research on the fundamentals of preparative chromatography will be
performed. Techniques such as simulated moving bed separations (SMB) will be
evaluated. Central to the work is the prediction and optimization of individual
band profiles of multicomponent mixtures through insights gained from the
thermodynamic behavior and kinetics of mass transfer of these components
measured under various conditions. Calculated and experimental band profiles
will be compared. The main experimental studies will involve determinations of
competitive isotherms, enantiomeric separations by SMB and the determination of
mass transfer resistances in protein purifications. This work is in the area of
separations science and is concerned with the theoretical and practical
operation of chromatographic columns for preparative chemistry. The work will
greatly improve our understanding in this area and is of major potential impact
on many industries which produce pure compounds such as fine chemicals and
pharmaceuticals.