* 9701428
* Two-Dimensional Electrons on Helium
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Arnold Dahm, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/2001
* USD 354,500.00

9701428 Dahm This is a renewal project covering four areas in the study of
electrons on liquid helium. We propose a new route to the ripplonic-polaron
state, which consists of an electron self- trapped in a surface dimple. We
suggest that ripplon-induced weak localization of the electron occurs in the
weak scattering limit. As the scattering, controlled by the holding electric
field, is increased, a transition to the bound polaron will occur with possibly
strong localization as a precursor to the bound state. The mobility of electrons
in the low density limit will be studied as a function of holding field,
magnetic field, and temperature. We will attempt to observe weak localization by
thermal ripplons and the bound polaron state. We further propose to study plasma
oscillations of quasi-one-dimensional electron gas formed by confining electrons
to helium filled grooves in an insulating substrate. We will also search for
viscoelastic modes in the electron fluid and study the pinned electron solid as
a function of coupling to pinning centers. %%% This a renewal project to study
electrons bound to a liquid helium surface. In such a situation, the bound
electrons form a single layer which floats on the surface of helium. This system
is the simplest two-dimensional system. It has interesting physical properties
and some of its properties are analogs of those which occur in three-dimensional
(3D) systems. The parameters controlling these analogs can be varied through a
wider range and are more easily controlled than in three dimensions. We propose
to study electrons on a helium surface in an attempt to better understand the
physics of systems of lower dimensions and the physics of 3D systems which are
difficult to probe. Our study will include the spatial localization of electrons
by random scattering, analogous to the localization of electrons in some 3D
semiconductors. By increasing the scattering rate we expect to find electrons
trapped in surface depressions, an analog of electrons trapped in a highly
compressible lattice in 3D. We will study the pinned electron crystal which is
an analog of 3D sliding charge-density waves. We also propose to study sound in
a single rows of electrons in an attempt to understand the physics of one-
dimensional systems. ***