* 9701578
* Noncommutative Projective Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Jian Zhang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 12/31/2001
* USD 213,046.00

Smith, 9701578 Abstract. The proposed research lies at the junction of non-
commutative ring theory and algebraic geometry. The most abstract setting for
the subject is to view a pair, consisting of an abelian category and a
distinguished object in it, as the category of sheaves on some imaginary non-
commutative space and the structure sheaf of the space. Such a pair is called a
scheme. The category of modules over a ring together with the ring itself is a
basic example. Much of the project involves the examination of special examples
with the goal of getting a better understanding of the appropriate analogues of
standard geometric notions such as subschemes, open, closed, singular, etc.
Particular attention will be paid to non-commutative analogues of projective
spaces; included in this are the Sklyanin algebras, which first arose from some
problems in physics. It is also proposed to examine several homological
properties of non-commutative rings, such as Auslander regularity, the Koszul
property, and the Cohen-Macaulay property. The basic problem addressed by non-
commutative ring theory is to understand the solutions in (possibly infinite)
matrices to systems of polynomial equations in non-commuting variables. Non-
commutative algebraic geometry aims to develop a more geometric approach to such
a problem, essentially by viewing the solutions as geometric objects.