* 9701739
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Family Ties to the Ethnic   Economic Enclave
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1998
* Alberto Palloni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/1998
* USD 6,207.00

9701739 Palloni This Doctoral Dissertation project examines the relationship
between the family structure of Cuban-Americans and their economic and social
adjustment in the United States. Previous research on immigration adaptation and
acculturation has focused on characteristics o the economic and social
environment which immigrants encounter upon arrival, on the individual
characteristics of immigrants, and on the receptivity of the host country. An
important element that has been overlooked in these studies has been the role
that the family and household arrangements of immigrants play in their social
and economic adaptation to a new environment. Of particular interest is whether
living arrangements and family structure is a result of certain 'survival
strategies' pursued by immigrants as a result of precarious conditions or if
they are cultural related. Cuban-Americans will be studied because much has been
written about their relative socioeconomic success relative to other immigrant
groups. The project will use three data sources: microfiles of three U.S.
censuses (1970, 1980, and 1990), published tabulations of Cuban censuses, and a
purposive survey of Cuban business owners and their employees in the Miami
Metropolitan area. The census data will be used to describe the living
arrangements of Cuban-Americans relative to those of Anglo-Americans at three
points in time. Additionally, household and demographic characteristics of
Cubans living in the U.S. will be compared to those living in Cuba (prior to and
after the 1959 revolution). Finally, a survey of business owners and their
employees will be conducted to address questions that cannot be answered using
cross-sectional census data. ****