* 9701018
* Bioreporters of Genetic Expression Demonstrate              Bioavailability of Metals During Biofilm Growth and         Development
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* David White, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 01/31/2000
* USD 217,364.00

White 9701018 Bacteria that are growing in biofilms form a relatively stable
community that may greatly affect bioremediation rate in situ, perhaps more than
bacteria in the bulk phase. However, microbial activity of biofilm bacteria, as
well as the bioavaliability o metal contaminatants, remain difficult areas to
study. Biofilm communities are complex mixtures of many species, both culturable
and non-culturable, and the composition of the biofilm communities to metal ions
spatially and temporally. We will study the response of biofilm communities to
metal ions (mercury and chromium) by constructing bioeporter strains for these
two metals. Expression of the bioreporter genes indicates that the metal is
bioavailable, and that the bacteria are actively producing gene products to
detoxify. We have produced bioreporter strains that bioluminesce in the presence
of mercury. We have further modified this strain to encode a gene for Green
Fluorescent Protein (GFP), which is an extremely bright fluorescent molecule.
Individual cells expressing this protein can be found using our sensitive
photodetection equipment. We will use this strain in a flow cell biofilm
formation apparatus, following the bacteria with both fluorescence and
bioluminescence detectors. The biofilm community will be established under
laboratory conditions using groundwater from a contaminated site. We will
incorporate the bioreporter bacteria and track their establishment using their
fluorescence. The continued presence of the cells, and their number, will be
established using the fluorescence bioreporter. The same technique will be
applied to bacteria that reduce chromium. The mercury reduction (mer) genes are
highly conserved, and we will use tis advantage to detect mer genes in the
biofilm population. Sensitive molecular techniques, such as in situ PCR for
detecting mercury reducers, and in situ Reverse Transcriptase PCR for detecting
activity from mer reducers, will be employed for comparison to results form
light measurements. The results of these experiments will give a more definite
assessment of biofilm bioremediationrates under in situ conditions.