* 9701487
* Fundamental Properties of Superconductors and Mesoscopic    Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Michael Tinkham, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/2000
* USD 543,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9701487 Tinkham Experimental and theoretical work
will be performed to elucidate the physical properties of superconducting and
normal-metal devices fabricated on micron and nanometer length scales. In such
mesoscopic structures, the Coulomb charging energy of a single electron exceeds
thermal energies below 1K, allowing one to control the number of electrons one-
by-one on the island in a single-electron transistor (SET). If the island is
superconducting, the PI's previous work has shown that the pairing energy leads
to even-odd electron number effects. One ongoing project will utilize this even-
odd effect as the basis for developing a microwave detector device of
unprecedented sensitivity, in which each individual microwave photon absorbed in
enabling the photon-assisted tunneling of a single electron will trigger a
microsecond long current pulse containing hundreds of electrons. The SET
electrometers coupled to wide-band cryogenic amplifiers developed for this
experiment will also make possible new types of experiments monitoring the
motion of single electronic charges with microsecond time resolution. If the
mesoscopic island is as small as 5nm, the PI's previous work has shown that
individual electronic energy levels can be resolved, and that a spectroscopic
even-odd effect exists even in the normal state because of the two-fold spin
degeneracy. Such measurements will be extended to new types of mesoscopic
systems such as chemically prepared metallic nanospheres of controlled size
(which should allow more systematic probing of energy level statistics than is
possible with random sized grains), carbon nanotubes, and possibly even
individual large organic molecules. Another experiment in preparation seeks to
observe the change in the spectrum of a superconducting nanograin when it is
doped with 0,1,2 or more magnetic impurities, to compare with theoretical
predictions. %%% There is a practical need to understand better the new basic
physics which will govern attempts to devise ever more compact computers and
memories. With this general motivation, the research which will be performed
under this grant will focus on various forms of the single-electron transistor,
or SET. An SET device consists of a small conducting island coupled to
electrical leads by ultramall tunnel junctions and capacitively coupled to a
gate electrode which controls the number of electrons on the island. Such SET
devices can easily detect a single excess electron charge, in principle making
possible an ultracompact memory element in which the binary "zero" and "one" are
represented by the presence or absence of a single extra electron. Development
of a technology from this concept is complicated by the sensitivity of the
devices to background charge noise and the difficulty of reliable fabrication of
such small devices. The proposed research may lead to progress in overcoming
these difficulties. A possible approach which will be explored involves joining
the fabrication technology of physics, for making connections, with the
molecular engineering of organic chemistry, to make small charge storage
elements. At such small length scales, classical physics must be replaced by
quantum physics, in which the wave properties of electrons become important in
understanding the electrical properties of the device. The research to be
performed will probe the relation between the discrete set of quantum energy
levels in a small conducing grain with the charging energies of classical
electrostatics. Special attention will be paid to phenomena which arise from the
pairing energy of electrons if the grain is superconducting, and to the coupling
of the electron spins with d eliberately introduced magnetic impurity atoms. ***