* 9701383
* Upper Ocean Effects on the Surface Heat Budget of the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Douglas Martinson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael T. Ledbetter
* 04/30/2001
* USD 269,000.00

9701831 Morison Stanton 9701391 Martinson 9701383 McPhee 9701558 This research
project is a key component of a large, coordinated, multi-investigator program
called SHEBA (Surface Heat Budget of the Arctic) Ocean. The SHEBA program will
simultaneously measure, over an annual cycle, the various fluxes and properties
of the atmosphere, ice pack, and upper ocean that determine the aggregate mass
and energy budgets of Arctic sea ice. Its goal is improved understanding of how
and to what extent, the ice covered Arctic Ocean affects climate variability in
lower latitudes and in global climate models (GCMs). Towards that goal, two
potentially important radiation/climate feedback processes have been singled out
for study: Ice-Albedo Feedback and Cloud-Radiation Feedback. Work sponsored here
is directed toward understanding the impact of the upper ocean on aggregate ice-
albedo feedback via the ice mass and heat budgets. The ocean component of the
program will provide (1) continuous time series of upper ocean state properties
and turbulent fluxes at the main SHEBA station, supplemented by remote buoy
measurements; and (2) measurements for determining the disposition of solar
heating in summer leads. The research program will be conducted for 14 months
from a ship frozen into the ice pack. The ocean measurements program makes an
essential contribution to the SHEBA team of researchers who will measure
atmospheric variables with a large array of instruments on the ice floe and
aircraft flying above. The combined set of measurements in SHEBA will allow
refinement of climate models for the Arctic region. Those improved models will
lead to better predictions of the climate and the permanence of the Arctic ice
cap under a proposed global warming that could occur if atmospheric carbon
dioxide levels are increased above present levels.