* 9701913
* CAREER: Teams, Task and Technology in High-Technology       Manufacturing Industries
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1997,12/08/1998
* Diane Bailey, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/08/1998
* USD 200,000.00

This research addresses the proper matching between social and technical systems
within high-technology manufacturing industries. A central theme of the research
concerns employee teams: their design, implementation, and management. Of
special concern are the infrastructural requirements necessary to facilitate the
successful integration of an organization's production, engineering, marketing,
and research and development departments via cross-functional teams. The project
is broken down into three interrelated areas, each addressing a unique set of
research questions: (1) How will prior models of work team effectiveness
(developed in low-technology and service industries) be transformed in higher
technology workplaces? (2) What is the long-term interaction between autonomy
and communication on white-collar or `knowledge worker` project teams? (3) What
advanced communication technologies can aid virtual teams in overcoming the
handicap of distance? The objectives of the proposed research are to develop and
test, via extensive field investigation and experimental work, models of team
performance for both white-collar and shop-floor employees. The proposed
research will contribute significantly to the understanding of work organization
within high-technology manufacturing industries. The creation of predictive
models for both shop-floor work teams and white-collar project teams will add to
our knowledge of team effectiveness while providing the basis for the creation
of design principles. These principles, in part pertaining to the integration of
production, engineering, marketing, and research and development departments and
in total addressing questions of team design, implementation, and management,
will be of considerable benefit to manufacturers as they seek to improve
organizational performance. The translation of research results into case
studies for classroom teaching will enhance engineering education by guiding
students in solution approaches to complex, unstructured problems involving the
union of social and technical manufacturing systems in dynamic high-technology
industries.