* 9701027
* Dissertation Research:  The Effects of Cortisol on Home-    Steam Water Imprinting and Recall in Kokanee Salmon
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Richard Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1998
* USD 4,849.00

9701027 Jones Pacific salmon (genus Oncorhynchus) have a life-history pattern in
which individuals hatch in cold, freshwater streams, migrate as juveniles
(smolts) to the ocean to feed for a few years, and then return as adults to
their natal stream to spawn and die. During both smoltification (the
physiological process preparing young salmon to leave freshwater for the ocean)
and the return migration to the natal spawning grounds, salmon exhibit an
increase in stress hormones in their blood plasma. The latter increase has been
implicated in the subsequent death of the adults shortly after spawning. During
periods of stress, all vertebrates secrete stress hormones. After reduction of
the stressor, stress hormone concentrations generally decrease, but after
periods of prolonged stress these hormones can remain elevated. Increased and
prolonged secretion of stress hormones, and the actions of these hormones, can
have degenerative effects on the body. However, it is known that in mammals an
increase in stress hormone levels can also facilitate the recall of long-term
memory. Before and/or during smoltification, young Pacific salmon imprint on the
chemical make-up of their home-stream water. this imprinted "memory" is vital in
directing the adult salmon back to their natal stream bed several years later.
This study tests the hypothesis that the increase in plasma stress hormones
during recall and homing aids the recognition of the home-stream water and that
this increase in plasma cortisol primes the brain regions to recall the
imprinted chemical composition of the salmon's home stream. Using
immunohistochemistry to determine the location of cortisol receptors in the
brain, as well as electrophysiological recordings from olfactory brain regions,
the research will test the involvement of cortisol in home-stream water
imprinting and recall in Pacific salmon. This project could have important
implications not only for understanding the life-history of an endangered genus
of salmonid fish, but more broadly the general role of stress hormones in
memory.