* 9701471
* Multidisciplinary Center for Earthquake Engineering Research (MCEER)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2008
* George Lee, SUNY at Buffalo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Vilas Mujumdar
* 03/31/2008
* USD 20,884,969.00

9701471 Lee The Center for Advanced Technologies in Earthquake Loss- Reduction
(ATEL) is a nine-institution consortium, closely linked under an integrated
research and management framework using modern communication networks. The
thrust of this center will be the development and application of advanced and
emerging technologies for design, construction, and intelligent engineering
renewal of buildings and civil infrastructure in reducing earthquake losses. An
integral part of the research is associated with loss-reduction: removal of
socio-economic barriers; and development of incentives for new knowledge and
technology. This EERC will carry out an integrated research, education and
outreach program that will be built on three major elements: (a) performance
assessment of the built environment; (b) rehabilitation of critical facilities;
and (c) response and recovery using new loss estimation methodologies and
advanced technologies. The technological foci of the research are: high-
performance computing; site remediation; structural control and monitoring;
smart and high- performance materials; condition assessment; robotics systems;
and decision-making systems. A comprehensive education plan for graduate and
undergraduate students, K- 12, professionals and the public sector is integrated
with the research plan and is supported by two user networks focused upon: (a)
advanced computation; and (b) experimental facilities. An innovative outreach
program will be implemented to promote and develop: public awareness;
professional training and re-education; and partnerships for
knowledge/technology transfer and utilization. The Center for ATEL is one of
three EERC's networked with an overarching governing board to provide synergism
in creating new knowledge and technology, educating the next generation of
earthquake engineers and scientists, and providing outreach to industry,
government, pre-college schools and potential user groups.