* 9701598
* Graph and Digraph Structure
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Paul Seymour, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 06/30/2001
* USD 144,000.00

Seymour 9701598 This project encompasses three lines of research in graph
theory. (1) To design a fast algorithm to test if a directed graph has a circuit
of even length. this is a well-known open problem, with a number of algebraic
ramifications. At the time of this writing, the investigator, Neil Robertson and
Robin Thomas have made substantial progress with it, but further development is
necessary. (2) To develop a theory of digraph minors, parallel to the highly
successful theory of graph minors; this is made approachable now because of the
recent solution of the Galllai-Younger conjecture. The ``undirected'' theory has
led to numerous results and algorithms of wide interest and applicability, and
the investigator believes that similar success with the ``directed'' theory. (3)
To complete work on solving Tutte's conjectured extension of the four-colour
theorem. A group of researchers, including the PI, has found a new proof of the
four-colour theorem itself, and they have reduced Tutte's conjecture to a form
which can probably be proved by modifying this new proof. This research is in
the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of Combinatorics is to find
efficient methods of studying how discrete collections of objects can be
arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely important to modern
communications. For example, the design of large networks, such as those
occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in computer science
deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of combinatorial
research.