* 9701338
* Dissertation Research: Testing Hypotheses for Proximate     Mechanisms Generating Spatial Segregation of the Sexes
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1997,11/30/1999
* Richard Grosberg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 11/30/1999
* USD 9,326.00

9701338 Stanton In some plant species, males and females live in different
habitats. The goal of this project is to identify what ecological mechanisms are
involved in creating such a pattern of spatial segregation of males and females
in saltgrass, Distichlis spicata. Saltgrass is a central component of salt
marshes on the west and east coasts of the United States as well as inland in
salty and alkaline areas. To determine what mechanisms could operate to create a
pattern of spatial segregation of males and females in this species, the
researchers have identified molecular markers capable of differentiating clones
and identifying the gender of individuals before they flower. With these tools,
they can test for effects of differential germination requirements and
differential seedling mortality by tracking seedlings grown from seeds in the
field. Further use of molecular markers on plants in patches of known ages can
determine whether differential adult mortality and differential vegetative
growth contribute to the pattern in saltgrass. Also, the researchers will use
transplant experiments to test for differential effects of environment on
vegetative growth between males and females and to examine male and female
reproductive success. The long term goal of this research project is to fully
understand how ecological and evolutionary mechanisms operate to create spatial
segregation of males and females in saltgrass. Spatial segregation of males and
females is exhibited by more than eighteen plant species. In these species,
males and females are found in environments that differ in water availability,
salt levels, altitude, light levels, or nutrient levels. Strikingly, females are
consistently found in less stressful environments (wetter, less salty) than
males. It is difficult to understand why this spatial separation of males and
females would not decrease mating efficiency for these plants. Thus, scientists
are interested in knowing what mechanisms lead to spatial segregation of males
and females and whether the pattern benefits individual plants. Only one study
has directly addressed the question of spatial segregation of males and females
as a benefit to plants, and no studies have been published that demonstrate
which mechanisms are working to create this pattern in species with genetic
determination of gender. It is particularly important to understand how such a
pattern operates because many key wetland plant species are known to exhibit the
pattern. Wetland ecosystems have a central environmental and ecological role,
and in order to preserve and restore wetlands, researchers need information on
wetland ecosystems particularly the factors that cause them to be resistant to
degradation and resilient to change. Genetic components of populations can
greatly influence their stability and consequently the stability of the whole
ecosystem of which they are a part. Spatial segregation of males and females is
one aspect of the genetics of many plant populations for which almost nothing is
known.