* 9701111
* Dissertation Research: The Potential Tradeoff Between       Competitive Ability and Predator Resistance in Larval       Anurans
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Earl Werner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 05/31/1999
* USD 8,460.00

9701111 Werner Predation and competition are thought to be important factors
that help determine the structure and composition of ecological communities.
Past studies of the interaction of these two factors have found that taxa either
compete well or resist predation well, but not both. These observations suggest
that there is a tradeoff between the ability to compete and the ability to
resist predation. Differences in predation risk and competitive ability are
associated with differences in predator-induced and competitor-induced
morphology of larval anurans including differences in tail fin depth and mouth
size. Populations within one species of larval anuran differ in morphology and
one can take advantage of these population differences in morphology to
determine if populations are trading off competitive ability and predator
resistance. This tradeoff can be further tested by generating more exaggerated
differences in the morphological traits by making use of different magnitudes of
morphological plasticity among the populations. Based on an understanding of
competitive abilities and predator resistance among populations within a
species, the relationship among anuran species within the same genus can be
predicted and tested. The proposed work has important implications to evolution
of local populations, species interactions within a community, and productivity-
diversity relationships across communities.