* 9701334
* Dissertation Research: The Effects of Yolk Tetosterone on   Nestling Development in the Red-Winged Blackbird
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2000
* Ellen Ketterson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 05/31/2000
* USD 10,000.00

Ketterson 9701334 Recent investigations have revealed the presence of
maternally-derived steroid hormones in the yolks of avian eggs. However, many
questions concerning both the functional significance and the mechanism of
action of yolk steroids remain unanswered. By concentrating on the interactions
between hormones, physiology, and behavior, the proposed research will elucidate
the role yolk steroids in the development and survival of offspring in the
context of hatching asynchrony. In doing so, the mechanisms by which yolk
steroids facilitate growth and survival will be identified. Preliminary research
on the eggs of red-winged blackbirds, Agelaius phoeniceus, has shown that the
concentration of yolk testosterone varies with laying order in such a way that
later-laid eggs contain more hormone. Therefore, this research will focus on the
developmental and fitness effects of yolk testosterone by: (1) Establishing
whether yolk testosterone levels are correlated with growth rate, muscle
development, or begging intensity. (2) Demonstrating causation between yolk
testosterone levels and these physiological and behavioral variables by
injecting testosterone into yolks. (3) Investigating the effects of female age
on yolk testosterone levels in a system where older females produce a greater
number of fledglings than first-time breeders.