* 9701251
* Dissertation Research:  Molecular Evidence for the Origin ofthe Hawaiian Drosophilidae
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Robert DeSalle, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 07/31/1999
* USD 8,000.00

9701251 DESALLE Much of what scientists know about the genetics and molecular
biology of living organisms has been learned from a single species of insect,
the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. The genus Drosophila contains thousands
of species. Continuing research on the biology of D. melanogaster will benefit
from comparisons with other species, especially if the phylogenetic history of
these species is known. Understanding the phylogenetic history of this large
group of species is a complex task, as no single source of information (e.g. the
sequence of a single gene obtained from all species) is powerful enough to
answer all questions about the relationships among species. In this research,
Rob DeSalle and doctoral candidate James Remson will reconstruct the
phylogenetic history for the closest relatives of Drosophila melanogaster using
a large amount of information, especially from the DNA sequences of several
different genes. The study will concentrate on species that live in the Hawaiian
Islands, where a large number of Drosophila species are found. A major question
to be answered is whether the Hawaiian Drosophila species arose from one, or
more than one, OfounderO species. The use of multiple sets of data should
provide a more robust reconstruction of the phylogenetic history of Drosophila
than has been available previously.