* 9701503
* CAREER:  Multimedia Explanation Generation for              Knowledge-Based Learning Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* James Lester, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2001
* USD 390,373.00

Knowledge-based learning environments can provide highly customized problem-
solving experiences that are tailored to the individual needs of each student.
This project creates the technology for a new generation of knowledge-based
learning environments by developing real-time multimedia explanation generators
with animated pedagogical agents. Prominently featured in learning environments,
animated pedagogical agents can observe students' progress, provide them with
visually contextualized problem-solving advice, and play a powerful motivational
role. The project has three major thrusts: (1) developing a computational model
of real-time multimedia explanation planning for dynamically creating customized
multimedia explanations; (2) developing a computational model of animated
pedagogical agents; and (3) conducting empirical evaluations of the pedagogical
effectiveness of these models. In addition, the project also develops a teaching
laboratory for multimedia technology and initiates a new multidisciplinary
course on Knowledge-Based Multimedia Learning Environments. This work
significantly advances the state-of-the-art in knowledge- based learning
environments and human-computer interaction. Coupled with rapid advances in
affordable multimedia hardware, the successful deployment of these technologies
will have a deep and lasting impact on students at all levels. By achieving
significant gains in learning effectiveness, these technologies will bring about
fundamental improvements in both the classroom and the workplace on a broad
scale.