* 9701113
* CAREER: Towards an All-Optical Network Infrastructure:      Interconnection of Photonic WDM Broadcast-and-Select        Local Area Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* George Rouskas, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 08/31/2002
* USD 200,000.00

The career development plan outlined in this proposal focuses on the integration
of the research and teaching objectives of the principal investigator. The
research project addresses a number of important issues in the design and
interconnection of optical networks. The ultimate goal of the proposed work is
to develop viable solutions for a seamless nationwide all-optical network
infrastructure. The educational component includes development of graduate-level
courses on all-optical networking and on internetwork architectures and
protocols, integration of topics on lightwave technology in existing graduate
and undergraduate introductory network courses, and active involvement of
undergraduate students in network projects. In an all-optical network using
wavelength division multiplexing (WDM), information is transmitted as optical
signals throughout the path from source to destination. By using multiple
concurrent channels, each on a different wavelength, WDM has the potential to
exploit the enormous information-carrying capacity of fiber and deliver an
aggregate throughput that is several orders of magnitude higher than it is
possible today. Given the installed base of optical fiber, and the maturing of
optical component technologies, it appears that current network technologies
will eventually evolve to an all-optical infrastructure. The deployment of such
an infrastructure will cater to the needs of emerging bandwidth-intensive
applications. However, large scale interconnection of optical networks raises a
number of fundamental and challenging problems that require novel and innovative
solutions. As part of his career development plan, the principal investigator
proposes to address a number of these issues, including multiple access in
broadcast-and-select WDM networks, traffic scheduling of unicast and multicast
traffic, interconnection of photonic local area networks, architectural issues
in wavelength routed backbone networks, dist ributed control, and issues related
to the interaction among subnetwork and backbone protocols. Our work is expected
to further our understanding of the characteristics of optical networks, and to
provide insight on how to overcome some of the limitations of the technology.
The objective is to produce an analytical framework that will make it possible
to evaluate alternative architectures and protocols.