* 9701014
* Multinuclear NMR Studies of Structure &amp; Dynamics in Complex Molecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Gina Hoatson, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 07/31/2001
* USD 538,000.00

Gina L. Hoatson and Robert L. Vold of the College of William and Mary are
supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program in their continuing
studies using solid-state deuteron nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
and the extension of their work using nitrogen-14 and carbon-13 NMR. To overcome
the low chemical shift resolution inherent using standard methods for obtaining
solid-state deuteron NMR, they will use magic angle spinning (MAS) experiments
to measure very slow motional rates. For carbon-13, they plan to exploit a new
two dimensional methodology, Variable Angle correlation SpectroscopY (VACSY),
and obtain information about orientation dependent relaxation by combining this
with spin temperature alternation. For nitrogen-14, the PIs propose to use
overtone spectroscopy with stochastic excitation as an alternative to the
technically demanding direct detection of single quantum nitrogen-14 NMR
signals. These new techniques are to be applied to urea inclusion compounds and
dendritic polyamidoamines. New uses of molecular dynamic simulations for
interpreting NMR data for complex molecular assemblies will also be explored.
This work involves novel multinuclear NMR techniques for determining structure
and dynamics in complex molecular assemblies. An improved understanding of order
and motion at the molecular level will increase knowledge of how these correlate
with macroscopic properties. Eventually, this cognition may help direct the
design of new materials with properties optimized for specific applications.