* 9701640
* RUI:  Dynamics of Nonlinear Spin Waves in Magnetic Films:   Envelope Solitons, Self-Focusing, Wave Collapse
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2000
* Andrei Slavin, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/2000
* USD 105,000.00

9701640 Slavin This is a grant to support research at a largely Undergraduate
Institution, the Oakland University. The research program consists of a
theoretical study of nonlinear magnetism and excitations in finite media, i.e.
devices. The specific projects in this grant are: (1) Two dimensional nonlinear
diffraction of finite aperture SW beams and pulses in magnetic films leading to
self channeling, self focusing and wave collapse; (2) Formation and propagation
of one dimensional "bright" and "dark" spin- wave envelope solitons in weakly
dissipative magnetic films and (3) parametric amplification of "bright" envelope
solitons in magnetic films by external microwave pumping. Results of this
research will be useful for the development of microwave signal processing
devices based on nonlinear spin wave processes in magnetic films. %%% This grant
supports theoretical research at a predominantly undergraduate institution on a
problem in device magnetism. The research is expected to advance our
understanding of nonlinear wave dynamics in a magnetic medium and has
applications to a better understanding of the properties of high quality garnet
films as used in microwave technology. The project involves undergraduate
students within the framework of an internationally acknowledged active research
program. ***