* 9701289
* Stiffness Threshold in Network Glasses
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Punit Boolchand, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/2002
* USD 270,000.00

9701289 Boolchand This is a renewal project to study the physical nature of the
stiffness threshold in chalcogenide and chalcohalide glasses using Raman
scattering, M ssbauer spectroscopy and T-Modulated Differential Scanning
Calorimetry measurements (MDSC). Specifically, Raman mode frequency shifts and
Lamb-M ssbauer factors will be measured systematically as a function of glass
composition to establish the mean coordination number dependence of local
elastic constant, C, and the first-inverse moment of the vibrational density of
states, w-1. Random network model simulations of both C and w-1 in glasses are
now available from numerical experiments, provide a convenient guide to compare
with laboratory experiments. The nature of structural relaxation at the glass
transition will be studied in MDSC measurements to establish the non-reversing
heat-flow DHnr variation with composition. Preliminary experiments on
chalcogenide glasses reveal that DHnr also displays a minimum at the stiffness
threshold, c=2.4 suggesting that only minuscule enthalpy changes accompany
structural relaxation of a glassy liquid when it is mechanically critical. Mean-
field constraint counting procedures also reveal that for networks possessing
terminal atoms such as one-fold coordinated atoms (halogens) the stiffness
transition in general shifts to a lower mean coordination c < 2.4. These ideas
will be put to a quantitative experimental test in suitable Raman, M ssbauer and
MDSC experiments in chalcohalide glasses. %%% This is a renewal project to study
the physical nature of the stiffness threshold in chalcogenide and chalcohalide
glasses. Many glasses containing the elements S or Se or Te are viewed as
networks composed of atomic-chain fragments (with a mean atomic coordination of
2). These chain-fragments can be progressively cross-linked by alloying other
atoms. Mechanical ri gidity of such alloyed networks is found to increase
progressively with degree of cross-linking as measured by the mean coordination
number of a network. When the coordination reaches 2.4, theoretical calculations
predict a floppy to rigid transition and stiffening of the network beyond 2.40.
We propose to carry out an experimental study on specific glass systems to
decode the physical nature of the underlying stiffness transition. This
transition, which corresponds to a magic composition in a glass system, is of
general interest in glass science because some of the best glass formers occur
near this magic composition. Furthermore, an understanding of this transition
will also help unravel the mysterious and elusive nature of structural arrest
that occurs at the glass transition. Such information will also assist in tuning
the glass composition for optical, thermal, electronic and mechanical
applications. ***