* 9701480
* Molecular Structure and Dynamics Beyond the Born-Oppenheimer Approximation
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Edward Grant, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 04/30/2000
* USD 439,150.00

Edward Grant of Purdue University is supported by the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program to continue his research on state-to-state photoionization and
dynamics of intramolecular relaxation in highly excited states of small
molecules. The main objective of this work is to accumulate, for a number of
polyatomic systems, state-detailed spectroscopic information of sufficient
resolution to support full-scale Multichannel Quantum Defect Theory
calculations. Systems to be studied include hydrocarbon and metal-centered free
radicals that form closed-shell cations. The PI will use multiresonant
excitation techniques to make high-resolution spectroscopic measurements of
resonant lineshapes and energies associated with transitions to states which are
coupled to ionization and dissociation continua, and photoselection with
specialized detection methods to study rovibrational structure in the electronic
ground states of cations and precursor free radicals. The effort to describe
energy flow in isolated molecules has added considerably to our understanding of
chemical reactivity, and served for many years as an important focus of research
in chemical physics. The study of intramolecular relaxation remains today a
vital point of contact between experimental and theoretical molecular dynamics.
Particularly important is the transfer of energy between electronic and
internuclear degrees of freedom. The detailed dynamics of such processes can
give rise to significant chemical consequences. For example, issues associated
with the dynamics of energy transfer between electronic coordinates and
internuclear ones underlie contemporary efforts to direct the outcomes of
chemical transformations.