* 9701725
* CAREER:  Atomic-Scale Optical Microscopy of Ferroelectric,  Quantum Paraelectric and Ferromagnetic Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Jeremy Levy, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2002
* USD 373,127.00

9701725 Levy This CAREER project aims to develop high resolution spatially and
temporally resolved near-field optical techniques to investigate nanometer-scale
phenomena in two materials systems: (1) ferroelectrics, quantum paraelectrics,
and (2) ultrathin magnetic films. The broad aim of this research is to probe
dynamical processes at the short length and time scales, and to relate these
observations to macroscopic properties. For ferroelectric thin films, domain
reversal and domain wall dynamics will be imaged stroboscopically at MHz-THz
frequencies, with the goal of understanding fundamental mechanisms for microwave
dissipation and dielectric dispersion. Nonlinear interactions between
impulsively generated coherent phonons, domain walls, charged impurities and
grain boundaries will be studied with anticipated near-atomic spatial
resolution, and time resolution below the phonon period. Time-resolved
techniques will be used to probe order parameter fluctuations in order-disorder
ferroelectrics, and to search for signatures of a macroscopically coherent
ground state in quantum paraelectrics at low temperatures. For magnetic films, a
newly proposed Kerr-effect near-field microscopy will be developed for the
purpose of studying magnetization dynamics on fundamental length scales and time
scales. The nature of biquadratic exchange in coupled ferromagnetic layers, and
the role of dynamic versus thermodynamic fluctuations at the reorientation phase
transition of ultrathin magnetic epilayers will also be addressed. %%% The
project addresses forefront research issues in materials science. The research
will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental atomic level
to important aspects of ferroelectric and magnetic materials, in general. An
important feature of the program is a special emphasis on education, and on the
integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant research area. ***