* 9701509
* CAREER:  High Resolution Optical Microscopy Studies of      Mesostructured Polymer-Dispersed Liquid Crystal Films
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Daniel Higgins, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 03/31/2001
* USD 244,446.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, will use near- field scanning optical
microscopy to study polymer-dispersed liquid crystal thin films. Professor
Higgins and his students at Kansas State University will study the mesoscale
structural, electronic, and dynamical properties of these thin film materials
for application as flat-panel displays. This integrated CAREER research project
will afford students the opportunity to learn how the spatial confinement of
organic mesostructured systems affects their properties as relates to flat-panel
displays. State-of-the-art optical microscopy methods that provide submicron
spatial resolution will be used in this work. Other educational projects to be
developed during this project involve computer simulations on data analysis,
analog electronics, Fourier transforms, and chromatographic separations for use
in undergraduate course work and a new course in chemical microscopy. Many
materials of scientific and technological interest involve spatial variations in
the electronic, structural, and chemical properties on very small distance
scales. In order to devise materials with desired features on this spatial scale
it is necessary to develop methods for quantifying the properties at the near
single molecule limit. This CAREER research project will apply state-of-the-art
near-field optical microscopy to the study of such properties of polymer-
dispersed liquid crystalline materials. Undergraduate and graduate students will
be exposed to the application of these new methods to study these materials that
have potential for use in making flat-panel display devices.