* 9701657
* Three-Wave Mixing Spectroscopy of Buried Solid Interfaces   and Thin Film Structures
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Arjun Yodh, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2000
* USD 200,000.00

9701657 Yodh The proposed work seeks to employ second-order nonlinear optical
techniques to study buried solid interfaces. The nonlinear optical method is
particularly attractive because it possesses the long penetration depths
characteristic of most optical probes, and the intrinsic interface sensitivity
characteristic of all second-order optical processes. The research will
vigorously apply our nonlinear tools to new classes of scientifically
interesting solid-solid interface systems including hererofilm structures such
as SiC/Si and SiC/SiO2, metal/GaAs,metal/ZnSe,ZnSe/GaAs, II-VI-based Quaternary
thin films on InP,and III-N nitride-based thin film structures. Loosely
speaking, high quality films of these materials are required for the next
generation of electro-optic devices such as blue light emitters and
photodetectros. The proposed investigations will encompass a range of open ended
polarization and frequency-dependent investigations. The polarization studies
have the potential to identify gross structural problems associated with the
growth of these thin films such as mixed phases, and misorientation. The
frequency-dependent studies of the solid interfaces, and in many cases of the
bulk thin films as well, will provide unique spectroscopic information about
these systems with the potential to reveal new information about defects, band
profiles, and strain in these systems. %%% When dissimilar crystals are abruptly
adjoined, an interfacial region is formed with physical properties that are
fundamentally different from those of the neighboring bulk materials. Since the
microscopic characteristics of the junction often play a prominent role in
determining the macroscopic properties of the material, the junction is
important to understand. At the most basic level we would like to understand how
specific interfacial stoichiometries bring about particular interfacial energy
level structures, band offsets, band profiles, and morphologies. On a mo re
technological level, "interface quality" is known to affect the properties of
injection lasers and LED's, as well as charge transport in photodetectors and
microelectronic circuits. A roblem of great fundamental and practical importance
then, is to elucidate the role played by various interfacial properties such as
level structure in affecting the properties of the material as a whole.
Unfortunately the buried solid interface is difficult to probe by conventional
means because traditional optical spectroscopies lack interface specificity, and
traditional surface diagnostics have a limited penetration depth. The proposed
work seeks to employ second-order nonlinear optical techniques to study these
interfaces. The nonlinear optical method is particularly attractive because it
possesses the long penetration depths characteristic of most optical probes, and
the intrinsic interface sensitivity characteristic of all second-order optical
processes. ***