* 9701028
* Orthogonal Laurent Polynomials, Moment Theory, Pade         Approximants and Continued Fractions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* William Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 32,553.00

Jones Abstract Jones proposes research in four closely related areas: (1) Strong
Moment Theory, (2) Orthogonal Laurent Polynomial Sequences (OLPS's), (3)
Applications of Szego Polynomials, and (4) Computation of Special Functions.
Following are brief descriptions of the proposed research. (1)Research on strong
moment problems will be focused on determining all solutions of a given problem
when more than one solution is known to exist. For certain classes of problems
we propose to show that there are infinitely many solutions in the form of step-
functions. For the infinite family of moment problems associated with bi-
sequences of log-normal moments, we propose to obtain explicit expressions for
all solutions of the moment problems, by using the Nevanlinna parametrization.
(2) A primary goal for research in this area is the determination of explicit
formulas for OLPS's that are analogues of the classical orthogonal polynomials
of Jacobi, Hermite and Laguerre. Explicit formulas will also be sought for
recurrence formulas, Rodrigues' formulas, differential equations, quadrature
formulas and other known properties of the classical polynomials. For areas (3)
and (4) our primary goal is to investigate computational methods for use in
applying recently obtained Theoretical results to problems of science and
technology. Orthogonal functions are used as building blocks to describe in
mathematical language a large number of physical phenomena; for example: (a) the
magnetic field of the earth (for navigation and geophysical research), (b)
musical tones, (c) motion of ocean tides, (d) alternating electrical currents
and (e) force fields due to gravitational attraction (orbiting planets and
satellites) and electrostatics. Examples of orthogonal functions that help form
the basis of mathematical physics (and its engineering applications) are
spherical and cylindrical harmonics, Fourier series and orthogonal polynomials.
OLPS's are r elatively new orthogonal functions introduced in the 1980's by the
principal investigator and collaborators (Thron, Waadeland and Njastad).
Originally they were used to solve strong moment problems. Jones proposes their
application to quadrature formulas for efficient computation of integrals that
arise in science and engineering. Szego polynomials are applicable to frequency
analysis problems that arise in such fields as communication (digital
transmission of radio, television and telephone signals), radar, phonetics,
speech processing, speech therapy, and teaching the deaf to speak. Our research
will compare Szego polynomial methods with other known methods, seeking to
refine the Szego method and exploit its application.