* 9701829
* AMP:  The Georiga-United Negro College Fund Alliances for   Minority Participants
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2005
* Thomas Cole, Clark Atlanta University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2005
* USD 4,400,000.00

HRD-9701829 Cole Clark Atlanta University, in cooperation with its sister United
Negro College Fund (UNCF) institutions in Georgia (Morehouse, Morris Brown,
Paine and Spelman Colleges), proposes to establish an Alliance for Minority
Participation (AMP) program. The junior college partner is Atlanta Metropolitan
College and the Atlanta Public Schools is the junior precollege partner. The
combined undergraduate enrollment of the Georgia-UNCF AMP exceeds 15,000 with
more than 55,000 precollege students. The enrollment in the sciences,
engineering and mathematics (SEM) is 2,640. The goal of the program is to double
the number of SEM graduates by the year 2002 based on the 1996 rate and to
improve the quality of instruction to insure that increased numbers of
baccalaureate recipients go on to graduate study. Building on the strengths of
each partner, this AMP will (1) increase the recruitment efforts of potential
SEM majors from Georgia; (2) establish or enhance prefreshmen summer bridge
programs for 125 students; (3) provide financial support through scholarships
and research assistantships; (4) provide students with research experiences; (5)
improve the SEM curricula with a special emphasis on entry level courses; (6)
improve the instruction in entry level SEM courses; and (7) conduct workshops on
mentoring and peer tutoring, and establish relationships with 10 graduate
programs. Dr. Thomas W. Cole, Jr. President of Clark Atlanta University is
Principal Investigator, Dr. Melvin R. Webb is Project Director and Dr. Denise
Stephenson- Hawk is Project Co-Director. Dr. Thomas W. Cole, Jr. will Chair the
AMP's Governing Board. The National Advisory Committee will be chaired by Dr.
David C. Turner of the Naval Research Laboratory. Each AMP institution will have
a campus coordinator and an interdisciplinary faculty team to work with the
program. UNCF will provide staff resources as well as fund-raising and publicity
assistance.