* 9701470
* CAREER:  Development and Utilization of Molecular           Simulations in Engineering Education and Research
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Edward Maginn, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 05/31/2001
* USD 305,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal No: CTS-9701470 Proposal Type: CAREER Principal Investigator:
Edward J. Maginn Affiliation: University of Notre Dame This CAREER grant is
awarded through the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the
Chemical and Transport Systems Division. The Principal Investigator is Dr.
Edward J. Maginn of the University of Notre Dame. A research program will be
developed that utilizes molecular simulations and theory in tandem with
laboratory experiments to rationally design molecular sieve membranes for
separation and catalytic applications. The program will demonstrate that
molecular modeling can be used effectively as a screening tool which reduces the
number of experiments required in searching for optimal material performance and
operating conditions and as an interpretive tool that enables researchers to
better explain experimental results and develop predictive models. The
application of molecular design principles; to engineering problems is crucial
in the industries served by chemical engineering. Society increasingly demands
products having very specific properties and compositions. This is most easily
seen in the burgeoning pharmaceutical, specialty chemicals and advanced
materials industries. Society also demands that the processes which make these
products have minimal environmental impact. To meet these needs, the discipline
of chemical engineering must respond by developing molecular design and
engineering capabilities that enable precise control over material properties
and manufacturing processes. This can only come from understanding the way micro
and mesoscopic variables, which can now be tailored, affect macroscopic
performance. The work proposed seeks to provide educational and research
capabilities that can be used to meet this growing need.