* 9701678
* CAREER: Surface Scattering Effects in Mine Detection and    Remote Sensing Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Joel Johnson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 09/30/2001
* USD 210,000.00

9701678 Johnson The detection and identification of buried mines is an important
problem given the risk land mines pose to civilian populations, and scattering
from the surface of the ground plays a significant role in the ground
penetrating radar technologies currently under investigation. Ground surface
scattering is also important in the remote sensing of soil moisture with
microwave sensors, and can strongly influence the accuracy of soil moisture
estimates obtained from satellite or aircraft measurements. However, the
contribution of soil surface scattering to radar measurements is still not well
understood, and only empirical models, which allow little insight into methods
for reducing surface clutter effects, are currently available for predictions.
Analytical approximate models for ground surface scattering have also been
developed, but the underlying approximations often are not valid for soil
surfaces, and the models require specification of a surface spatial frequency
spectrum, which is difficult to measure and for which little information is
available. In this project, detailed studies of ground surface scattering which
allow new insight into the important physical processes will be performed
through analytical, numerical, and experimental techniques. The Ohio State
ultra-wideband ground penetrating radar system will be used to measure surface
scattering at the ElectroScience Laboratory (ESL) indoor range under a variety
of conditions, with surface height profiles measured to insure their accurate
characterization. A comparison of measured data with numerical model predictions
for the exact profiles measured distinguishes this work from previous purely
empirical studies of ground surface scattering, and enables conclusive
determinations of the extent to which distributed surface versus discrete and/or
volume scattering is significant. Comparisons with existing analytical models
will be performed based on this improved understanding, with a new analytical
model which inc ludes both surface and discrete or volume scattering effects
resulting from the study. Further measurements will be done on a variety of
outdoor surface profiles, and methods for reducing surface clutter effects on
ground penetrating radar and soil moisture remote sensing systems will be
investigated. ***