* 9701539
* Reliability Enhancement of Power Systems via Condition      Assessment and Early Failure Detection of Polymeric         Equipment
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Norma Hubele, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 09/30/2001
* USD 291,617.00

ECS-9701539 Gorur Power system reliability is dependent on efficient and
accurate characterization of network components. This proposal addresses the
critical need for condition assessment and early failure detection in polymeric
outdoor equipment, key elements in the power delivery system. The present use of
polymeric insulation in power systems is estimated at US $ 2 billion per year
and increasing, with USA being the single largest user. Flashover, or the
inability of the device to maintain the service voltage, and housing material
degradation, which can lead to disastrous consequences such as dropping of the
line, are the principles failure modes experienced in service. Until now, there
is no reliable method available to predict when failure of the insulation, which
is one of the weakest link in the system, will occur. Our interdisciplinary team
of insulation systems expertise and statistical analysis expertise proposes to
focus on making significant breakthroughs to enable condition assessment and
early failure detection by demonstrating that: (1) It is possible to quantify
electrical discharge activity that initiates material degradation, (2)
Statistically efficient designed experiments and models can be used to create a
predictive model linking device characteristics and service conditions to
material degradation and flashover, and (3) A computer model which incorporates
detailed device design can reliably predict flashover occurrence, and
consequently can be used for preventive maintenance in the system. Advancements
in the understanding of aging phenomena of polymers, electric field calculation,
flashover mechanism, data acquisition, signal processing related to electrical
discharges, material characterization and high speed photography will be
utilized in this project. The failure criteria will be translated into
parameters that are easy to use and in industry standard terms. Failures will be
detected from measurements of discharge current, arc dynamics, discharge tempera
ture and chemical detection process. Each of these criteria has potential for
development as a practical sensor device that can be used for preventive and
predictive maintenance.