* 9701716
* "CAREER:  Towards Understanding the Temporal Universe"
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Robert Nemiroff, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen D. Eastwood
* 08/31/2003
* USD 404,750.00

Abstract - Nemiroff The universe we live in changes continually, but most
changes are not easily observed. The planned projects will have a focus on some
of the few areas of astronomy where significant change occurs on easily
measurable time scales. The study of change may brings clues which have far
reaching implications - from the better understanding of the nature of dark
matter to the better understanding of the nature of high energy environments.
The temporal nature of humanity's understanding of our universe lends itself
nicely to public outreach efforts and educational programs. Programs on the
following topics will be carried out: Gamma Ray Bursts: The temporal aspects of
gamma-ray bursts will be further explored. Previously, there was the successful
detection of the existence of time-dilation in gamma ray bursts (GRBs). The
precise amount of time-dilation. however, is still unknown by almost a factor of
1.5. The effort will be to work toward increasingly accurate calibration of this
important attribute with regard to different samples, systematic errors, and the
amount expected from calibration to best-fit cosmological brightness
distributions (Log N - Log P). Definitive resolution of the GRB distance scale
debate would occur were a gravitational lensing signature isolated. The search
for lens detection in GRB data will be extended to all GRB data as it becomes
available. The search for new hard GRBs in the BATSE data stream will be
extended. Gravitational Microlensing: The temporal aspects of gravitational
microlensing will be further explored. Previously, there was success in
quantifying the success rate of microlensing (MACHO) searches before results
were reported, and predicting the usefulness of finite source lenses in
determining the nature of the lenses. Currently, the microlensing searches are
entering a new era - one where common single lens, point source events have only
statistical value. More complex events, such as those involving binary lenses
and finite sources, have become increasingly important as they give more direct
evidence of the mass, velocity, and distance to the lens. The effort will
continue to study how best to deconvolve mass, distance, and velocity using
multiple lens and finite source size effects. The mass and density of Galactic
lenses currently implied is controversial and goes to the heart of the Galactic
dark matter problem. The effort will include the use of computer simulations to
better study which microlensing measurements best deconvolve mass from the
amplitude and duration of finite source events, predict which type of MACHO
surveys would yield best information about the density and composition of our
Galactic halo, and scrutinize public domain data for finite source size effects
and implications. Astronomical Debates: Disputes at the forefront of astronomy
also change. Two successful astronomical debates have been staged. These modern
debates act a natural platform for the teaching of astronomical subjects and for
public outreach. Three more debates are planned. Astronomy Picture of the Day
(APOD): As the universe changes daily, so does APOD. Each day APOD will display
a different astronomically oriented picture on the World Wide Web along with a
heavily hyperlinked description. In its 1.5 year existence, APOD has acquired
many thousands of readers and has been praised by magazines including The New
Yorker. APOD' s archive now contains many of the most famous astronomy pictures.
APOD's use in education is shown by it popularity in astronomy class home pages,
and its outreach potential by the high access rate from the businesses domain.
The APOD's will be expanded, to create an outreach program for cooperating U.S.
universities, and to directly incorporate student interns in APOD's daily
routine.