* 9701775
* AMP:  The University of Texas System Alliance for Minority  Participation
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2005
* Pablo Arenaz, University of Texas at El Paso
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2005
* USD 5,227,595.00

HRD-9701775 Arenaz The University of Texas System Alliance for Minority
Participation (UT-System AMP) brings together all nine academic components of
The University of Texas System and ten regional community college partners in an
effort to increase the number of under-represented minority students and
students from other underserved populations enrolling in and graduating from
baccalaureate programs in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology and
entering graduate programs in SMET fields of UT-System universities. The
activities of the UT-System AMP are supported by partnerships with industry and
government agencies, particularly national laboratories. The educational
institutions in the Alliance serve a rapidly growing region, where by the
decade's end minorities will comprise a majority of population. Prominent among
the institutions are those in the U.S.-Mexico Border regions serving large
numbers of Hispanic students and those in metropolitan areas serving mainly
commuter students, including many minorities. The UT-System places a high degree
of importance, system-wide, on improving retention among undergraduates and
proving enhanced opportunities for these undergraduates to enter graduate
programs in SMET. This proposal also emphasize the system-wide sharing of
resources to attain these goals. In Phase II, the University of Texas System
Alliance for Minority Participation is committed to achieving the following
objectives: 1) The UT-System AMP universities will graduate a minimum of 1,500
under-represented minority and other underserved students with B.S. degrees in
SMET by 2002, an increase of 70% over 1995-1996 baseline and 2) the UT- System
AMP universities will enroll a minimum of 600 under-represented minority and
other underserved student in the SMET graduate programs by the fall of 2002, an
increase of about 40% over the fall 1995 baseline. AMP program activities will
focus on three major areas: (1) retention of students who are SMET majors
through the development of strategies of all partner institutions to address
retention of second year students in SMET; (2) mentoring and career development
opportunities for SMET majors interested in pursuing an advanced degree.
Activities include the development of a joint graduate school application for
UT-System institutions, GRE workshops and career development/mentoring
activities at each partner institution; and (3) stipend support, mentoring and
training for students participating in research and summer bridge activities.
The UT-System AMP is permanently changing the nature of SMET higher education in
Texas. Through the UT-System AMP, the participating universities have raised the
visibility and increased the awareness of the chancellor, presidents and chief
academic officers about SMET program outcomes and the status of under-
represented minority students. Providing leadership to the UT-System Alliance
for Minority Participation will be a Governing Board, chaired by James Duncan,
Executive Vice Chancellor of The University of Texas System which includes
presidents, vice-presidents or provosts of UT-System member institutions and
participating community colleges as well as a selected number of experts from
industry and the national R&amp;D community. Meeting annually, the Governing
Board will continue to provide general oversight of the UT-System AMP. The
Academic Leadership Council (ALC), composed of deans, chairs and distinguished
faculty are involved in the implementation of AMP activities at their
institution. The ALC meets twice yearly.