* 9701692
* CAREER: Wavelet-Based Nonlinear Digital Signal Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Robert Nowak, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2001
* USD 212,681.00

The application of Digital Signal Processing (DSP) has been driven by the rapid
growth of digital computing power and the need for fast, reliable computer
processing techniques for communication, biomedical, manufacturing, seismic,
radar, and a wide variety of other signals for commercial and scientific
interest. Despite the great success of traditional DSP techniques, many real-
world problems remain unsolved due to the nonlinearities and non-Gaussian noises
often encountered in these applications. Solving these more complex problems
requires the development of new, more flexible, nonlinear DSP theory and tools.
The objectives of this project are to develop these new tools and theory, and to
transfer them directly into practice and into the engineering classroom. A new
framework for nonlinear DSP based on the wavelet transform is currently under
study. The desirable properties of the wavelet transform, such as time-
frequency localization and signal compression, are being exploited to develop
sophisticated, yet tractable, nonlinear processing techniques. Key elements of
the work include the development of statistical re-sampling methods and data-
adaptive wavelet analyses for nonlinear DSP. Applications of the new framework
to cross-disciplinary problems in imaging and communications are being
investigated. The principal investigator is concurrently developing innovative
approaches to engineering education including Internet-based tutorials and
documentation of new research, cross-disciplinary student design projects, and
tools for curriculum assessment.