* 9701969
* CAREER:  Transition Metal Initiators for the Synthesis of   Well-Defined Polypeptides
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Timothy Deming, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 04/30/2001
* USD 350,000.00

Professor Deming's research focuses on the use of transition metal complexes as
initiators for the synthesis of well-defined polypeptides. Polymerization of
alpha-amino acid N-carboxyanhydrides using various Cu, Ni, Pd and Zn complexes
provides a nonbiological alternative for the preparation of polypeptides,
including block co-polymers expected to display properties rivaling those of
naturally occurring structural proteins. Light scattering, viscometry, and x-ray
diffraction, as well as mechanical testing and processing, will permit
characterization and evaluation of the materials produced. Professor Deming will
introduce a biomaterials curriculum at the undergraduate and graduate levels,
presenting core macromolecular courses and covering biopolymer synthesis and the
structure, dynamics, and processing of biomaterials. With this CAREER award, the
Synthetic Organic Program supports the research and educational activities of
Professor Timothy J. Deming of the Materials and Chemistry Departments at the
University of California, Santa Barbara. Professor Deming's research focuses on
the use of transition metal complexes as initiators for the formation of well-
defined polypeptides, specifically targeting materials which are expected to
mimic naturally occurring structural polypeptides such as spider silk and
collagen. These materials are of particular interest because of their excellent
physical properties, biocompatability, biodegradability, and potential for
biomedical applications. Professor Deming's educational activities are focused
on the development of a new curriculum that consists of a core sequence of
courses covering the science of large molecules and additional courses focused
on biological materials. This training, at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels, will be complemented by student involvement in biomaterials research
programs, affording a unique opportunity to participate in multidisciplinary
research and laying the groundwork for effective future collaborative research
efforts.