* 9701148
* Dissertation Research: The Ecological Genetics of PhenotypicResponses to Three Light Environments in Collinsia verna
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Andrew Jarosz, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 05/31/1998
* USD 4,645.00

9701148 Jarosz Most organisms live in variable environments. For example,
nearly all plants experience frequent temporal fluctuations in temperature,
light, moisture, and nutrients during their lifetimes. Only recently have
biologists begun to address the significance of this environmental heterogencity
with regard to natural selection. A general expectation is that environmental
heterogeneity will favor plants that are phenotypically plastic. An adaptively
plastic plant expresses a phenotype appropriate for the environmental conditions
in which it occurs. For example, a plant growing in shade might produce large
thin leaves to efficiently harvest the limited light, while the same plant
growing in full sun might produce smaller, thicker leaves to minimize water
loss. Each leaf phenotype allows the plant to be more fit, i.e., to produce more
seeds, than if the alternate phenotype were expressed. Despite the ubiquity of
phenotypic plasticity of most traits, the ecological meaning and adaptive
relevance of phenotypic variation in natural populations have seldom been
investigated. The PIs will characterize the genetic basis of phenotypic
responses to three light environments by studying individuals of known genetic
relationship in a natural population of the winter annual wildflower, Collinsia
verna (blue-eyed Mary). The PIs will examine the fitness consequences of light-
induced phenotypic changes by studying traits known to respond to different
light levels and/or to be closely related to fitness (e.g., germination date,
size at overwintering, leaf size and shape, plant size and branching pattern,
date of first flowering, number of flowers, number of seeds, and seed size).
Human activity is causing unprecedented environmental change at all scales from
local habitat fragmentation to global climate change, with far reaching
consequences for earth's biodiversity. The results of this research will
contribute to our understanding of many important questions about biodiversity
and it s management: What are the determinants of species ranges? What
constitutes a stressful environment for a species? How do individuals and
species respond to novel and changing environments? When can species be
reasonably expected to adapt to change, as opposed to going extinct? By
assessing the adaptive nature of phenotypic responses to light, and by
quantifying the potential for the further change in plastic traits, this study
will make an important contribution to our understanding natural selection in
heterogeneous or changing environments.