* 9701581
* CAREER:  Novel High Magnetoresistance Oxide Thin Film       Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Yuri Suzuki, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2002
* USD 318,495.00

9701581 Suzuki This CAREER project addresses the role of structural distortions
in magnetic properties of ferromagnetic perovskite materials. A major objective
is to correlate structural distortions with magnetic properties to shed light on
the origin of anomalously large magnetoresistance effects. Effects of lattice
strain of cubic perovskite ferromagnets in thin films grown on prudently
oriented substrates, in particular piezoelectrics, will be studied. In thin film
samples on piezoelectric substrates, strain can be applied to the sample
externally by applying a voltage to the substrate. These studies aim to
elucidate the effect of structural distortion on the magnetic properties,
including magnetoresistive response and Curie temperature, and thus identify
appropriate theoretical interpretations. Conversely the effect of varying the
strength of the magnetic interactions on the structural and magnetic properties
will be studied in related layered ferromagnetic perovskites that have only
recently been isolated in bulk and in heterostructures of ferromagnetic and
paramagnetic cubic perovskites. This series of thin film samples is expected to
uniquely allow systematic tuning of structural and magnetic properties. An
education program in which the magnetics research is integrated into
undergraduate and graduate experiences will be developed. This includes a course
on magnetics for advanced undergraduates and graduate students, and advanced
magnetics lab course and undergraduate internships in the PI's lab. The aim is
to provide a firm foundation in materials science, condensed matter physics and
solid state chemistry, and especially to develop students' experimental and
analytical skills. %%% The project addresses forefront research issues in a
topical area of materials science having high technological relevance. The
research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
level to important aspects of magnetic materials and devices, in general.
Additionally, the fundamenta l knowledge and understanding gained from the
research is expected to contribute to improving the performance of advanced
devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
designing and producing improved materials, and materials combinations. An
important feature of the program is the emphasis on education, and on the
integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant research area. ***