* 9701053
* Dissertation Research: Modeling the Consequences of         Heterogeneous Light Environments for Seedling Perfomance in Tropical Wet Forests: A Multi-Scale Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Robin Chazdon, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1999
* USD 9,578.00

9701053 Chazdon This proposal addresses the critical need to create predictive
models of seedling response to changing patterns of environmental heterogeneity.
The PIs propose to develop mechanistic models of whole-plant carbon gain that
will be coupled with studies of plant performance in relation to light
heterogeneity in tropical forest environments. The PIs will examine levels of
plant response to natural spatial and temporal variation of light to integrate
leaf physiology with whole-plant architecture, leaf display, and biomass
allocation. The approach involves two components. First, known genotypes of
three shade-tolerant tree species will be planted along a continuous gradient of
light availability from the center of a gap, through gap edges, and into the
forest understory. An architectural model will be used to scale from leaf-level
measures of photosynthesis to whole-plant estimates of carbon gain. From these
data the PIs will develop and parameterize a maximum likelihood model of whole-
plant carbon gain and growth as a function of continuous variation in light
availability. This model will then be used to predict growth of transplanted
seedlings of the same family lines in secondary forest and native tree
plantations, two habitat types differing in patterns of light availability.
Since changing land use patterns can dramatically affect both spatial and
temporal patterning of light, this information will help to understand and
predict how plants may respond to current and future land use changes.
Predicting the consequences of heterogeneous light environments for seedling
populations in tropical forests requires an explicit characterization of the
pattern of heterogeneity as well as patterns of plant response to this
heterogeneity.