* 9701820
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny, Morphology and Life       History: Effects of Dramatic Size Variation in Monitor      Lizards
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Allan Larson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 05/31/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9701820 Losos This award will provide funds for domestic and international
travel and for materials and supplies to enhance the dissertation research of
Mr. David J. Pepin, a doctoral student at Washington University in St. Louis
working under the supervision of Drs. Jonathan B. Losos and Allan Larson. Mr.
Pepin's dissertation research will utilize phylogenetic relationships among 46
species of monitor lizards (genus Varanus), as inferred from mitochondrially-
and nuclear-encoded DNA sequences, to examine and test several hypotheses
regarding variation in morphology and life history. Monitor lizards vary
dramatically in body size and are an ideal, model group in which to test these
hypotheses. Specifically, the influence of allometry on life-histmry traits will
be examined to determine the influence of life-history on body size.
Reproductive traits to be examined include egg-clutch number, and hatchling
size. The award will provide support for Mr. Pepin to travel to several museums
in the United States to obtain data from specimens sampled from the Philippines,
Guam, Indonesia, and Northern Africa. Foreign travel to Australia and Western
Europe will allow Mr. Pepin to obtain data from specimens not available in U.S.
museums. Funds for materials and supplies will permit acquisition of both
morphological and molecular data. . Support for training of graduate students in
modern technologies is critical to maintain the workforce of scientists capable
of addressing questions and issues in global biology.