* 9701092
* Dissertation Research: Origin and Evolutionary Relationshipsof the Cultivated Passion Fruit (Passiflora)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Robert Jansen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9701092 Jansen Graduate student Anne Hansen, under the direction of Profs.
Robert Jansen and Lawrence Gilbert at the University of Texas, is studying
plants of the tropical passion flower genus, Passiflora, in South America. The
genus is large and taxonomically difficult, with over 475 species; the subgenus
Passiflora with an estimated 100 species is the main target for study. Field
work in Brazil will augment materials collected from other regions of the
neotropics, complementing herbarium holdings. The general goals include improved
species classification, with description of reliable and stable characters for
identification, and the construction of a phylogeny for the group, from new
molecular data derived from restriction site mapping of the chloroplast genome
and from DNA sequencing of nuclear ribosomal genes. The widely cultivated edible
passion fruit, Passiflora edulis, is a member of this subgenus, and a related
goal is determination of the closest relatives of the cultivated species and the
likely area of origin in South America. Considerable ecological work has been
done on the interactions between Passiflora host plants and herbivorous insects
of the butterfly genus Heliconius, in the American tropics. Many insects are
specific to particular Passiflora species, and some are thought to sequester
noxious plant compounds from their host plants (alkaloids, cyanogenic compounds)
as potential chemical defenses of their own. Further research on this ecological
interaction is limited by the lack of a phylogeny of the Passiflora species; it
is not known whether closely related insect species feed on closely related
plant species, or whether host switching is unconstrained by genealogical
relationship. The project will improve the taxonomy of Passiflora species, and
facilitate future ecological research by providing a reliable phylogeny for the
plants.