* 9701063
* Dissertation Research:  Why Animals Form Groups:  Predator  Avoidance Versus Foraging Success in Fiddler Crabs
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* David Wethey, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 05/31/2000
* USD 9,100.00

9701063 Wethey Why animals for groups is central question in the field of
sociobiology. Researchers have proposed five models to explain why social
aggregations form. Three of these suggest that groups form because they help
protect group members from predators. Mathematically, group membership should
lower the risk of predation to each individual at the expense of its neighbors.
Conversely, many experiments have demonstrated that rapid scattering of a group
during a predator's attack can decrease the risk of predation by confusing the
predator and allowing the prey to escape. Other work has shown that predation
risk is decreased in groups because there are more sets of eyes to watch for
possible danger. The other two models that explain social aggregation suggest
that group formation would increase each member's ability to find food.
Experiments have demonstrated that many animals are capable of watching each
other's behavior and learning about good food sources from one another, and the
opportunity for this would be higher in large groups than in small ones.
Additionally, larger groups of animals tend to move in straighter lines than
smaller groups, and it has been shown mathematically that this will lead to an
increased likelihood of entering pristine, un-foraged areas. To test these five
models, this study will examine group formation in burrow-building crustaceans
that regularly form large flocks, and are extremely numerous in coastal marshes.
Use of field experiments, direct observations, and computer analysis of video
recordings, will determine which model best explains why animals form groups.