* 9701258
* Dissertation Research:  Selection on Male Ornaments Through Male-Male Competition
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* William Wagner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 06/30/2000
* USD 8,150.00

9701258 Dissertation Research: Selection on Male Ornaments Through Male-Male
Competition Natural selection of ornaments in males have received considerable
attention. Most recent attention, however, has focused on the role of female
preference for male ornaments. One model regarding how such traits and
preferences can begin to co-evolve is pre-existing bias. According to models of
pre-existing bias, female preference predates the trait. The reasons such biases
may exist are numerous, such as, a bias may be related to some other context
(i.e. feeding) or to some means of nonspecific evaluation or due to some bias
that no longer extant. Any trait that arises that can take advantage of such a
bias would be selected. Though such biases are demonstrated in females of many
species, contributing to the exaggerated and maintenance of male traits, it has
not been examined whether males may also have such biases. This study will
examine whether the males of one group may have pre-existing biases (in addition
to the females) which has contributed to the exaggeration of a sexually selected
trait. Intra-sexual selection due to pre existing biases may play an important
role in the exaggeration of male traits, but have not been previously examined.
Positive results from the proposed work would suggest that students of sexual
selection should reexamine the role of male-male competition in the evolution of
male traits.