* 9701902
* REU SITE:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the   Oklahoma Weather Center
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1997,03/31/1999
* Mark Palmer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 03/31/1999
* USD 79,695.00

9701902 Palmer An objective of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Program is to provide talented undergraduate students with the opportunity to
obtain active experience in research. After a series of summer programs hosted
by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration s (NOAA) National Severe
Storm s Laboratory (NSSL), scientists at various meteorological institutions
Norman, OK (collectively known as the Weather Center) met to discuss the summer
program and ways to improve it. The result was a proposal to the NSF to
establish a REU site at the Weather Center. The REU program proposed for 1991
addressed the concerns identified by the hosts of the NOAA program with a plan
to increase the number of students, the number of mentors, and the variety of
institutions participating, as well as the level of financial support to be
offered and an increased effort to recruit students from underrepresented
groups. In addition to NSF, the NSSL continued its support at about the same
level as in 1990. For ten weeks, from June 10 through August 16, 1991, fourteen
undergraduates from eight different states and nine different undergraduate
institutions participated in the program of lectures, demonstrations, laboratory
experiments, field trips, and individual research projects. Their positive
evaluations of their experience led to REU sites in the Summers of 1992 and
1993. Under the current award, this series will continue with approximately ten
undergraduate students participating in the late Spring/early Summer of 1998. At
the Oklahoma Weather Center, students will participate in atmospheric research
and data analysis under the supervision of mentors from throughout the Oklahoma
Weather Center. The students' research experiences will be supplemented by tours
of Weather Center facilities and lectures to produce a well-rounded summer
learning experience. This will give the students an opportunity to become more
aware of scientific ethics an d issues relating to gender and racial
discrimination, and to judge for themselves whether a scientific research career
might be right for them. The students will prepare and present papers reporting
the results of their research. The students will be provided housing,
transportation to and from the REU, and a modest stipend to make the program
accessible to economically disadvantaged students who must work during summers
to support their continuing education. The Principal Investigator will make
recruiting trips to encourage underrepresented minorities and women to apply to
the program. For example, the Principal Investigator will travel to and work
closely with the Department of Physics at Clark Atlanta University (CAU), a
historically African-American university, in recruiting motivated students. The
Principal Investigator also intends to perform a follow-up evaluation of
students who have participated in these programs in the past in order to obtain
some measure of effectiveness. ***