* 9701970
* CPMSA: THE GARY INITIATIVE
* EDU,ESR
* 09/01/1997,11/30/2002
* Mary Guinn, Gary Community School Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Reed
* 11/30/2002
* USD 3,489,397.00

PI: Hawkins, James The GARY INITIATIVE is a plan to improve the quality and
quantity of science and mathematics education received by all students in Gary.
It brings together the Gary Community School Corporation, five higher education
institutions, the business community, parents, and the Gary Accord. The Gary
Community School Corporation is a minority- majority urban system located in
Gary, Indiana, a city of 116,500 persons. Gary is located at the southern tip of
Lake Michigan and is surrounded by resources from the Indiana Dunes National
Lakeshore, steel mills, and those of the greater Chicago area. Three aspects of
Gary community demographics which are important in this project are ethnic
composition of the community, the out migration of people, and the economics of
the Gary community. The population of Lake County is 32 percent African-
American; the school population of Gary is approximately 96 percent
AfricanAmerican. Gary graduates have low SAT scores and test below state and
national norms in science and mathematics. This project is specifically intended
to increase performances in science and mathematics. This comprehensive and
systemic plan is a system-wide initiative that will impact all students. The
school system currently has 20,600 students in 22 elementary schools, 6 middle
schools, 6 high schools, an alternative middle school, an adult education
center, and a career center. The plan supports the district objectives to
increase the number of minority students enrolling in and successfully
completing pre-college courses which will lead them to pursue undergraduate
programs in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology (SMET). The
objectives are: 1 . To align the PreK-12 science and mathematics curricula to
national standards, state proficiencies and competencies. 2. To enhance PreK-12
teachers' knowledge of science and mathematics and e nhance their use of
instructional strategies which insure student success. 3. To increase to 30% the
proportion of students who enroll in and successfully complete Algebra I by
grade B. 4. To increase to 50% the proportion of students who currently enroll
in and successfully complete three or more years in both science and mathematics
starting with the gateway courses of Algebra I and Biology 1. 5. To increase the
proportion of students who meet the standards of the state proficiency tests. 6.
To increase the proportion of students who meet national norms on citywide
subject specific tests in science and mathematics. 7. To provide opportunities
for student enrichment in science and mathematics within and outside of the
school environment. 8. To establish a parent network which will facilitate a
partnership of parents, teachers, and students. 9. To extend and enhance
partnerships with community, business, and educational agencies. We will meet
these objectives by: Revising the PreK-1 2 science and mathematics curricula to
meet the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) Standards, National
Science Education Standards (NSES), and state proficiencies and competencies.
Providing staff development to align instruction with national standards for
teaching science and mathematics. Implementing instructional models in science
and mathematics that incorporate unit planning, performance-based activities,
assessment, and cooperative learning. Upgrading PreK-12 science and mathematics
departments with equipment, materials, supplies, and other resources needed for
inquiry-based science and mathematics teaching. Expanding student enrichment
activities, for grades PreK-12 for after-school, weekend and summer programs
such as science and mathematics clubs, Family Science/Math Nights, and academic
competitions. Providing and strengthening partnerships and mentorsh ips with
community, business, and education. Providing parent and community networks to
facilitate the objectives of this proposal.