* 9701532
* Scanning Hall Probe Microscopy of Superconducting Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,10/31/2002
* Stuart Field, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/2002
* USD 220,489.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9701532 Field This experimental research project
focuses on unusual magnetic properties of Type II superconductors using a state
of the art cryogenic scanning Hall probe microscope, with high spatial (one
micrometer) and temporal resolutions. The first system to be studied is a large
array of mesoscopic superconducting rings. The magnetic moments in such rings
can couple "antiferromagnetically", via purely magnetic interactions, which have
been observed in preliminary experiments. Cleaner arrays will be studied in a
search for true long range order. The microscope will also be used to study the
static and dynamic properties of vortices in superconductors with both random
and periodic pinning. In the random case the primary interest is in spatially-
resolved dynamics of vortices in a disordered potential, when strongly driven by
either magnetic fields or applied currents, with the expectation of getting new
information on the depinning transition. With periodic pinning, experiments will
probe the consequences of variations of two competing length scales: the vortex-
vortex spacing and the distance between pinning sites. %%% This experimental
research project explores the magnetic properties of superconductors, with
particular attention to how magnetic flux moves through a superconductur when
pushed by an external magnetic field, or by a current passing through the
superconductor. Since it is this flux motion which generally results in the loss
of perfect conductivity, which is the hallmark of superconductors, a deeper
understanding of these issues may lead to improved technological applications of
superconductors, as in power generation and transmission. The flux motion will
be imaged using the powerful new technique of scanning Hall probe microscopy.
The further deve lopment of this instrument, which may find use in many fields
(such as hard disk technologies) where the local structure of the magnetic field
is of interest, is an integral part of the project. Results from this research
may include unusual new effects or materials which may find new application in
technology. This research project is interdisciplinary in nature and involves
graduate students who will be excellently trained to enter positions in
industry, government or education. ***