* 9701225
* Kloosterman Sums and Related Exponential Sums
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Yangbo Ye, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 07/31/2001
* USD 53,000.00

Ye 9701225 This award funds research of Professor Ye, who works on Kloosterman
sums. The classical Kloosterman sum has important applications in number theory.
An example is Kuznetsov's estimate of a weighted sum of Kloosterman sums which
is a step toward the Linnik--Selberg conjecture; the proof is based on the
Kuznetsov trace formula. Generalized Kloosterman sums appear in various relative
trace formulas; such a relative trace formula is indeed an equality between a
generalized Kuznetsov trace formula and one of its relative versions. The above
appearances of the Kloosterman sums suggest their central role in number theory
and group representation theory. This research project is centered at
Kloosterman sums and related exponential sums, their generalizations, and their
applications. The objectives are listed below. (i) The Langlands functoriality
conjecture predicts functorial relationships between representations of
different groups. If a functorial lifting can be studied by a relative trace
formula, its fundamental lemma may be reduced to an identity of exponential sums
of the Kloosterman type. The first objective is to study specific lifting
problems and deduce the corresponding identities of exponential sums. (ii)
Conversely, such an identity not only will imply the fundamental lemma of the
relative trace formula, but also might be used to deduce the whole relative
trace formula, based on recent results on Shalika germ expansions and
exponential sum expansions of local orbital integrals of relative trace
formulas. The second objective is to deduce a relative trace formula from its
identity of exponential sums. (iii) Important applications of the classical
Kloosterman sum are usually based on estimation of its values and weighted sums.
The last objective is to estimate certain weighted sums of generalized
Kloosterman sums and related high ranking exponential sums. This proposal is in
the part of mathematics known as the Langlands program. This program represents
a fus ion of Number Theory and Representation Theory , and it has been a
stimulus to a great deal of recent research in both fields. Number Theory is one
of the oldest branches of mathematics and is concerned with the most basic of
mathematical objects, the ordinary whole numbers. However, it turns out that in
order to express many of the patterns and relations discovered by
mathematicians, it is necessary to use some of the most advanced and technical
theories of twentieth century mathematics. On the other hand, the problems of
number theory have provided a powerful stimulus to research in other diverse
parts of the discipline. The Langland's program provides a framework for
investigating and vastly generalizing the so-called reciprocity laws of number
theory using the tools of infinite-dimensional representation theory. Although
very technical and deep, this program has found astonishing applications in
areas like theoretical computer science (construction of expanding graphs) and
coding theory (finding optimal Goppa codes). It has also played a role in some
of the recent spectacular developments in number theory itself, such as the
proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.