* 9701304
* CAREER: Computationally Efficient Error-Correcting Codes and Their Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Daniel Spielman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Sloan
* 08/31/2001
* USD 205,000.00

The goals of this research are to improve the computational efficiency of
error-correcting codes and to apply techniques from this effort to other
problems of computation and information theory. Error-correcting codes are
essential components of all electronic communication systems. New constructions
for error-correcting codes that could be encoded and decoded very efficiently
have recently been developed. The objectives of this research are to extend this
initial work by: Improving the error-tolerance and speed of the explicit
constructions of error-correcting codes based upon previously developed codes.
Developing algorithms that can certify the quality of the randomized
constructions. Using related techniques to improve the computational efficiency
of other tasks vital to information theory and electronic communication.
Developing quality implementations of the codes that will make it easier for
engineers to test how these codes would perform in their own application areas.
The educational goals of the proposed investigation are broader in scope. They
involve the design of classes that teach graduate students about the larger
mathematical framework on which this research rests. These classes should
attract students from mathematics as well as computer science to learn about the
new fascinating ways in which ideas from mathematics can be applied to solve
important problems in computer science. These classes are designed to teach how
connections in research are made as well as provide them with many areas ripe
for connection. Eventually, these classes will teach the students another
essential element of the principal investigator's research methodology: that of
using computational experiments in mathematical research. They will learn how
one can use computer experiments to make and test combinatorial conjectures. As
they begin to see the computer as a tool that can aid them in their own
research, they will inevitably become concerned with the efficie ncy of
computational algorithms and gain intuition for which mathematical ideas might
result in practical algorithms.***