* 9701768
* (CAREER) Career Development in Geological and Environmental Fluid Mechanics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Michael Manga, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2002
* USD 235,415.00

9701768 Manga This proposal describes long-term educational and related research
activities in the area of geological and environmental fluid mechanics. A set of
undergraduate courses will be developed to replace the standard piece-meal and
phenomenological teaching of the subject with an inductive approach; classes
will focus on a set of hands-on active-learning laboratory experiments which
emphasize the process of discovery. A set of graduate classes will also be
developed which focus on interdisciplinary collaborative research projects, with
an emphasis on interactive learning and communication. A set of complementary
research activities will address problems in hydrology, geodynamics and
volcanology. This work will involve the same combination of theoretical and
experimental approaches that will be used in the classroom. Specific research
problems include studying the hydrology of spring-dominated streams in the
Oregon Cascades (research will be integrated into a summer field school),
characterizing the dynamics and rheolgy of bubby magmas and lavas, developing
pore length-scale models of multiphase flow in porous materials in order to
understand macroscopic properties of such flows, and relating the chemical
evolution of the Earth's mantle to dynamic processes. Despite the wide range of
these research problems, they all share a common feature, namely, the
application of quantitative methods in fluid mechanics to problems in the
geological and environmental sciences. It is anticipated that much of the
material for lab exercises and graduate classes will be provided by these
research problems, and that the development of lab exercises will in tern
provide inspiration for new research directions.