* 9701120
* Dissertation Research:  Size-Refugia, Alternative States andTrophic Cascades in Pond Benthic Food Webs
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1999
* Mathew Leibold, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 04/30/1999
* USD 9,023.00

9701120 Leibold Several factors can influence the impacts of consumers in food
webs. In simple food chains, the impact of predators increases with
productivity. If prey can attain a refuge from predation due to size at some
point in its life history, however, the food web interactions become more
complex. In this proposal, the investigators will examine how size-structured
prey populations may influence the strength of interactions of predators, and
how initial conditions, species composition, and environmental factors (e.g.,
productivity) may greatly determine the degree to which predators can control
the food web. An ongoing modeling effort shows how all of these factors can
influence the effects of predators in food webs, with particular reference to
potential alternative stable states depending on initial conditions. The salient
features of the model were developed for, and appear to be upheld in small pond
benthic food webs of southern Michigan, where the snail, Helisoma trivolis, is
only susceptible to predators (primarily the Hemipteran, Belostoma flumineum,
leeches, and predatory beetles) when small, whereas another common snail,
Physella gyrina, is susceptible at all sizes. A large mesocosm experiment will
examine the predictions of the model based on prey species identity and
diversity, initial densities, and productivity. Biotic and abiotic surveys of a
wide range of ponds, and enclosure/exclosure experiments m situ will be employed
to further elucidate these effects. Results from this study should shed light
into a variety of questions in ecology concerning the strength of species
interactions in relation to morphological, environmental, and initial
conditions.