* 9701798
* CPMSA: Project SMASH-Science and Mathematics Alliance for Successful Habitude
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Adriana Birne, Union City Board of Education
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 09/30/2000
* USD 600,000.00

PI: Highton, Thomas The Union City School District, a special needs district
(Enterprise Zone) with a total enrollment of 9,017 students 94% of which are
minorities, proposes a multi-year effort in collaboration with Institutions of
Higher Education, which will increase the numbers of underrepresented minorities
prepared and motivated to enroll in precollege SEM classes and to consider SMETE
(Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology Education) by enhancing
teaching effectiveness in science and mathematics across K-12 grade levels. The
proposed pilot project, Science and Math Alliance for a Successful Habitude
(SMASH), will be a five year comprehensive professional development and
assistance program for 315 elementary/middle (K- 8) and 50 secondary teachers,
counselors, students and their parents with a particular focus on: standards
based curriculum implementation, teachers enhancement and professional
development, and raising counselors and parents knowledge of the bridging
mechanisms that Facilitate educational transitions from one level to the next.
The five year systemic project will involve several components: 1) a needs
assessment to give direction to the project; 2) teacher enhancement to develop
teaching skills and content mastery; 3) standard based curriculum
implementation; and 4) teaching assistants component. Through the meeting,
brainstorming, discussion and decision of teacher-led curriculum sequencing and
articulation committees, the teaching process will be examined and new
strategies deployed. All efforts will include full teacher participation. In-
service training workshops will be provided for elementary/middle (K-8) and
secondary grade level teachers to continue content knowledge and to explore the
curriculum standards. The project will facilitate a continuing dialogue among K-
12 faculty throughout the grant period. The university personnel will work with
the classroom teacher in the introduction of hands-on activities and management
strategies and provide guidance in the content areas. In addition, counselors
and parents will be also trained in hands-on science and math activities, and
will be provided with information on SMETE precollege initiatives and SMET
career opportunities. A "Tutorial Assistance" program will be implemented. A
summative and formative evaluation process will be used to assure project
improvement from the date of initial activity to the conclusion of our efforts.
Methodologies will provide rapid feedback to assist in timely management
intervention, planning and decision making, especially to eliminate unnecessary
student failures. This proposed project will build upon existing reform
initiatives already taking place in the Union City school district and its
partner sites. Mr. Henry Cisneros, Secretary of HUD, has designated Union City
as New Jersey's "Campus of learners", one of twenty-four nationwide. Union City
is a Thrust H district for NJSSI and has been funded for a NSF/NIIE project
entitled "Union City On-Line". Its statewide -partner site, NJIT has several NSF
funded initiatives such as Young Scholars Programs, Females in Engineering
Programs, Science and Math Education for the Special Education Population. Upon
completion of the project grant period, the district will have developed an
unique and meaningful curriculum not only on the elementary, middle, and
secondary levels, but will possess a standard based curriculum that relates to
outstanding post- secondary education at prestigious universities.