* 9701360
* After the Genome 2:  Towards a Predictive Functional        Genomics" Conference/November 9-13, 1996, Santa Fe, NM
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Roger Brent, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

Brent 9701360 Many contemporary biologists now recognize the need to understand
two aspects of gene function: to determine the function of individual gene
products, and to determine how those products act together in pathways to
control gene expression, to sense environmental signals, and to execute cellular
processes. This need has become more pressing because of the large numbers of
genes of unknown function that are being identified by genome projects. The vast
increase in the number of sequenced genes has made it important for
pharmaceutical companies to seek methods to decide which proteins to target for
their drug discovery efforts, and has made biologists aware that they will need
better handles on gene function to understand biology in its fundamentals. The
purpose of the second annual "After the Genome" meeting is to bring together
leaders in technological development, technological use, and technological
funding to discuss the state of information acquisition and its use in genomics.
Participants will discuss what new developments are still necessary to address
current limitations on the cost and availability of information and tools. The
result of this focused, open exchange will be disseminated via the internet with
the purpose of engaging community, funding organizations, and academic and
commercial concerns in this discussion. As we move towards the 21st century, the
challenge of genomics will be to utilize the information contained in the vast
amount of sequence, positional, and functional information to create new
research, diagnostic, and therapeutic tools to enhance our understanding of
biological processes. Three current research areas are relevant to these tasks.
One is the recently-christened field of "functional genomics", which takes as
its goal the global assignment of function to genes. Another is the older
discipline that develops tools and models to predict biological outcomes. The
third is the development of methods and instrumentation to underpin the first
and the second. This meeting examines how recent developments such as the yeast
two-hybrid system,. High density arrays, and footprinting can be combined to
facilitate the identification of the function of a gene. A section of the
meeting will also be devoted to the current and future state of data analysis
and information systems in genomics. This conference will brings together people
working in these areas. It emphasizes new approaches and cross-disciplinary
communication.