* 9701745
* Dissertation Research:  The Effect of Stratocladistics on   the Phylogenetic Analysis of Nassariine Gastropods
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Sandra Carlson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 06/30/2000
* USD 4,300.00

9701745 CARLSON Snails placed in the subfamily Nassariinae represent a
significant portion of present-day snail diversity. Hundreds of living species
are known; in addition, hundreds of species appear in a fossil record of at
least 60 million years in age. The geneaology (phylogenetic history) of
nassariine gastropods is not well understood, despite the large number of
species and significant fossil record. One approach to resolving this
phylogenetic history includes using data from both living and fossil species in
a single analysis. However, the data from fossils are more incomplete than the
data from living snails, and this relative incompleteness has caused problems.
Consequently, fossil data have previously not been included in phylogenetic
history reconstructions based on extant species. In this research, Sandra
Carlson and doctoral candidate David Haasl will reconstruct the phylogenetic
history or family tree of the subfamily Nassariinae, combining both an analysis
of shell and anatomical traits and a comparative analysis of the fossil history
of nassariine species. Representatives of each major nassariine group will be
obtained from museum collections and examined for informative shell traits.
Anatomical traits of representative species will be obtained from the literature
and from dissections of specimens. The oldest fossil occurrence of each major
group will be noted. The usefulness of combining fossil data with a trait-based
analysis will be tested by comparing trees constructed both with and without the
inclusion of temporal fossil data.