* 9701339
* Neutron Scattering Techniques Applied to the Investigation  of Prototypical Magnetic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Jeffrey Lynn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/2001
* USD 405,000.00

9701339 Lynn This project will explore three general avenues of research. The
first involves the structure and dynamics of the magnetoresistive oxides. This
work will employ both polarized and unpolarized neutron scattering techniques to
study the magnetic and crystal structures, nature of the coupling between these
two, and the sping and lattice dynamical excitations. The second area concerns
the nature of the vortex state in superconductors, when the lattice becomes
disordered, and when the rare earth magnetic ordering occurs. The final area of
interest involves the study of the spin dynamics of isotropic ferromagnetics.
Polarized beam techniques will be used to separate the longitudinal and
transverse spin dynamics of materials in anomalous systems such as Invar alloys.
We will also continue our investigations of the longitudinal and transverse
fluctuation spectra just below the Curie temperature, and their behavior as a
function of applied field. %%% This project will explore three general avenues
of materials research using neutron scattering techniques. The first involves
the fundamental structural and magnetic properties of the colossal
magnetoresistive oxides, in an effort to establish the origins of the metal
insulator transition in these novel systems. The second aspect concerns a
determination and understanding of the materials properties which control the
superconducting parameters of central importanceto commercial applications, such
as vortex pinning to produce high critical current materials. The final area
concerns the fundamental and practical properties of soft magnetic materials,
which are of commercial importance for transformer cores, magnetic shielding,
etc. Particular emphasis will be placed on the Invar class of soft magnets, as
these are of technical importance because their density does not chan ge with
temperature, in contrast to most metals which expand upon heating. ***