* 9701425
* Dissertation Research: Form and function of the strepsirhineprimate temporomandibular joint
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1999
* Matthew Ravosa, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 04/30/1999
* USD 11,995.00

The temporomandibular joint (TMJ), the point of articulation of the lower jaw
and the cranium, presents a model system for addressing form and function
relationships in primate and mammalian skulls. In the primate group
Strepsirhini, the TMJ is highly suitable for consideration of form-function
associations because of the marked variation in the TMJ, as well as in the
entire jaw. This research will test several functional hypotheses relating TMJ
movements and mechanical loading to TMJ morphology in these previously
unexamined primate species. Additionally, TMJ form and function in strepsirhines
will be compared to haplorhine primates, a second closely-related group of
primates. A combined approach using experimental data and comparative
measurements will be implemented to assess a number of functional hypotheses.
This study will provide the first comprehensive survey of how TMJ form relates
to TMJ movements, loading and size-related factors in strepsirhines as well as
between strepsirhines and haplorhines. Integration of these new findings with
previous research in other primates enables the documentation of evolutionary
changes in the TMJ across primates. These evolutionary changes in the TMJ will
be compared to temporally correlated changes in the jaw, thus providing an
historical perspective to the functional evolution of the primate jaw. Finally,
this research develops a protocol for the assessment of fossil primate TMJ
functional diversity.