* 9701958
* Spin and Pseudospin Degeneracies in Interacting Electron    Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Bennett Goldberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 254,500.00

9701958 Goldberg This experimental research project focuses on conducting
systems formed by the "edge states" that lie near the perimeter of quasi- two
dimensional electron gases in the quantum Hall effect (QHE). Fundamentally new
transport behavior is predicted for sample geometries that bring multiple edge
states into communication. Two sample geometries will be employed in this
project. These are a GaAs/AlGaAs superlattice pillar with edge states
communicating on a 2D surface sheath; and a gated GaAs/AlGaAs heterojunction
with edge states communicating across a long, narrow "line gate" barrier.
Existing theoretical predictions in these cases will be tested with measurements
to be made using a high-field (19Tesla), low temperature (20mK) apparatus on
samples fabricated from MBE-grown GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures. It is expected
that the results will advance general understanding of electronic transport in
quasi-1D- and in anisotropic 3D- materials. %%% This research program examines
ways in which electrons interact with each other to create ordered or collective
structures. In many materials systems magnetism is driven by electronic
interactions and in many technologically important areas like mass storage
devices and computer memory, magnetism plays a fundamental role. Our program is
an experimental effort to develop and examine model systems of magnetism. Only
by using very pure model systems can the electronic interaction effects be
isolated and studied. Our preliminary results have shown that when you have all
electrons magnetically aligned, then forcing one to flip its orientation cause
all its neighbors and their neighbors to turn to partially flip, creating a kind
of swirl or vortex. These swirls of electrons, called Skyrmions, determine the
magnetic properties of the material. To study Skyrmions, our group has built
collaborations with Lucent Technology, the Kepler University in Austria, the
Institute of High Pressure Physics in Russia, and the National High Magnetic
Field Laboratory in Florida. The group encompasses students from high-school
summer interns, to undergraduate and graduate students who will work together
using novel techniques of light transmission to "see" these electron swirls and
study their most fundamental properties. New microscopes are being developed,
which will have eventual application in biology and DNA sequencing, extending
beyond the materials science of this program. New materials systems combining
silicon technology with optical properties will be used, which again will have
application in future generations of optoelectronics. ***