* 9701489
* Effective Diophantine Geometry over Function Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Minhyong Kim, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 07/31/2001
* USD 69,000.00

Kim 9701489 This award provides funds for M. Kim to continue his past research
on the Diophantine geometry of curves over function fields of arbitrary
characteristic. In elementary language, this is the study of equations of type
f(x,y,t)=0 (1) viewed as a two-variable polynomial equation whose coefficients
are functions of t to which we seek solutions (x,y)=(p(t), q(t)), that is, pairs
of polynomials (or rational functions) which satisfy f(p(t),q(t),t)=0 as a
function of t. In particular, he will continue his previous work on `effective'
Mordell conjectures over function fields, which allows one to find all solutions
to (1) (for f's of high genus) by giving a priori bounds on the `height' (which
in this case is the degree) of solution pairs (p(t),q(t)). A result of this sort
over number fields is the long-term eventual goal of this research This is an
outstanding problem in Diophantine geometry whose resolution would provide a
crude algorithm for finding all rational solutions to Diophantine equations in
two variables over the rational numbers. The specific projects go in three
closely related directions: (1) finding more refined geometric height
inequalities in arbitrary characteristic to serve as efficient input into
algorithmic search for solutions; (2) embedding the PI's previous work into the
study of curves on surfaces of general type in the spirit of Bogomolov's theorem
on boundedness of curves of bounded genus, and that of his joint work with
Shepherd-Barron; (3) approaching geometric height inequalities from a more
explicitly algorithmic viewpoint in the hope of finding techniques which would
transfer more readily to number fields than the existing ones. This project
falls into the general area of arithmetic geometry - a subject that blends two
of the oldest areas of mathematics: number theory and geometry. This combination
has proved extraordinarily fruitful - having recently solved problems that
withstood generations. Among its many consequences are new error corre cting
codes. Such codes are essential for both modern computers (hard disks) and
compact disks.