* 9701538
* CAREER: A Program for Research and Education in Fiber-OpticsInvolving Fabrication of Novel Bragg-Grating Devices and    Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Anup Sharma, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 07/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

9701538 Sharma The proposal deals with fabrication of new devices and sensors
using fiber-optic Bragg gratings. While the characteristics of reflection Bragg
gratings is quite well understood, this is not so for tapped Bragg gratings.
This is proposed to be done here. A novel directional coupler consisting of two
tapped Bragg gratings side-by-side will be fabricated. Its application as a
wavelength sensitive light-tap will be inveqtigated. A number of such devices
fabricated in series will be useful for distributed sensing of transverse strain
in Smart Structures. Such a sensor will compliment the well known distributed
sensing of longitudinal strain by reflection Bragg gratings in series.
Reflection Bragg gratings will also be used to fabricate a chemical sensor for
sensing environmental gases like NH3, H2O and CH4 in a novel correlation
spectroscopy set up where a grating will replace the cumbersome bulky reference
cell. With the grating set up 100% modulation of correlation between the gas
absorption lines and the Bragg wavelength can be obtained unlike partial
modulation by Stark shift and broadening of spectral lines as in conventional
correlation spectroscopy. This technique will be used for distributed sensing of
environmental gases. This will have important applications in the area of
monitoring and control of atmospheric pollution. Students will be an integral
part of all research activity described in the proposal. At any time over the
four year duration of the proposed integrated plan one Ph.D. student will be
involved in the research, working towards his/her degree in applied physics. The
University has a work/study program for undergraduate students working towards
their physics/engineering degrees. A student typically works as a research
assistant and is paid to cover his tuition and other expenses. At any given time
the proposed research will support one undergraduate student as well, assisting
a graduate student in his/her research. Finally, the proposal d escribes an
apprenticeship program for high school students in which they will spend 4-6
weeks of their summer getting a hands-on experience with basic devices in a
fiber-optics laboratory. ***