* 9701779
* Singular Hermitian Metrics on Vector Bundles and            Codimension Two Subvarieties of Quadrics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Mohan Kumar Neithalath, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 03/31/2000
* USD 60,000.00

9701779 de Cataldo This project is concerned with two problems: (1) the study of
singular hermitian metrics on vector bundles and (2) codimension two
subvarieties of quadrics. For the first problem, the principal investigator will
determine a theory of singular hermitian metrics for holomorphic vector bundles
on complex manifolds. The aim is to develop a basic understanding of them with
special regards to positivity. For the second problem, the principal
investigator will study codimension two subvarieties of dimension at least five.
He will work on the classification of low degree submanifolds; the
classification of submanifolds which carry special structure; the role of vector
bundles in the above classification; the size of the Hilbert scheme of
codimension two submanifolds not of general type; the rationality and
unirationality of the earlier mentioned varieties; and the adjunction theoretic
properties of these submanifolds. This is research in the field of algebraic
geometry. Algebraic geometry is one of the oldest parts of modern mathematics,
but one which has had a revolutionary flowering in the past quarter-century. In
its origin, it treated figures that could be defined in the plane by the
simplest equations, namely polynomials. Nowadays the field makes use of methods
not only from algebra, but from analysis and topology, and conversely is finding
application in those fields as well as in physics, theoretical computer science,
and robotics.