* 9701973
* CAREER:  Mechanisms for Ensuring the Integrity of           Distributed Object Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2003
* David Rosenblum, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2003
* USD 200,000.00

9701973 Distributed object computing is a new computational paradigm in which
independent software objects interact with each other over a distributed
computing network. A key promise of distributed object computing is that it may
greatly simplify the construction of distributed software systems. However, it
also introduces enormous problems in ensuring the integrity of interactions
between objects and the reliability of system execution. The objective of this
research is to investigate mechanisms for ensuring the integrity of the
computational interactions in distributed object systems. In particular, the
design, implementation and empirical evaluation of two classes of mechanisms are
investigated: (1) formal interface specifications, which allow precise
definition of object interface semantics and provide a means for automatically
checking conformance to interface semantics during execution; and (2) methods
for systematically testing distributed object systems in a minimally invasive
manner. The significance of this research is that it addresses those attributes
of distributed object systems that make them ill-suited to the use of
traditional software validation techniques. An additional objective of this
project is to enhance the software engineering curriculum with content that
teaches how the fundamental tenets of software engineering both influence and
are influenced by the unique aspects of distributed object technology. ***