* 9701052
* Dissertation Research: Molecular Phylogenetic Analysis of   the Major Lineages of Tapeworms (Platyhelminthes:           Eucestoda)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Janine Caira, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 08/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9701052 CAIRA Tapeworms are obligate flatworm parasites that are often
restricted to specific host animals. Many tapeworm species have been associated
with their hosts for long periods of time. Understanding the phylogenetic
history of tapeworms is significant to biologists, who wish to understand the
consequences of shared history on host and parasite species, and to lessen the
harmful effects of tapeworms on humans and domesticated animals. The
phylogenetic history of tapeworms has been difficult to reconstruct, because
morphological characters are few and difficult to interpret, fossils are absent,
and investigations on molecular characters have not been conducted. In this
research, Janine Caira, Chris Simon and doctoral candidate Peter Olson will
infer the phylogenetic history of tapeworms by sequencing the nucleus-encoded
18S-like ribosomal RNA gene, from representative species in each of 14
recognized major groups (orders) of tapeworms, and conducting a comparative
analysis of these sequences. The work will provide a foundation with which to
test hypotheses of tapeworm phylogenetic history based on morphological,
ecological, and other types of evidence. In particular, the researchers will
determine whether the tapeworms placed within an order share a common history
(are Omonophyletic groupsO) or not.