* 9701264
* Dissertation Research: A Cladistic Analysis of the Deep Sea Ophiuroid Genera Ophiomusium Lyman and Ophiosphalma H.L.    Clark and Their Relations Within Ophiolepididae ......
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* David Pawson, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 06/30/1999
* USD 9,200.00

9701264 LIPSCOMB Ophiuroids, or brittle stars, are the largest class of
echinoderms. They occupy nearly every marine environment from the tropics to
polar seas, and the intertidal to abyssal zones. Nonetheless, ophiuroids remain
one of the least studied groups with respect to their systematics. Brittle stars
in the deep sea may also inform an ongoing debate about the origins of deep-sea
animals. Some scientists believe that the deep-sea environment is a refuge for
ancient species, others believe that deep-water species appeared more recently,
by invasions from shallow-water and Antarctic faunas. In this research, Diana
Lipscomb, David Pawson and doctoral candidate Susan Hottenrott will conduct a
systematic revision of two ophuroid genera, Ophiomusium and Ophiosphalma (family
Ophiolepididae) which are dominant members of the deep-sea fauna in all oceans.
The 77 species that comprise these genera are poorly characterized. By studying
the gross and fine structural anatomy of specimens archived at various museums,
this study will provide the first detailed description and identification keys
of these species. It is anticipated that this analysis will result in a better
understanding of ophuroids in general and deep-sea species in particular. The
study should also give insights into the origin of deep sea faunas, by including
biogeographic analyses that will test competing hypotheses for the origins of
these brittle stars.