* 9701524
* Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Origins of Diapause in Marine Harpacticoid Copepods
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Bruce Coull, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 06/30/2000
* USD 9,970.00

9701524 COULL The ability to survive in a state of suspended animation is
commonly called dormancy or diapause. The spores of fungi and bacteria, the
seeds of higher plants, the larvae of certain insects, and the cysts of some
crustaceans, notably the brine shrimp (Artemia), are among the better known
examples of diapausing stages in organisms. Among crustaceans (crabs, lobsters,
shrimp, and their kin) those inhabiting inland bodies of water, especially those
that occasionally freeze or dry, are more likely to possess a diapausing stage
than are species living in the ocean. Diapause occurs, as expected, in many
species of miniature freshwater crustacea called harpacticoid copepods, but it
also occurs, unexpectedly, in at least two marine species. Since the marine
environment is not likely to freeze or dry, the benefits of diapause are
unclear. Three possible explanations account for the presence of diapause in
marine species: (1) diapause arose in marine harpacticoid copepods and was
retained in their freshwater descendants; (2) diapause arose in freshwater
harpacticoid copepods, and was retained in their marine descendants; (3)
diapause arose independently in freshwater and marine lineages of harpacticoid
copepods. In this research, Bruce Coull and doctoral candidate Regina Wetzer
will use molecular and anatomical data to establish the phylogenetic
relationships of marine and freshwater copepods belonging to families known to
contain diapausing species. These "family trees" and comparative methods will
allow Coull and Wetzer to ascertain the evolutionary history of diapause in
closely related families of harpacticoid copepods, and, in particular, to find
out which hypothesis best explains how diapause arose in marine qpecies. The
work may help provide a more general explanation of how diapause can arise in
environments that are OstableO, lacking fluctuations such as Ocold-hotO or Owet-
dryO seasons.