* 9701008
* Dissertation Research: Breeding Systems in Gaertnera        (Rubiaceae): A Phylogenetic Approach to the Evolution of    Dioecy from Distyly
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Peter Raven, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 06/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9701008 Raven Graduate student Simon Malcombep, under the direction of Dr. Peter
Raven at the Missouri Botanical Garden, is studying the several species of the
Old World tropical shrub Gaertnera (madder family, Rubiaceae) for the evolution
of pollination and floral features. Along with several related genera, these
plants are considered ancestrally to possess hermaphroditic flowers with two
different style lengths (said to be distylous), a condition hypothesized to
promote outbreeding. Within the genus, several species have changed to the
dioecious condition, with separate male (pollen) and female (ovule or seed)
flowers on separate plants, a condition obligately enforcing outbreeding. The
relative roles of pollinator effectiveness (the flowers are insect pollinated)
and genetic inbreeding depression have been impossible to disentangle, in trying
to determine what ecological or genetic factors drive the evolution toward
dioecy. A well supported phylogeny for the 48 or so species of Gaertnera is one
major goal of this project, to be reached by combining extensive morphological
studies with new DNA sequence data generated from all the species. Then, field-
based studies of pollination and seed set can be targeted to species pairs or
groups where contrasting distylous and dioecious conditions coexist. Field
collecting in the Old World tropics and observational work on pollinators and
seed set will provide necessary materials for morphological and molecular
analyses of the phylogenetic relationships among the species of Gaertnera
shrubs, leading to improved classification of these plants and reliable markers
for identification. In addition, tests will be made of ecological conditions
pertaining to pollinator effectiveness and seed set in various species pairs and
groups, to assess factors that promote the evolution of dioecy in plants.