* 9701637
* Dissertation Research: A Comparison of Marital Quality of Asian-White Couples to that of Same-Race Asian Couples and Same-Race White Couples
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1997,09/30/1998
* Elaine Wethington, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/1998
* USD 7,500.00

9701637 Wethington This Doctoral Dissertation research examines the martial
quality of interracial Asian-white couples. The large number of interracial
couples in the U.S. and the limited knowledge of these families prompted this
study. It is hypothesized that such interracial families may experience more
stress and strain and may be at risk for higher marital instability and lower
well-being than same-race families. The major goal of this research is to
complement and improve upon existing studies of interracial families. Knowledge
of the marital quality and consequences of such marriages may have important
social implications. Given that marital quality is highly predictive of divorce,
this study will enhance our understanding of it in non-majority populations.
Research findings will permit a better accounting of positive benefits of public
policies that affect the probability of divorce. Data will be gathered from
3,000 Asians and 500 whites from geographically diverse locations. This will
generate a finale sample of approximately 452 couples (i.e.,140 Asian-white
couples, 211 Asian couples, 99 whites couples and 2 other white-minority unions)
Potential subjects will be contacted by mail and interested subjects will be
asked to complete a self-administered mail survey which contains questions on
marital quality, and perceived social integration and support. ****