* 9701863
* CPMSA:  Over The Top In Teams
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Raymond Daniels, Kansas City Kansas Public Schools
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2002
* USD 3,397,117.00

PI: Jim Hensley Over the Top in TEaMS ( OTT) blends the efforts of an urban
school district and an array of partners in a long-range project to
significantly increase minority enrollments and success rates in courses
comprising the science, mathematics, engineering, technology (SMET) pipeline.
The Kansas City, Kansas Public Schools (KCKPS) is a minority majority school
district in the Kansas city Metroplex. 68% of the students are minority, 54%
being African American. KCKPS students scored well below national averages on
the 1996 MAT-7 and ACT. Of 225 students in Algebra I at grade 8, only 15% were
African American males. OTT will double minority enrollment in advanced
math/science classes, double minority enrollment in AP/IB science/math classes,
increase minority enrollment in grade 8 Algebra I to 75%, prepare all students
for success in Algebra II, prepare all students for success in Chemistry I,
significantly raise average minority math/science scores on national achievement
tests and state assessments, complete a revised math/science curriculum that
reflects NTSA/NCTM standards, increase teacher knowledge and use of research
based teaching tools, and increase student interest level and student confidence
in science/math. KCKPS will implement a set of interventions intended to
eliminate barriers and build capacity toward minority quccess in SMET pipeline
courses. These interventions include: math/science curriculum reform and
improvement of K-8 science/math curriculum resources, intensive staff
development enrichment programs outside the school day(summer, after school,
Saturday), tutoring programs, providing teacher leaders in math/science at each
school, creating community partnerships for mentor support, and developing
counselors as pumps for minority students into the SMET pipeline.