* 9701114
* Dissertation Research: Using Patterns of Nucleotide         Diversity to Distinguish Between Modes of Selection in Very Low Recombining Regions of the Drosophila Genome
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Martin Kreitman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/1999
* USD 11,965.00

9701114 Charlesworth Genetic material is exchanged between maternally and
paternally derived homologous chromosomes, by the process of crossing over. The
level of within-species variability in the DNA sequence of a gene is related to
the frequency with which the gene experiences crossing over. Chromosome four of
the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster lacks crossing over, and its genes show
little variability. This provides an opportunity to test two major hypotheses
about the relation between crossing over and variability. Under the first
hypothesis, variability is eliminated in the absence of crossing over because a
selectively favorable variant drags all genes on the chromosome along with it,
as it spreads through the species. Restoration of variability depends on new
mutations, which are necessarily rare. Under the second hypothesis, variability
is reduced because selection continually eliminates harmful mutations all along
the chromosome; the relative abundance of rare versus common variants should be
little affected. These hypotheses will be tested by examining the proportions of
rare versus common variants at genes on this chromosome, using DNA sequencing
technology. This research will shed light on the genetic mechanisms affecting
diversity levels in natural populations. This has broad implications for
conservation biology and the genetics of human variation, as well as for
knowledge of fundamental biological processes.