* 9701493
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Scattered Site Public Housing on Social Networks and Access to Opportunity
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1998
* William Rohe, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/1998
* USD 7,392.00

9701493 Rohe This Dissertation Research Improvement project examines the effect
of residential location on the social networks of people who live in scattered-
site and clustered public housing. This work will provide insight into how
housing density affects social networks. Two research questions will be
addressed-- (1) do the social networks of low-income people living in
predominantly low-income neighborhoods differ from those of low-income people
living in more affluent neighborhoods; and (1) if differences in social networks
exist, are they associated with a differential access to opportunity? Data will
be collected by in-person interviews with 270 public housing residents living in
two different types of housing in Montgomery County, Maryland. Specifically,
this research will compare 148 residents who live in low income housing
developments with 122 who live in units scattered throughout more affluent
areas. This research addresses a gap in current knowledge about social networks
of low income individuals; bridges the neighborhood effects and social networks
literatures, suggesting that neighborhood and social networks together impact an
individual's live chances; and examines assumptions undergirding an U.S. housing
policy initiative that places low-income people in more affluent communities to
provide them with social and economic opportunity. ****