* 9701345
* Dissertation Research: Evolution of Hydrodynamics and       Functional Morphology of Balistiform Locomotion
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Mark Westneat, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 11/30/1999
* USD 9,486.00

Westneat 9701345 This study will elucidate major evolutionary patterns in the
functional morphology and hydrodynamics of locomotion in a diverse monophyletic
group of reef fish: the triggerfishes and filefishes (Superfamily Balistoidea).
Data on the fin morphology, 3-D stroke kinematics, and hydrodynamics of a
taxonomically broad sample of these fish will be collected and analyzed within
the framework of general mechanical predictions and tuo theoretical hydrodynamic
models applicable to long-based paired fin propulsion. Objectives include: (1)
assessing the strength of a widely assumed but untested correlation of fin shape
and kinematic profile; (2) testing the theoretical advantages proposed for
swimmers with long, narrow fins and deep, rigidly held bodies; (3) determining
which of the two hydrodynamic models yields better estimates of mean thrust; and
(4) examining predictions from simple lever mechanics and muscle architecture.
The study, the first in aquatic locomotion to consider detailed form and
kinematic data in a regorous phylogenetic framework, will narow the traditional
gulf between functional studies that ignore the influence of common ancestry and
evolutionary studies that fail to acknowledge biomechanical and hydrodynamic
principles and contraints. The study will explore novel mechanisms of thrust
with potential applications in underwater propulsion technology.