* 9701408
* CAREER: Research in Low Noise Integrated Circuit Design for Telecommunication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2002
* John McNeill, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Foster
* 07/31/2002
* USD 254,443.00

The goal of this research is to investigate extensions of a design methodology
for a class of low noise integrated oscillators in the applications areas of
telecommunications, high speed microprocessors, and oversampled data conversion.
The goal of the teaching plan associated with this research is for the Analog
Microelectronics Laboratory to become an integral resource for educating both
undergraduates and graduate students in the complete integrated circuit design
process. This project will improve the design of analog and mixed signal
integrated circuits for telecommunication systems in which system-level
performance is ultimately limited by fundamental circuit-level considerations. A
critical component in any integrated communication system is an oscillatory that
provides a time/frequency reference for the data transmission and detection
process. The broad class of ring oscillators offer many advantages for
integrated oscillator design, but until recently there were no procedures
available to design for a desired level of noise performance. This project is
based on a new design methodology for ring oscillators that has been proven
successful to the frequencies up to 155 MHz in a bipolar IC process. The goal is
to extend and broaden the low jitter oscillator design techniques to higher
speed in the GHz range, reduced supply voltage of 3.3V and below, and other
fabrication technologies including CMOS.