* 9701137
* Dissertation Research:  Thirteen-Lined Ground Squirrel      Antipredator Vigilance
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Daniel Leger, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 05/31/1999
* USD 1,695.00

9701137 Leger Studies of the decision-making capabilities of animals while they
are under the risk of being eaten by predators can reveal the complex process by
which animals evaluate optimal trade-offs. A simple example of an optimal trade-
off is where an animal is faced with two conflicting choices, e.g., foraging
versus scanning for predators (antipredator vigilance). Foraging reduces
starvation risk while antipredator vigilance reduces predation risk. The animal
is unable to maximize the benefit from one without incurring serious risk from
the other. An optimal trade-off is where the animal's choice is the joint
maximum of both feeding and antipredator vigilance. Decision-making is the
framework within which this research is based. A very common observation is that
a group size increases, prey animal vigilance decreases. This decrease in
vigilance could result in the animal having more time to feed and could be a
significant force in the evolution of sociality. Although visual obstruction is
a common contextual variable in many prey animals' environment, this variable
has not been given much empirical attention. Thirteen-lined ground squirrels are
burrowing rodents that occur across the Great Plains. They are preyed upon by
birds, terrestrial mammals, and reptiles such as snakes. It has been shown that
thirteen-lined ground squirrels increase their antipredator vigilance only when
their long-range (greater than 20m), lateral field of view is obstructed.
Considering how many animals prey upon these ground squirrels, it is quite
surprising that they do not react with increased vigilance when their 'overhead'
view is obstructed. To test hypotheses about antipredator vigilance and visual
obstruction, thirteen-lined ground squirrels are allowed to feed inside
plexiglass boxes that differentially obstruct the squirrels' filled of view, and
detect the approaching threat. This is an important test since ground squirrel
antipredator vigilance behavior indicates that they do not co nsider certain
positions of visual obstruction to be important. Therefore, even without
increasing their vigilance, ground squirrels should be able to detect predator
attacks with 'overhead' visual obstruction as when there is no visual
obstruction.