* 9701317
* Problems in Graph Structure Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Neil Robertson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 06/30/2000
* USD 145,095.00

Robertson 9701317 This award will provide funds to develop several projects in
structural graph theory associated with the graph minor relation. Much of the
work involves ongoing joint projects with Paul Seymour, Robin Thomas and others;
and the research of graduate students supervised by the principal investigator.
The main topics of this proposal are summarized below. These topics cover a
large part of graph structure theory as it relates to the graph minor inclusion
relation. In fact, each topic contains major problems, often well known and
difficult, and so significant progress in any direction is likely to absorb a
great deal of time. There are at present serious attacks (which our group
welcomes) being made on many of these problems elsewhere in the graph
theoretical community. The main topics are as follows: (1) To continue the
attack on the open problems in explicit finite graph minor structure. (2) To
continue the attack on the open problems in general finite graph minor
structure. (3) To attack coloring problems made accessible by the improved proof
of the four-color theorem and structure theory results. (4) To continue to study
connectivity at the levels exhibited by the graphs of the Platonic solids and
the toroidal regular lattices; in particular chains of minors or types of minors
at a given level. (5) To continue to detelop surface embedding structure theory
by studying questions about how nontrivial closed curves on the surface meet an
embedded graph. (6) To extend graph minor theory to binary matroids. (7) To
attack some problems in algorithmical graph theory and matroid theory. This
research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely
important to modern communications. For example, the design of large networks,
such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the d esign of algorithms in
computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of
combinatorial research.