* 9701399
* CAREER: Algorithmic Methods for Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Jon Kleinberg, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Sloan
* 03/31/2002
* USD 200,000.00

The research program is centered around the design and analysis of algorithms in
combinatorial optimization, with an emphasis in two major directions: the
development of efficient approximation algorithms to provide near-optimal
solutions to intractable problems in combinatorial optimization; and the use of
these techniques in the design of algorithms for large-scale networks. A
fundamental goal is the development of general methods for approximating the
optimal solutions to intractable optimization problems. The study of linear
programming methods has proved to be a valuable way to gain insight into the
structure of such problems. The approach in this work involves the development
of techniques based on linear programming and some of its generalizations, in
conjunction with probabilistic methods and randomized algorithms. A related
issue is the behavior of local-search methods for optimization, as a means of
understanding the ``landscape'' of feasible solutions on which they operate;
there are close connections between this issue at a general level and some
concrete optimization questions in the area of biomolecular structure. A rich
application area for these algorithmic techniques, and the focus of much of this
research, is in the area of network optimization problems. One basic issue is
the problem of routing traffic streams so as to minimize congestion in
communication networks. This involves techniques from network flows, adapted to
the framework of virtual circuit routing. Another on-going issue in this
research is the development of tools to analyze network traffic as a dynamic
phenomenon, which arrives continuously over time. Some fundamental issues here
are {\em stability} --- determining whether delays in the network remain bounded
over long durations --- and the probabilistic analysis of traffic whose rate can
fluctuate greatly over time. The education component of the program is focused
on the planned development of a course designed to link curren t developments in
algorithms with work in the biological sciences. In particular, there is an
emerging opportunity here to bring together students from computer science, and
those in biology and chemistry, around the set of fundamental computational
problems that have arisen in molecular biology. Related to this is a plan for
increased coverage of certain topics in the core undergraduate algorithms
course: in particular, the general area of heuristic and local-search methods in
optimization, which has figured prominently in much of the computational work
currently being done in molecular biology and related areas.***