* 9701800
* CAREER:  The Polymerization of Small and Large Ring         Propellanes and the Incorporation of Materials Science into the Hope College Curriculum
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2003
* Elizabeth Sanford, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 04/30/2003
* USD 200,000.00

Professor Sanford's research focuses on the synthesis of substituted (1.1.1)
propellanes and their polymerization to produce materials displaying novel
thermal and optical properties. Introduction of long-chain alkyl substituents
will enhance the solubility of the targeted homopolymers and alternating
copolymers. Polymerization of propellane monomers with planar pi-substituents
will create materials with novel molecular architectures, while copolymerization
with electron deficient olefins will provide materials with unusual electronic
properties. Large-ring propellanes will provide access to polyamides with rigid
propellane structures in the main chain of the polymer. In addition to providing
undergraduate research opportunities in these projects, Professor Sanford will
integrate materials issues into the curricula for science and engineering
students and will develop a collaborative, interdisciplinary course for
nonscience majors in which critical thinking and understanding of science will
be fostered through lecture and laboratory investigations relating to science
and technology in the everyday world. With this CAREER award, the Synthetic
Organic Program supports the research and educational activities of Dr.
Elizabeth Sanford of the Department of Chemistry of Hope College. Professor
Sanford's research focuses on the synthesis of propeller-shaped molecules known
as propellanes. These molecules are relatively unstable, and they readily
undergo reactions which relieve their strained polycyclic structures, forming
polymers comprised of long chains. Professor Sanford introduces various
substructures into the propellane molecules, thereby permitting the formation of
polymers bearing these substructures, which are designed to impart to the
polymers better solubility, novel architectures, and unusual electronic
properties. Professor Sanford is developing educational programs for both
science and nonscience majors. A course focusing on science and technology in
the everyday world will be developed for the nonscience majors, while curriculum
changes and the opportunity for undergraduate research in Professor Sanford's
laboratory will afford undergraduate science and engineering students a broad
view of current materials science issues.