* 9701828
* "Career" Integrated Programming in Science, Mathematics, andAgricultural Science Teacher Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Carol Conroy, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 07/31/2001
* USD 260,275.00

9701828 Conroy The Department of Education at Cornell offers programs in
educational psychology, foundations, and policy, as well as teacher education in
agriculture, science, and mathematics. The applicant was hired in July, 1996, to
facilitate a process of reform in agricultural education encompassing several
areas: (1) integration of science and mathematics teacher education in
agriculture, (2) technical and pedagogical update for secondary agricultural
educators in New York, and (3) course/curriculum development to support
utilization of agriculture content as applied subject matter for under served
populations. This project will provide support for research and educational
activities for development of essential elements of reform in the evolution of
agricultural education to agricultural science: (1) the development of a unique,
integrated program of teacher education in science, mathematics, and
agricultural science and (2) the development of an interdisciplinary graduate
program to prepare individuals as faculty in agricultural science. A secondary
purpose is the development and implementation of research-based inservice
programming to improve science and mathematics competencies of practicing
vocational agriculture teachers. Specific research and educational objectives
and methods required to fulfill these purposes are to: 1. Determine technical
agriculture, science and mathematics cmntent as well as pedagogical competencies
required for certification to teach agriculture as a science through development
of a process to identify areas of overlap which exist between courses offered
separately to the two teacher education groups. 2. Revise and/or develop core
curriculum and coursets) for the program in teacher education in agriculture to
include enhanced science and mathematics skills and pedagogy for teaching
science and mathematics. 3. Assess technical update, and science and mathematics
skills inservice needs of New York State secondary agriculture teachers. 4.
Develop and impl ement a sustained inservice program to enhance the science and
mathematics skills of New York State agricultural educators. The integration of
academic and vocational content and alternate assessment will be emphasized. 5.
Develop core curriculum and course(s) for a graduate program to prepare
individuals for faculty positions as teacher educators in agricultural science.
Emphasis will be placed on constructivist theories of learning to include
aspects related to applied academics as a philosophy of delivery, experiential
learning, and reflective practices. The results of this study will be presented
on a regional and national level in an attempt to begin discussion on a national
agenda for teacher education reform. Information on progressive programmatic
changes will be reviewed and considered as Cornell University and New York State
begin the process of restructuring agricultural education. The results of this
project, however, will reach beyond New York State. Since there has been no
comprehensive national review of teacher education in agriculture programs the
results will be useful to individuals in other states as they struggle with the
same issues faced by New York. Successful development and implementation of a
reform effort moving towards agricultural science will require sustained and
integrated research and instructional activities. The applicant is poised to
make significant contributions to the field of agricultural science education as
well as providing a role model for younger women wishing to assume a leadership
role. The implementation of this project would have national impact on how
faculty and teachers of agricultural education are prepared as well as
significant impact on efforts to intezrate academic and vocational content.