* 9701597
* Magnetic Properties of Quasi-One Dimensional Molecular      Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,08/26/1998
* Michael Naughton, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/26/1998
* USD 189,500.00

97-01597 Naughton This is a renewal proposal to study superconducting, metallic
and dielectric properties of the quasi-one dimensional molecular conductors
TMTSF at low temperatures and large magnetic fields. Recent transport studies to
B=7T of the upper critical field Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3555 (1997) provide strong
evidence for unconventional spin-triplet pairing, and a novel field- induced
dimensional crossover. These and similar magnetic measurements will be extended
to higher fields in a search for reentrant superconductivity which has been
predicted for such quasi-1- d superconductors. In the normal state, the origin
of a new series of angular magnetoresistance oscillations, which map the
curvature of the Fermi surface, will be investigated. A search for corresponding
angular magnetic oscillations via torque magnetometry will be initiated. In the
dielectric state, the origin of the "fast oscillations" will be investigated via
torque and transport in pulsed fields to 100T. %%% This is a renewal proposal to
study superconducting, metallic and dielectric properties of the quasi-one
dimensional molecular conductors TMTSF at low temperatures and large magnetic
fields Superconductivity arises when two negatively charged electrons become
attracted to each other and become "paired", in spite of the fact that
"opposites attract while likes repel". In all conventional superconductors,
these paired electrons have opposite spin, such that the total spin of the pair
is zero, a fact which plays an important role in the explanation of the
superconducting state. A recent theory has predicted, however, that in certain
materials in which electrons are confined to move mostly in one direction,
electrons with the same, rather than opposite, spin, can form pairs, and
superconduct. One consequence of this pairing would be that a magnetic field
could enhance, rather than destroy , the superconducting state, opening the
interesting possibility of superconductivity reappearing in very high magnetic
fields. This project involves a search for high field superconductivity in a
one- dimensional molecular conductor, where initial studies are strongly
suggestive of equal spin pairing and reentrant superconductivity. ***