* 9701318
* Dissertation Research:  Evolution and Systematics of a      Widespread Polyploid Fern Complex, Dryopteris filix-mas
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Charles Werth, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9701318 Werth Graduate student Lilin Xiang, under the direction of Prof. Charles
Werth at Texas Tech University, is studying the origin and diversification of
the so-called male fern, Dryopteris filix-mas, over its wide northern-hemisphere
distributional range. A polyploid plant, the male fern is thought to combine
sets of chromosomes from two or possibly more parental diploid fern species that
hybridized to produce doubled-chromosome offspring. Suspected diploid parents
are Eurasian Dryopteris species, but American and Chinese taxa will also be
studied. One goal is to distinguish between a single origin followed by
dispersal, or multiple origins over the range of distribution, possibly from
different parental species on the different continents. New evidence from
molecular biology will help solve the problem, including electrophoretic
analysis of protein variation (an indirect measure of genetic variability,
sampling mostly nuclear genes) and direct DNA sequencing of a chloroplast gene.
Population samples from North America, Europe, Turkey, and China are being
gathered to provide extensive coverage of the morphological diversity known in
this group of ferns. Polyploidy, or multiple sets of chromosomes (which
sometimes restores fertility to otherwise sterile plant hybrids), is widespread
in land plants, especially in ferns. As in the male fern, Dryopteris filix-mas,
it is often associated with a widespread, almost weedy distribution, accompanied
by minor morphological variation. Whether the polyploid arose once and dispersed
widely to its present range, or arose through repeated hybridization events in
various parts of the current distribution, is a question difficult to answer
with only traditional taxonomic characters of morphology and anatomy. New
molecular evidence from allozyme analyses and DNA sequencing, drawn from
extensive population samples across the range and including several putative
parent taxa, will help resolve the matter. In turn, the Dryopteris case will add
to the small number of rigorous studies that analyze the historical biogeography
of polyploid plant taxa.