* 9701190
* Dissertation Research: Evolution of Host Choice and         Specialization in North American Diadasia (Hymenoptera;     Apoidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Paul Wolf, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9701190 WOLF Bees vary in their choice of pollen plants. Generalists are bees
that collect pollen from many plant species, while specialists collect pollen
from only a few related plants. Biologists do not fully understand why some bees
are generalists, whereas others specialize. Bee pollen choice is important for
several reasons. First, many native plants depend on pollination by particular
bees for seed set. Additionally, some native bees are used as crop pollinators,
and many others hold such potential. In this research, Paul Wolf and doctoral
candidate Sedonia Sipes will study pollen choice in Diadasia, a genus of
specialist bees whose members specialize on different plant families. Many
species visit only plants in the mallow family; others specialize on cacti or
sunflowers. It is unknown when, or how often, these changes in host
specialization have occurred during the history of this bee genus. The
researchers will use DNA analysis to determine how Diadasia species are related,
to infer the frequency and order of host-switching. They will also quantify the
degree to which Diadasia are restricted to their preferred hosts. Finally, the
researchers will examine morphological characteristics that may be adaptive to
specialized pollen collection. The work should add to the understanding of
specialization in bees, and provide some of the basic information needed to
evaluate the potential of these bees for crop pollination.