* 9701793
* CAREER: Design, Modeling, and Development of Active Aperture Antennas
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2003
* Gregory Washington, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Kawthar A. Zaki
* 06/30/2003
* USD 320,000.00

9701793 Washington The primary goal of this work is the development of a novel
class of aperture antennas capable of variable directivity (beam steering) and
power density (variable focusing or beam shaping). The actuation for these
antennas is employed using a distinct mechanism. The mechanism employs
Polyvinylidene Fluoride (PVDF) film bonded to a lightweight metalized mylar
structure. Since the film is piezoelectric, any electrical voltage drop across
the film will cause the film to lengthen in its stretch direction. The resulting
lateral deflection from a length change causes the production of a moment which
causes the antenna surface deflection. In addition, the educational aspects of
this proposal can be summarized in three distinct task: The first involves the
development of hands-on demonstrations that highlight major principles of
mechanical, electrical, and electromechanical systems. The second involves the
use of an interactive web site with hypertexted class notes to enable one to
teach at level more in-depth than general classroom knowledge. The final
component is the development of an interactive slide presentation that
highlights the contribution of African Americans, Hispanics, and Women to
engineering and science. ***