* 9701787
* CAREER:  Defining the Chemical Basis of RNA Function by     Nucleotide Analog Interference Mapping
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Scott Strobel, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 04/30/2001
* USD 347,000.00

Professor Strobel's research focuses on establishing a new methodology to
determine structure-activity relationships in structurally and catalytically
important RNA molecules. Target molecules include a series of nucleotide
analogues with oxidatively labile 5'-O-(1-thio)triphosphate substituents.
Individual analogues will be incorporated into RNA by in vitro transcription to
create a library of mutant RNA's, where individual nucleotides have been
randomly replaced by an analogue. Individual RNA mutants that exhibit activity
in a particular biological system are distinguished from those that do not.
Subsequent oxidative cleavage at the thiophosphate group under mild conditions
with iodine, and comparative analysis of the active and nonactive analogues on
sequencing gels offers a straightforward means to identify the active chemical
group. This methodology, called Nucleotide Analogue Interference Mapping (NAIM),
will be used to identify the chemical groups in RNA relating to: (1) the
interaction of 5S rRNA with ribosomal protein L25; (2) the role of U6 snRNA in
pre-mRNA splicing; (3) the autocatalytic VS ribozyme from Neurospora; and (4)
the interaction of alpha operon mRNA with S4 protein. Educational activities
include developing a bioorganic course emphasizing synthetic organic design and
macromolecular function, and involving both local undergraduates and minority
students in the research program. With this CAREER award, the Organic Dynamics
Program supports the research and educational activities of Professor Scott
Strobel of the Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry at Yale
University. Professor Strobel's research is focused on developing a methodology,
called Nucleotide Analogue Interference Mapping, that will significantly
accelerate the process of identifying structure-activity relationships in
structurally and catalytically important RNA molecules. Professor Strobel's
educational activities include developing a multidepartmental course which will
explore the use of organic chemical synthesis to investigate and understand
biological systems, and promoting an interest in chemical research by involving
both local and minority undergraduates in the research program.