* 9701142
* Experimental Studies of Diffuse Ultrasonics and Materials   Characterizations
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2000
* Richard Weaver, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 04/30/2000
* USD 193,787.00

9701142 Weaver A project is to be undertaken to further our understanding of
linear stochastic wave fields, waves which have suffered sufficient randomizing
scatterings or reflections as to lose most coherence. Such fields are present in
applications of ultrasonics in many modern heterogeneous materials. The proposed
work primarily concerns the diffuse ultrasonics of polycrystalline materials
with a view towards ultimate applications in robust ultrasonic characterization
of microstructures and flaw detection in the midst of grain noise. The main
focus will be towards the validation of ultrasonic radiative transfer
formulations of multiple diffuse scattering in polycrystals. Of particular
interest is the transition from the simple single scattering limit model used by
many, through the complicated regime in which typical rays have scattered a few
times, to the once again simple diffusion limit in which typical rays have
scattered many times. Broad industrial Interest in materials characterization
where conventional attenuation and velocity measurements are difficult or fail,
and where therefore the proposed project will have application, includes grain
size and texture characterization through rough surfaces (with associated
inferences in regard to fracture toughness and formability), detection of low
levels of porosity in acoustically (grain-)noisy materials with thick sections
(i.e. porosity in powder metallurgical iron), detection of microcracking and
monitoring of microcracking after service, detection and monitoring of
embrittling conditions, detection of residual stresses, and characterization of
highly inhomogeneous materials such as sintered materials or metallic foams.
While the primary concern and envisioned Immediate application i s in diffuse
ultrasonics, fields of this kind are also present on sufficiently long time
scales In seismology, in reverberation rooms, In the vibrations of large
Irregular built structures, In the electronics of mesoscale devices and for
optics in turbid media. The project Is also, therefore, expected to contribute
to these other fields. The proposed project consists of theory, numerics, and
experiments. The equations of ultrasonic radiative transfer will be extended
where necessary. They will be applied to the specific experimental
configurations and samples to be studied in the lab. The resulting numerically
generated predictions for diffuse ultrasonic intensity will be compared with
laboratory measurements and with direct numerical simulations of two-dimensional
heterogeneous elastic media. Extensive ultrasonic Immersion testing of metal
samples with well controlled polycrystalline microstructures will be carried out
in a variety of configurations designed to be optimal for illustrating and
testing the main predictions of radiative transfer. Two secondary but related
thrusts will be carried out also. One on ultrasound in materials with extremely
strongly scattering microstructures will contribute to a basic understanding of
fluctuations and transport in materials with attenuations of the order of
wavenumbers. The other on reverberant ultrasound at very late times will study
fields which are potentially very sensitive to global properties of the samples
in which they reverberate. The proposed methods are expected to reveal material
properties that are not otherwise easily obtained. This is a collaborative
project In which the theory and numerics will be conducted primarily at the
University of Illinois, and the experiments will be conducted primarily at the
Uni versity of Missouri.