* 9701980
* CAREER:  Characterization of Local Singularities:  Self-    focusing Wave Motion
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1998
* Daniel Lathrop, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Wolf
* 05/31/1998
* USD 75,000.00

9701980 Lathrop This CAREER project is a study of free surface liquid
singularities performed in order to characterize nonlinear self-focusing in
liquid free surfaces. This information should assist in defining a class of
systems exhibiting singularities including turbulent dissipation fluctuations,
self-focusing in nonlinear optical systems, cavitation phenomena and
sonoluminescence, and gravitational singularities. The experimental surface
waves are produced using a Faraday apparatus (vertically oscillated tank). This
proposal focuses on three aspects: determination of the threshold value for
singularity formation, understanding the time dynamics of states exhibiting
singularities, and finally pursuing local models for the structure of the
singularities. The continued development of undergraduate research and
improvement of the undergraduate course work are at the core of the teaching
plans. The research investigating gree surface singularities is integrated with
a program of involving undergraduate and graduate students in the experiments.
%%% This is a CAREER project to study local singularities or local blow-up of
some pare of a system. Such singularities play an important role in the behavior
of a number of physical systems such as turbulence, burn-out of lasers and
optical fibers, cavitation, and singular objects due to gravity: black holes.
Significant mysteries exist about what classes of motion and what types of
singularities arise in physical systems. The droplets, spray and foam produced
by breaking waves on a beach and in deep water are examples of singularities on
a liquid surface. This project studies liquid surface singularities to aid in
both the knowledge of liquid motion, and the general understanding of physical
sysstems exhibiting singularities. The continued development of undergraduate
research and improvement of the undergraduate course work are at the core of the
teaching plans. The research investigating liquid singula rities is integrated
with a program of involving undergraduate and graduate students in the
experiments. ***