* 9701679
* CAREER:  Multi-threaded Research and Education
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1997,06/30/2003
* Eric Torng, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Du
* 06/30/2003
* USD 205,000.00

Many computer systems are multi-threaded. Traditional on-line problems abstract
away the existence of multiple threads, either by collapsing multiple threads
into a single thread or by reducing each thread to a single request. This
project studies a new class of problems: on-line systems with multi-threaded
inputs. To model multi-threaded inputs, multiple client input model where each
client (thread) is represented by a directed acyclic graph (DAG) are introduced.
Three practical problems investigated are the multi-threaded paging problem,
where processes compete for both central processing unit (CPU) time and fast
memory locations; the multi-threaded disk scheduling problem where processes
and/or database transactions compete for access to the disk; and the multi-
threaded operating system problem, the natural combination of these two
problems. These problems generalize into the k-client problem, a dual version of
the well-studied k-server problem, and the k-server l-client problem. One
important goal of this research is to learn how to design a complex system such
as a fast memory manager, a CPU scheduler, and a disk scheduler. In particular,
determine if the algorithms and results obtained by considering each system
component in isolation can be easily combined to produce new algorithms and
results for the complete system. In education, there are two complementary
projects. The first project deals with the process of learning how to teach. The
PI applied for and received a highly competitive MSU Lilly Endowment Teaching
Fellowship. In this intensive year-long program, the PI will work together with
a group of five promising young faculty to learn fundamental educational
principles taught by leading education scholars from around the University and
around the country. The second project is to build a more cohesive curriculum
emphasizing the practical importance of all topics, especially theory. This is
achieved by leading a departmental effort to wr ite a comprehensive computer
science textbook written in hypertext markup language (HTML). This HTML textbook
will utilize hyperlinks to highlight the connections between and within courses.
For example, links will connect a module on stacks and queues from a data
structures course with modules from an operating systems course where these
structures are used. This HTML textbook project may also supplement departmental
efforts to offer distance learning courses to nontraditional students.