* 9701211
* Extremal Combinatorics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Jerrold Griggs, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 06/30/2001
* USD 135,000.00

Griggs 9701211 This award funds further research in extremal combinatorics. In
extremal set theory, one can replace the old questions, ``how many sets can one
have under the following restrictions'', by new ones, ``how many families of
sets can one have under the following restrictions''. The investigators will
advance projects in this area of research, which was started by R. Ahlswede et
al. with strong motivation from information theory. The investigators will study
subset sum distributions of vectors and abelian group elements. This area of
knowledge started with the Littlewood-Offord problem and became dependent on
extremal set theory. Extensions to higher dimensions suggest tantalizing new
problems of fundamental interest. Problems from extremal graph theory the
investigators will investigate include: (1) Bounds for the independence ratio in
degree-bounded graphs, with restricted maximum clique size, and algorithms for
independent sets guaranteed to achieve the bounds. (2) The maximum size of
bipartite graphs with given parts under excluded cycle conditions. (3) The
maximum size of n-vertex graphs such that no k vertices have more than m edges,
continuing work (by Griggs et al.) on generalizations of theorems of Turan and
Dirac Szekely recently discovered a connection between crossing numbers of
graphs and the Szemeredi-Trotter theorems in combinatorial geometry. The
investigators will build on this progress by considering these problems from
extremal topological graph theory: (4) Bounds for crossing numbers of graphs.
(5) Further investigation of the connection between crossing numbers and
combinatorial geometry. (6) Graph drawings, where many pairwise crossing edges
are excluded. This is research in extremal combinatorics, a subject at the very
core of our understanding of how discrete structures work and how to use them
optimally. Significant longstanding open problems are abundant in extremal
combinatorics, and new problems frequently come from nearby rapidly d eveloping
fields such as information theory, computer science, computational biology, or
number theory. Certain database security models require the solution of certain
extremal combinatorics problems in order to optimize their performance.