* 9701893
* International Research Fellow Awards:  Taxonomic Studies of Malesian Melastomataceae
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Jacinto Regalado, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1998
* USD 35,900.00

9701893 Regalado The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by
Dr. Jacinto C. Regalado, Jr. to work with Dr. Jan F. Veldkamp at the
Rijksherbarium in Leiden in the Netherlands. While at Leiden, Dr. Regalado will
work with Dr. Veldkamp on the taxonomic revision of Medinilla, a large and
complex genus from New Guinea. This study will update our understanding of the
genus, which is based on scattered and outdated papers published during the
first half of the century. The taxonomic problems caused by the loss of type
specimens during the destruction of the Berlin herbarium will be treated by
assigning neotypes or lectotypes from duplicate specimens found in the herbaria
at Kew, Paris, Geneva, Florence and Stockholm. The revision will include keys to
species, species descriptions, illustrations, habitat information, and
geographic distributions. In addition, Dr. Regalado will work with other
Melastomataceae specialists in Europe, Dr. Roger Lundin of Sweden, Dr. Anton
Weber of Austria, and Ms. Gudron Clausing of Germany. They will produce a
synoptic checklist of the family. That checklist, will serve as a precursor to a
monographic treatment of the family for the Flora Malesiana project based at the
Rijksherbarium. ***