* 9701013
* A Conference on the Arithmetic and Geometry of Algebraic    Cycles; Banff, Alberta, Canada; June 7-19, 1998
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,12/31/1998
* B. Brent Gordon, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ann K. Boyle
* 12/31/1998
* USD 15,597.00

9701013 Gordon This award supports a conference on the arithmetic and geometry
of algebraic cycles. As a subfield of algebraic geometry, the subject of
algebraic cycles has thrived through its energetic interaction with algebraic
K-theory, Hodge theory, arithmetic algebraic geometry, number theory, and
topology. The immense recent progress in algebraic cycles, based on so many
interactions with so many other areas of mathematics, has made the subject less
accessible to graduate students and non-specialists. The goal of this conference
is to have leading experts who study algebraic cycles from all these different
directions speak on their various points of view, aiming their talks to graduate
students, recent Ph.D.'s as well as to researchers who work in other aspects of
the arithmetic or geometry of algebraic cycles. Algebraic geometry has a long
and important history in mathematics, particularly because it interacts with so
many other fields of mathematics, such as topology, analysis, algebra, and
number theory. It has flourished during the last half of the twentieth century,
especially in this country. At its simplest and most fundamental level,
algebraic geometry studies sets defined by polynomial equations. Such sets arise
in many problems in computer science and robotics, and there is increasing
interaction between algebraic geometry and these fields.