* 9701418
* CAREER:  A Partial Evaluation Tool Set for Automatically    Customizing Adaptable Software
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1997,09/09/1998
* John Hatcliff, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 09/09/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9701418 Partial evaluation is an automatic tool for program specialization,
customization, and optimization. The goal of this project is to establish
partial evaluation technology as the key component of a new methodology for
constructing and customizing adaptable software written in modern imperative
programming languages. Despite successful applications, current partial
evaluation technology is unable to satisfactorily treat modern imperative
languages that include object-oriented, multitasking, and exception- handling
features. Moreover, partial-evaluator construction does not begin to approach
the maturity of compiler construction where well-organized tools sets
dramatically ease the burden of designing, building, and modifying systems. The
project focuses on the construction of a language-independent tool set for
building partial evaluation systems that can handle features found in modern
imperative languages. This tool set will be built on top of the IRIS language
processing facilities developed in the Arcadia project. The core of the tool set
will be a general- purpose specialization environment for Ada 95. The tool set
philosophy will be validated by reusing artifacts in (a) the construction of a
special-purpose specializer for one or more application domains, and (b) the
construction of a second general-purpose specializer for a minimal core of a
second language supported by the IRIS tools. ***