* 9701145
* Research in One-Dimensional and Complex Dynamics and        Thermodynamical Formalism
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Yunping Jiang, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 75,000.00

Abstract Jiang The goal of the first part of this project is to develop new
results by combining knowledge and techniques from both Thermodynamical
Formalism and Teichmuller Theory and apply them to the study of one-dimensional
and complex dynamics. A generalized Fredholm Determinant Theory on the space of
Zygmund functions on the circle is investigated. Notice that the space of
Zygmund functions on the circle can be treated as the tangent space of the
universal Teichmuller space. It is hoped that the knowledge of the spectral
properties of transfer operators may be applied to the study of Teichmuller
theory and vice versa. An especially interesting case is when a transfer
operator is the tangent map of a non-linear map of the universal Teichmuller
space. A technique called Yoccoz puzzles is also investigated as a replacement
of the Markov partitions in the study of the thermodynamical properties of a
non-renormalizable quadratic polynomial. In the second part of the project, the
Mandelbrot set at infinitely renormalizable points and the topological
properties of the Julia sets of infinitely renormalizable quadratic polynomials
are investigated because these are the only remaining points to prove that the
Mandelbrolt set is locally connected. A generalized Feigenbaum conjecture for
folding mappings with arbitrary exponent and asymmetry is investigated in the
project. The study of one-dimensional dynamics has lead to the discovery of many
physical laws. One recent discovery is the universal law in chaotic phenomena:
in a one-parameterized system like the family of quadratic polynomials (such a
system appears in fluid and celestial mechanics, in chemistry and biology, and
in social sciences), regular motions evolving into a chaotic motion can be
characterized by a universal number. This new paradigm provides a rich supply of
mathematical problems. In return, the study of these problems gives a deeper
understanding of concepts connected with universality and develops some new
tools to ma ke further progress. The goal of the first part of this project is
to attack some unsolved problems and to develop new results concerned with
universality. More specifically, some thermodynamical and geometric properties
of one-dimensional and complex dynamical systems are investigated. The discovery
of the Mandelbrot set, which was one of the direct important results from the
development of a fast computer, breaks the barrier to develop some traditional
geometric concepts. Traditionally, the mathematical study of geometry
concentrates on smooth objects like circles, lines, and spheres. But in the real
world, most geometric objects are more fractal in shape when one looks into the
microscope at a geometric object. The Mandelbrot set not only breaks the visual
and psychological barrier of the study of fractal geometry but also carries the
universal fractal structure in a large class of systems. However, a complete
understanding of the geometric structure of the Mandelbrot set is far from being
finished. The goal of the second part of the project is to study the topological
structure of the Mandelbrot set, and also to investigate the topological
structure of the Julia set for a corresponding infinitely renormalizable point.