* 9701508
* CAREER: Distributed Deduction with Contraction and Foundation of Strategy Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Maria Paola Bonacina, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 08/31/2002
* USD 205,000.00

This project has two parts, one in distributed deduction and one in the theory
of theorem-proving strategies. Distributed deduction couples the traditional aim
of making computation faster by parallelization, with the aim of investigating
new forms of automated reasoning, that may arise from the combination of
deductive computing and distributed computing. The research will consider the
coarse-grain parallelization of contraction- based strategies, that are among
the most successful strategies available, especially on equational problems. The
objective is to design new techniques to subdivide a theorem-proving problem
among concurrent deductive processes, in such a way that each of them has less
work than a sequential process, and a proof may be found faster. This part of
the work will consist in the definition and implementation of distributed
strategies with these features. Theorem-proving strategies are evaluated usually
by testing their implementations. The long-term goal of the theoretical part of
this research is to make possible some complexity analysis of theorem-proving
strategies prior to implementation, so that useful features may be recognized
sooner. Recent work by the proponent shows that progress in this direction is
feasible. This project will develop a methodology of analysis, that covers both
forward reasoning and backward reasoning, sequential and parallel strategies. As
part of the project the methodology will be applied to analyze selected features
of strategies, such as contraction, lemmaizing/caching and forms of parallel
search. The two parts of the project are deeply connected, because the
methodology for strategy analysis is based on a model of the search space and
search process, which is used also as a fundamental tool of analysis to achieve
the objectives in distributed deduction. The educational component of this
project comprises two objectives in course development. The first one is the
evolution of an undergraduate cour se in programming language concepts into a
course where the concepts are learnt in functional and logic programming. The
purpose is to offer to the students some exposure to paradigms that are
underrepresented in the curriculum. This is important, since long-lasting
programming maturity requires the flexibility fostered by the practice of
multiple paradigms. The second one is the development of a graduate course in
artificial intelligence. It will be a course in logical methods for artificial
intelligence, with an emphasis on fully automated deduction. The students will
acquire a solid understanding of some of the most important concepts in the
logical foundations of computer science, together with the preparation for
seminars or research projects in deduction. Both lectures and assignments will
emphasize the practical consequences of the theory, and students will conduct
experiments with state-of-the-art theorem provers.