* 9701311
* Dissertation Research: Interspecific Interactions and Life  History in the Maintenance of Gynodioecy in Sidalcea        malviflora (Malvaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Peter Raven, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 02/28/1999
* USD 6,764.00

9701311 Raven Gynodioecy is the co-occurrence of female and hermaphrodite
individuals in a population of a given species. There has been much debate about
the factors influencing the maintenance of this breeding system in plants. The
aim of this study is to understand how various ecological processes and growth
habits may act as constraints or releases on the maintenance of females in
populations. In particular, the PIs are looking at how plant-insect interactions
including pollen limitation and floral herbivory may differentially affect
females and hermaphrodites. In addition, we are studying how clonal spread and
the spatial distribution of females and hermaphrodites in a population may
affect pollen limitation. The PIs' study species is Sidalcea malviflora, a
gynodioecious perennial with 2 contrasting and sympatric clonal and aclonal
subspecies (ssp. laciniata and ssp. malviflora, respectively). A combination of
field observations, experimental manipulations and genetical greenhouse studies
will be used to look at the above processes. Gynodioecy is often considered to
be an intermediate step in the development of dioecy, or completely separate
male and female individuals within plant species. Because of this, investigation
into the factors influencing the maintenance of females in gynodioecious plant
populations is crucial to our broader understanding of the development of
breeding systems throughout the flowering plants. Though many studies have
investigated genetic mechanisms and aspects of resource allocation which act to
maintain females in gynodioecious populations, very few studies have looked at
the roles of ecological factors or clonal growth in selecting for females. This
study is important because it investigates the effects of several interacting
ecological factors and will thus enable us to evaluate the overall importance of
ecology and growth form in the maintenance of gynodioecy in Sidalcea malviflora.