* 9701208
* Dissertation Research: Phylogenetics of the Order           Amphisbaenia Using Evidence from Fossil and Recent Forms
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* James Clark, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 05/31/2000
* USD 9,950.00

9701208 Clark This award will provide funds for travel materials and supplies to
enhance the dissertation research of Ms. Maureen Kearney, a doctoral student at
George Washington University who is working under the supervision of Dr. James
Clark. Ms. Kearney's dissertation research involves a higher-level phylogenetic
analysis of the Order Amphisbaenia, a group of highly specialized, limbless,
burrowing reptiles that spend their entire life in underground tunnels.
Osteological characters will be examined from fossil and Recent forms primarily
to: (i) identify monophyletic taxa within Amphisbaenia; and (ii) ascertain
patterns and directions of divergence in morphological characters. The research
also seeks to identify effects of different character-coding approaches on
phylogenetics analysis and explore theoretical issues associated with missing
data in phylogenetic reconstruction. Ultimately, the study will lead to a
phylogenetic hypothesis of Amphisnaenia that will test previous taxonomies
(leading to an improved classification), elucidate patterns of structural
diversification, and contribute to systematic theory and methodology. Support
for training of graduate students in modern technologies is critical to maintain
the workforce of scientists capable of addressing questions and issues in global
biology.