* 9701751
* Nonlinear Mechanics for Energy Transfer in the Atmosphere   and the Ocean
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Esteban Tabak, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2002
* USD 200,000.00

Tabak 9701751 In this CAREER grant, the investigator pursues two lines of
research on the nonlinear dynamics of the Atmosphere and the Ocean: one focused
on turbulent cascades in dispersive systems, particularly the Munk-Garret scale
distribution of energy in the Ocean, and the other focused on equatorial
dynamics. Both projects study resonance among geophysical waves, in very
different scales: the former considers energy transfer through the self-similar
inertial range, from the long waves beyond which the system is forced, to the
short waves below which dissipative mechanisms take over, and the latter
concentrates on the very long waves, comparable to the radius of the Earth,
where forcing plays an important role. In fact, the resonance between long
equatorial waves could be considered as a starting point for the resonant energy
transfer toward shorter waves. Once the scales become relatively small, detailed
information on the nature of the forces is lost, and a statistically self-
similar regime arises, further carrying the energy through a wide range of
scales toward the very short waves. The educational component of this proposal
involves developing a curriculum which blends applied mathematics and
geophysical fluid dynamics. Particular efforts are devoted to integrate
experimental and numerical work into both graduate and undergraduate education.
This is facilitated by the building of a Laboratory for Fluid Dynamics at the
Courant Institute, scheduled to open in the Spring of 1997. Two new graduate
courses in the mathematical modeling of geophysical waves are developed, one
introductory and the other more advanced, the latter focused on nonlinear
mechanisms of energy transfer among geophysical waves. Numerical modeling and
desk-top experimentation are integrated into advanced undergraduate mathematical
courses, with the goal of introducing undergraduate students to the lure and
potential of interdisciplinary work. The Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences have
reached a degree of maturity such that the accurate prediction of the weather
and even of longer term climatological changes appears to be within reach. A
basic understanding of many of the fundamental processes underlying the
prevailing winds and currents has been developed over the last few decades; and
the computational power brought about by the computer revolution makes it
possible to run global models with relatively fine grids. However, the dynamics
of the weather and climate has a tremendous complexity, with phenomena taking
place in a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. This complexity makes it
hopeless to resolve all the relevant phenomena without appealing to strong
simplifying assumptions. Applied Mathematics provides powerful tools that may
help clarify the validity of the various assumptions and shed light on many
phenomena not yet fully understood. The two proposed subjects of this research
are examples of fields where this contribution should be particularly fruitful.
The dynamics of equatorial waves is known to strongly affect the global weather
and climate; phenomena such as the El Nino Southern Oscillation and its global
effects exemplify this. In order to study phenomena of this kind, one needs to
go beyond the time scale of the order of days of the waves, to the months or
years where small effects accumulate to yield substantial changes in the
amplitude and behavior of the waves. Asymptotic multiple-scale analysis is an
ideal applied mathematical tool to achieve this. As for the other line of
research, understanding the transfer of energy among scales in the Ocean and
Atmosphere is fundamental to predict the long-time effects that a change in
forcing, such as the one brought about by the release of chemicals in the
Atmosphere and the Ocean, may produce on our weather. Involving students in
these lines of research, and bringing research-related results and methods into
their classroom education, also helps develop a generation of scientists better
equipped to understand the difficult and important problems of atmosphere and
ocean interactions.