* 9701617
* CAREER:  Integrating Multiple Knowledge Sources for Robust  Human-Machine Communication
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2003
* Susan McRoy, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Kukich
* 05/31/2003
* USD 396,426.00

The proposed research aims to intestigate models of dialogue that can support
robust and flexible interaction between people and computer systems. When
computers are used to teach users about a new topic or technique, users may have
difficulty understanding the knowledge and reasoning behind the system's
answers. To address this difficulty, this research will specify a computational
theory and methods to allow systems to vary the presentation of material
dynamically. Specifically, this project will address two important research
issues. First, it will provide a specification and representation of the
linguistic, intentional, and social information that influence people's
understanding of an ongoing dialog and that allow for the detection of
misunderstanding, if it should arise. Second, the research will provide methods
for integrating and employing these information sources to produce relevant
utterances and to identify and resolve communication problems as they arise.
Evaluation of the approach will employ two tutoring systems that are under
development: one that explains medical concepts and one that teaches general
life skills, such as good nutrition and budgeting. Final evaluation of the
proposed research will be based on testing with end-user populations, runtime
performance, and technical correctness.