* 9701119
* Dissertation Research: Growth and Evolution of the Shell in Turtles: Patterns, Processes, and Consequences of           Morphological Variation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Michael LaBarbera, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 09/30/1999
* USD 6,040.00

LaBarbera 9701119 The authors will study patterns of dermal shell growth,
function and evolution in turtles. The turtle shell represents a unique skeletal
system which is particularly amenable to growth studies because most
ossification and development occurs post-hatching. As one of few sutured
vertebrate skeletal systems other than the skull, the turtle shell is a useful
comparative model for exploring the growth of sutured structures. The functional
consequences of growth patterns will be evaluated in the context of
morphological integration, mechanical integrity and relative shell mass.
Patterns of shell growth will be characterized for various species of
cryptodiran turtles and compared in a phylogenetic context. Growth trajectories
will be quantified and compared using landmark-based morphometric methods. The
role that sutures play in shell growth, and the relationship of that role to
shell geometry, will be assessed in a study using fluorochrome bone markers to
quantify skeletal growth. Functional hypotheses of morphological integration,
shell strength, and relative shell mass will be evaluated using a combination of
statistical models and mechanical testing. This study contributes to an
understanding of the relationship between ontogenetic change and morphological
evolution, examines tissue level processes which contribute to the gross
development of form, and places these findings in a functional context.