* 9701916
* CAREER: Research and Education Program Based on a Novel     Microplasma Source
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2002
* Jeffrey Hopwood, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 04/30/2002
* USD 199,720.00

Proposal Number: ECS-9701916 Principal Investigator: Jeffrey Hopwood Title:
CAREER: Research and Education Program Based on a Novel Microplasma Source The
fabrication, physical characterization, modeling and applications of a novel
microplasma source will be investigated and developed. The microplasma generator
is fabricated on a wafer, in much the same way as an integrated circuit, and
therefore is a significant addition to the new and important class of devices
known as microelectronic mechanical systems (MEMS). The plasma source itself is
based on the principle of an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) reactor in which
an antenna, through inductive coupling, becomes a source of rf energy for a
neutral gas contained in a reactor region, thereby ionizing it and creating a
plasma state. The planer ICP geometry is well-suited for scaled down fabrication
on wafers using conventional integrated circuit and micromachining techniques.
The small scale of the device will push its operation into a wholly new and
unexplored area in plasma science. In this new small scale regime, the skin
depth is greater than the radius of the plasma itself, therefore shielding
properties may be expected to be very different. This work is therefore very
fundamental, as well as adding a new dimension to MEMS with many potential
applications. The education plan involves projects in environmental monitoring
based on the small, lower power ICP devices for undergraduates, with some high
school outreach also planned. The projects also involve multidisciplinary
training in optical emission spectroscopy, electronic design of voltage
controlled power oscillators, and non-linear control systems, in addition to
training in MEMS fabrication methods. The research projects also make an
education in plasma science much more accessible to a much wider range of
students. The usual ICP reactor is a large piece of equipment which can only be
accessed by a few competently trained operators. It als o involves high currents
and high fields which limit its accessibility for safety reasons. That there is
a critical need for more education in plasma science is documented by the
National Research Council Report: Plasma Science: From Fundamental Science to
Technological Applications. The semiconductor industry and the burgeoning plasma
aided manufacturing and environmental waste treatment industries face a critical
shortage of people with training specifically in plasma science and engineering.
These hands-on plasma projects will provide training in an area of national
importance. ***