* 9701661
* Dissertation Research:  The Impact of Cultural Status       Beliefs on Individual Task Performance in Evaluative        Settings:  A New Direction in Expection States Research
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1998
* Cecilia Ridgeway, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/1998
* USD 6,496.00

9701661 Ridgeway Existing theory on group processes provides a clear description
of how cultural status beliefs determine the power and prestige of actors
performing collective task. Yet there has been very little theorizing and
research on the role of status processes during individual tasks. This research
proposes to test how status characteristics (e.g., gender) affects performance
on a test. Specifically, this Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
proposal investigates whether/how the presence of same and opposite gender
research subjects affects undergraduates' performance on ten questions taken
from the Graduate Record Examination. Performance will be recorded for twenty
subjects under each of six conditions. The conditions include: 1) male
respondent believes himself to be alone; 2) female respondents believes herself
to be alone; females respondent hears but does not see another respondent and is
able to infer from voice that the other respondent is: 3) same sex; 4) other-
sex; male respondent hears but does not see another respondent and is able to
infer from voice that the other is: 5) same sex; 6) other-sex. Analysis consists
of comparisons among combination of respondents in the six conditions on mean
performance scores, proportion correct, and time spent on each item. This
research proposes to contribute to our understanding of the relation between
cultural status dimensions and goal-directed behavior, and offer insight into
why particular social groups are differentially responsive to social performance
cues in evaluative settings. **** ??