* 9701347
* Dissertation Research: Biogeography of the Conyzinae and theEvolution of Agamospermy
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Loren Rieseberg, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/1999
* USD 8,015.00

9701347 Rieseberg Graduate student Richard Noyes, under the direction of Prof.
Loren Rieseberg at Indiana University, is studying the phylogenetic
relationships of representatives of the c. 500 species of the sunflower subtribe
Conyzinae, including Erigeron (fleabanes) and Conyza (horseweeds). Presumed to
have originated in South America and spread northward, the Conyzinae appear
instead to be a Nopth American group of sunflowers in origin, based on
preliminary DNA sequence evidence from these researchers, which have spread
southward and to other continents, in part as weeds that set seed without
fertilization (a condition named agamospermy--dandelions being the better known
example). Additional field collecting of samples, followed by molecular
sequencing of a nuclear gene (ribosomal ITS regions) and a chloroplast gene
(ndhF) and further study of traditional morphological characters, are tasks that
will lead to phylogenetic reconstructions for the group. In turn, that
genealogical framework facilitates the determination of geographical migrations
and tracks in the evolution of these plants, and of the number of origins of the
agamospermous condition. A well supported phylogeny of the fleabanes and their
relatives, for the Americas and Africa, will improve classification of the group
and provide reliable markers for identification. Also, studies can then progress
on the ecological conditions favoring the origin of agamospermy, a peculiar
asexual mode of seed production known in several lineages of the large sunflower
family.