* 9701072
* Spin Coherence and Quantum Transport in Magnetic            Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* David Awschalom, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2000
* USD 255,000.00

9701072 Awschalom This experimental effort is aimed at understanding fundamental
aspects of coherent electronic spin dynamics and spin-related transport in
artificial quantum structures. Such investigations form the basis for the
exploitation of coherent spin transport in future generations of magneto-
electronic devices. The experiments focus on model nanostructures fabricated
from II-VI magnetic semiconductors (MS), allowing one to systematically tailor
spin interactions between confined electronic states and low dimensional
distributions of local moments. The project is comprised of highly interactive
efforts that combine the concurrent development of sophisticated MS
nanostructures (digital magnetic heterostructures, magnetic two-dimensional
electron gases (2DEGs), and quantum spin dots) with state-of-the- art spin
dynamical probes having high temporal (~100 fs) and spatial (~100 nm) resolution
(femtosecond Faraday rotation and time-resolved near-field scanning optical
microscopy) and low- temperature magnetotransport. %%% Recent decades have
witnessed the development of sophisticated solid state fabrication techniques
that enable the construction of artificial atomic architectures
("nanostructures") in which one or more dimensions are at the nanoscale (a
billionth the diameter of a human hair). There has also been a concurrent
development of optical measurement techniques that allow one to record physical
phenomena at unprecedently high speeds (ultrafast spectroscopy) and with very
high spatial definition (near field microscopy). In this highly interactive
project, we employ a powerful combination of state-of-the-art fabrication and
measurement techniques to study the dynamic motion of electrons in new classes
of "magnetic nanostructures," wherein magnetic atoms are embedded within an
engineered semiconductor. These fundamental investigations lay the groundwork
for future generations of magneto-electronic devices that would exploit the
quantum mecha nical interactions between electrons and magnetic atoms for high-
speed communication devices and ultra-high density memories. ***