* 9701101
* Topics in Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Andrew Granville, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 05/31/2001
* USD 326,500.00

Pommerance 9701101 This award supports work on problems in analytic,
computational, and additive number theory. One of the principal investigators
will probe further the basic ideas behind some known algorithms, by making
rigorous some of the established algorithms, and by developing the appropriate
tools necessary to help analyze the next generation of algorithms. He will also
study rigorous discrete logarithm algorithms for the multiplicative group of a
finite field with bounded degree over its prime field, as well as several
'Erdos-type" problems in analytic number theory. The other principal
investigator will try to obtain a more precise understanding of character sums
by proving distribution results and lower bounds for the largest such sums. He
also will study consequences of the abc-conjecture. Finally he will examine
several of the infamous problems involving elliptic curves. This is research in
the field of number theory. Number theory starts with the whole numbers and
questions such as the divisibility of one whole number by another. It is among
the oldest fields of mathematics and it was originally pursued for purely
aesthetic reasons. However, within the last half century, it has become an
essential tool in developing new algorithms for computer science and new error
correcting codes for electronics.