* 9701518
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Norms, Laws and the         Provision of Social Control
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1998
* Michael Hechter, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/1998
* USD 3,000.00

9701518 Hechter A society can use two kinds of control (legal and normative) to
ensure that individuals comply with its rules. Legal control refers to
punishment of deviant behavior by a legal institution that is supported by
taxes. Normative control refers to punishment by individuals themselves who
personally take action against a person who commits a deviant act. This Doctoral
Dissertation research will investigate the relationship between these two types
of control -- specifically, how change in the strength of one control
institution affects the strength of the other. The two hypotheses that will be
tested are: 1) cohesive communities with strong normative controls facilitate
the growth of strong legal systems; and 2) investment in the legal system, for
example in the police and prisons, will weaken normative controls and thus the
ability of communities to address social problems like crime in more informal
ways. In other words, strong communities contribute to the growth of the legal
system which in turn weakens the communities upon which it depends. An
experimental design will be employed where subjects will interact with each
other using computers. They will make decisions about sanctioning (i.e., how
best to sanction a thief) and about responding to the sanctioning decisions of
others (i.e., provide data through the assignment of points on subjects'
reactions to the sanctioning decisions of others). Resulting changes in the
strengths of the two types of control will be measured. Analysis of variance
will be used to determine the effects of variation in the initial strength of
one control institution on the later strength of the other.