* 9701082
* Dissertation Research: Inter-individual Variation in        Production of an Insect Defensive Secretion: Implications   for Defense and Mate Acquisition
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Jeffrey Spring, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 05/31/1999
* USD 5,003.00

Spring 9701082 The lubber grasshopper can take noxious chemicals (including
herbicides) from its diet and store them in its body. The composition and
quantities of these sequestered chemicals depends on the internal, physiological
capabilities of an individual grasshopper. These qequestrative abilities, and
the compositions of secretions, vary greatly among individuals. This
physiological variation can be characterized by isolating segments of the
grasshopper gut. Further, when attacked by predators, the grasshoppers secrete
the noxious chemicals as a deterrent. The PI can perform experiments using
collected secretion and live ants to test the defensive efficacy of specific
secretion samples. This provides us with a system to examine the role of
internal, physiological variations on an animal's interactions with other
organisms. One of the chemicals that lubber grasshoppers sequester from their
diet is the common herbicide 2,4-dichlorophenol (2,4-D). This herbicide is
commercially available in radioactive form, making it relatively easy to detect
and measure in the defensive secretion. The PIs can measure the amount of 2,4-D
in the secretion of individual grasshoppers, and then test the relative level of
ant deterrence for each secretion sample. Thus, we can not only measure the
internal, physiological variation in the uptake of 2,4-D but also characterize
the role of that variation in ecological interactions.