* 9701125
* Dissertation Research:  Molecular Phylogenetics and         Interfamilial Relationships in the Portulacaceous Alliance  of the Order Caryophyllales
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Robert Wallace, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/2000
* USD 9,950.00

9701125 Wallace Graduate student Wendy Applequist, under the guidance of Dr.
Robert Wallace at Iowa State University, is studying the phylogenetic or
genealogical relationships of plants in the four caryophyllalean families of
Basellaceae, Cactaceae, Didiereaceae, and Portulacaceae, making use of botanical
garden materials and field collections amassed over the years at Iowa State. The
morphological features of flowers and fruits used traditionally in the
classification of these plants, especially the c. 500 species of purslanes
(Portulacaceae), are suspected to be unreliable in marking evolutionary groups,
perhaps due to repeated, convergent adaptations in arid or desert habitats. New
evidence from DNA sequences of the chloroplast genome is being sought to provide
a large number of variable yet informative characters (mutations or nucleotide
substitutions) that can be used to measure genetic divergences among these
plants. In turn, a reliable phylogenetic framework for these plants will enable
the study of their historical biogeography and patterns of adaptation to various
desert regions of the world. The plants traditionally treated in the four
caryophyllalean families listed above present interesting problems of evolution,
biogeography, and adaptation, mostly in arid or desert habitats of the world,
and primarily on the southern continents of South America, Africa, and
Australia. Disentangling patterns caused by ancient continental drift from more
recent dispersals and migrations has been impossible without a reliable
phylogeny for the group, based on genetic features not directly affected by
habitat conditions. This project is a focused effort to construct a phylogenetic
framework for these plants from DNA sequence information, augmented by the
morphological, chromosomal, and anatomical data in hand.