* 9701116
* Dissertation Research: Evolutionary and Ecological          Determinants of Incubation Strategies in Three Sympatric    Nuthatches
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1998
* Thomas Martin, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 04/30/1998
* USD 7,670.00

Martin 9701116 Evolution of parental care strategies is thought to be determined
by fitness costs and benefits associated with providing care. Avian incubation
is a form of parental care and energetic constraints are thought to underlie
intra- and interspecific variation in incubation strategies. However, these
conclusions are based almost exclusively on single species studies which may
reflect phenotypic rather than genetic differences. Nest predation is an
alternative explanation that has been proposed as a potential selection pressure
leading to different incubation strategies, but critical tests are lacking. The
PIs propose to experimentally test the energetic constraint and nest predation
risk hypotheses in three sympatric species in the genus Sitta. These species
provide a model system to test these hypotheses because they differ in opposite
directions with respect to energetic constraints and nest predation risk. The
energetic constraint hypothesis will be tested by experimentally modifying the
nest microclimate using warm and cold air pumped into nests. The nest predation
risk hypothesis will be tested through predator presentation experiments. This
experimental and comparative field work advances understanding of the factors
responsible for intra and interspecific variation in parental care. l J