* 9701548
* CAREER:  Investigations of Novel Low Temperature Behavior in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Peter Schiffer, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 04/30/2001
* USD 230,000.00

9701548 Schiffer This is a CAREER proposal on magnetic materials that are
employed in all facets of modern technology from computer discs to automobile
engines. In these materials, the magnetic moments (which can be thought of as
microscopic quantum mechanical bar magnets) interact with each other, and the
nature of the interactions has a profound impact on the material properties. The
proposed research will investigate two classes of magnetic materials:
geometrically frustrated magnets in which the geometrical placement of the
magnetic moments results in a precisely balanced competition between
interactions and colossal magnetoresistance manganites in which the interaction
between the magnetic moments is closely tied the conduction of electrical
current. The proposed educational initiative will be the development of a
seminar course in modern condensed matter physics. Since standard condensed
matter physics courses typically do not cover the developments of the past three
decades, this course will give students a broad overview of research areas of
current interest. %%% The proposed CAREER research will investigate the
properties of novel magnetic materials at low temperatures. One subject of
research will be geometrically frustrated magnets, in which the magnetic ions
interact antiferromagnetically, but the interactions are frustrated by the
lattice geometry. Thermodynamic measurements on these systems are planned as a
function of magnetic field, temperature, and non-magnetic impurity concentration
in order to elucidate their novel low temperature behavior. A second area of
research will be investigations of the rare-earth manganites which have been
recently shown to display large magnetoresistance. In particular the
compositional phase diagrams of these materials will be examined to understand
the observed transitions between various magnetic and electronic phases. The
development of a new course in modern condensed matter physics is also planned.
The intent of the course is to expose graduate students and advanced
undergraduates to modern research topics (such as spin glasses, liquid helium,
and high temperature superconductors) which are typically excluded from standard
courses on condensed matter physics. ***