* 9701453
* Dielectric Studies of Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Lois Pollack, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

9701453 Pollack This is a Woman Career Advancement Award to study the dielectric
properties of proteins. The goal of these experiments is to study the important
problems of protein shape (conformation) and protein folding, the process by
which a linear chain of amino acids assumes the shape which allows the protein
to perform its specific function. Folding intermediates of proteins will be
studied with different techniques, such as measurements of the dielectric
constant of a protein solution. The dielectric constant is a measure of the
distribution of charge within the macromolecule and changes as the protein
folds. Membrane proteins will also be studied. %%% This is a Woman Career
Advancement Award to study the dielectric properties of proteins. Proteins are
large molecules that consist of a long chain of amino acids. The molecule
'folds' itself into a specific shape that dictates its function. The goal of
these experiments is to gain insight into the important problems of protein
shape (conformation) and protein folding. Different techniques, such as a
detailed measurements of the distribution of positive and negative charges in
the molecule, can yield new information about the forces that cause the protein
to fold in a unique way. Different types of proteins will be studied, including
the important class of proteins that cross membranes. ***