* 9701222
* Dissertation Research:  Experimental Tests of the Parental  Investment in Care Hypothesis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Justin Congdon, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 05/31/1999
* USD 5,375.00

9701222 Congdon Reptiles such as turtles lack behavioral parental care, such as
birds feeding their young and mammals providing milk. In contrast, female
turtles lay eggs in nests in the ground and subsequently return to their aquatic
habitats. Nests are left unprotected and once hatchlings emerge from the nest
they are on their own to find not only a suitable aquatic habitat but their own
food as well. However, hatchling turtles do not leave the nests totally empty
handed; they carry within their bodies some reserve yolk. Hatchlings may
metabolize this yolk as fuel during their early life. The time that elapses
before hatchlings feed can be surprisingly long. In some species of turtles, the
hatchlings develop completely but then remain in the nest to overwinter. They
may remain in the nest over 200 days before emerging in early spring. In other
species, such as sea turtles, hatchlings emerge immediately after developing,
race down the beach and then must swim out to seal until they reach offshore
currents where they spend their first months of life. Sea turtle hatchlings may
swim for several days without feeding. Evolutionary ecologists have hypothesized
that providing the 'yolk' is one way females can increase the chances of their
offspring surviving a critical period. Whether hatchlings with larger reserves
perform better than hatchlings with smaller ones is unknown. The importance of
the yolk reserves will be experimentally tested so that the ecological and
evolutionary significance of varying amounts of yolk reserves can be better
understood. Yolk reserves in hatchlings can be manipulated by removing a small
amount of yolk. After the yolk reserves are reduced, the experimental animals
can be compared to control animals in which the yolk reserves were not
manipulated. Four questions will be addressed. How will reduced yolks affect the
ability of the hatchling to overwinter in the nest? How will the reduced yolks
affect the ability of the hatchlings to capture prey such a s small tadpoles?
What will the growth and survival of the experimental animals be compared to the
control group? And how will the ability to disperse overland to a home pond be
affected? The last question will be answered by releasing hatchlings in areas
used by nesting females. The shell and hind legs of the hatchlings will be
coated with a color-coded dust that can be seen at night using a UV light. Each
turtle will be followed to determine if it successfully reaches a pond. In
combination these tests will demonstrate if and in what ways yolk sac reserves
affect hatchling turtles.