* 9701122
* Dissertation Research: Geographic Variation in Life History Traits of Myrmeleon immaculatus
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Nicholas Gotelli, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/1998
* USD 8,000.00

9701122 Gotelli This research focuses on geographic variation in body size of
the ant lion, Myrmeleon immaculatus. Ant lions are larval insects common
throughout the eastern and southern United States. They live for 1 to 3 years as
larvae, and are effective sit-and-wait predators on arthropods. Collections of
larvae from 37 populations, ranging from Oklahoma to New York, revealed that M.
immaculatus body size increased with latitude: northern ant lions were larger
than southern ant lionq. This research addresses whether this pattern is due to
nature versus nurture. In other words, is ant lion body size variation due to
genetic or environmental influences? This question will be answered by raising
first-instar larvae in environmentally controlled growth chambers. This
experiment removes environmental influences and reveals genetic determinants of
growth. To complement this study, larvae will be reared in the field in a
reciprocal transplant experiment between sites in Oklahoma and Connecticut. The
results from these two experiments will reveal whether growth rates and adult
body size of ant lions are determined primarily by individuals genes or by the
environment in which they are raised. Other factors that may influence insect
body size at different latitudes are temperature and prey abundance and
distribution. The effects of food and temperature on growth rate will be tested
by raising larvae from northern and southern populations at different
temperatures and food levels. Prey body sizes will be determined by pitfall-
trapping at 25 different sites between Georgia and Vermont. These data will
reveal whether there is a correlation between ant lion body size and prey body
size and abundance. This study will enhance our understanding of the
environmental and genetic components of body size, and reveal the nature of life
history variation on a large geographic scale.