* 9701587
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Nonverbal Behaviors in     Social Interaction
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Lynn Smith-Lovin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1998
* USD 5,701.00

9701587 Smith-Lovin Within the field of Social Psychology, Affect Control Theory
(ACT) has been used to understand the ways in which people perceive events
generally (i.e., cognitions, emotions, and behaviors emerging from an event).
ACT conceptualizes situations as consisting of actor-behavior-other and
quantifies the definitions of actors and behaviors on three dimensions:
Evaluation, Potency and Activity which have been shown to be human universals
for responding to stimuli. However, nonverbal behaviors have an impact on how
people perceive the situations in which they find themselves everyday. This
Doctoral Dissertation Improvement proposes to extend ACT to include nonverbal
behavioral that modify actions, with nonverbal behaviors being defined as "those
aspects of a person's demeanor which communicate additional information about
the behavior being performed. For example, nonverbal behaviors tell others
whether a subject is performing an action enthusiastically (with a smile) or
reluctantly (with a roll of the eyes). A four-phase research design will be
used. The first phase entails collecting information on nonverbal behaviors
independent of an event context. Phase two will pair nonverbal behaviors with
other behaviors to see how they combine in people's perceptions. The third and
four phases involves performing two experiments (one on paper and one via
videotape) to see what effects the inclusion of nonverbal behaviors has on
impressions people form of events. Data will be collected from undergraduate
students at a major U.S. university. This research has the potential to increase
our understanding of the relationship between nonverbal behaviors and
impressions. In addition, it will increase the utility of Affect Control Theory
in predicting event perception and will allow for more accurate understanding of
the complex situations in which people interact. ****