* 9701467
* CAREER: Fines Induced Liquefaction in Alluvial Sands and    Geotechnical Engineering Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Jerry Yamamuro, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 09/30/2000
* USD 210,000.00

9701467 Yamamuro This action is to support an integrated research and
educational-enhancement project submitted under the NSF Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Program. Most research into liquefaction of soils has been
performed on clean sands, while most of the documented historic cases of
earthquake-induced liquefaction have occurred in alluvial silty sands. The
current view of the effect of fines (particles smaller than 0.074 mm) on the
liquefaction behavior of soils is that it either inhibits liquefaction or that
it has little effect. However this is not necessarily correct. The behavior of
silty sands has also been observed to be highly unconventional. The four major
tasks and objectives of the research program are: (1) To investigate the
unconventional behavior of silty sands by performing drained and undrained
testing using monotonic and cyclic loading. The objective is to explore the
bounds of the observed unconventional behavior. (2) To evaluate, using scanning
electron microscope and thin- sections analysis, the soil fabric of silty sands
formed by the different depositional methods used to create test specimens. This
will be followed by a study of soil fabric created by water depositional
processes in a fabricated cylindrical vertical sedimentation chamber. The
objective is to ensure that the fabric created by alluvial deposition is
incorporated accurately into test specimens. The soil fabric will then be
modeled using Discrete Element Methods (DEM), the objective being to verify
possible 'collapse' mechanisms of 'meta-stable' structures created in silty
sands during alluvial deposition. (3) To perform model cone penetrometer tests
(CPT) in a fabricated double-walled calibration chamber on silty sands. The
objective is to evaluate existing insitu liquefaction assessment methods and the
effect of grain size. (4) To modify an elasto-plastic, non-associated flow
constitutive soil model to capture the unconventional behavior pattern. The
objective is to enable predictions of liquefaction in alluvial silty sand. The
three main educational objectives are: (l) To improve students' electronic
communications skills when acting as 'disassociated' project team members
connected only by networking technology. (2) To improve undergraduate soil
mechanics education by providing undergraduate students with greater exposure to
advanced soil mechanics testing by developing interactive videos. Videos will be
developed for tests such as monotonic and cyclic triaxial testing, torsion
shear, CPT, and pressuremeter. This will supplement the basic undergraduate
laboratory experience. (3) To encourage minority participation into the
geotechnical engineering program at Clarkson University. This will be best
accomplished by participation in the McNair Program which funds qualified
minority students to participate in undergraduate research during summers.