* 9701991
* Magnetic Field Driven Transitions in Spin-Lattice Coupled   Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Bernhard Keimer, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9701991 Keimer This is a renewal project to study cooperative magnetostructural
transitions in electronic materials, especially spin-Peierls systems and
magnetoresistive manganites using synchrotron x-ray diffraction in intense
magnetic fields. In spin-Peierls systems, the experiments will provide a
detailed picture of the magnetic field induced soliton lattice phase as well as
the critical behavior near the commensurate- incommensurate transition. In the
manganites, a recently discovered insulator-metal transition that can be induced
by a magnetic field as well as exposure to x-rays will be investigated, and its
potential for applications in x-ray lithography will be evaluated. In addition,
possible magnetostructural transitions will be explored in new materials,
including charge density wave, spin density wave and spin- ladder systems. %%%
This is a renewal project to study novel phases of solids induced by magnetic
fields in a unique facility designed for x-ray diffraction in intense magnetic
fields. These experiments are of fundamental as well as long-term technological
interest. From a fundamental perspective, our understanding of magnetic
interactions in metals and insulators, especially the roles of dimensionality
and disorder, will be advanced by focusing on the coupling between the magnetic
order and the crystal structure in various materials. An improved understanding
of magnetic field induced transitions may also lead to a variety of
applications, for instance in high-density magnetic storage; of particular
interest are recently discovered insulator-metal transitions in manganese oxides
that can be induced by magnetic fields as well as exposure to x-rays. ***