* 9701592
* Collaborative Research: Explicit Modeling of the Summertime SHEBA Sea Ice Pack
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Michael Steele, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Michael T. Ledbetter
* 05/31/2001
* USD 130,979.00

ABSTRACT OPP-9701592 OPP-9701990 STEELE, MICHAEL HOLT, BENJAMIN UNIVERSITY OF
WASHINGTON JET PROPULSION LABORATORY OPP-9702040 HOPKINS, MARK COLD REGIONS
RESEARCH AND ENVIRONMENTAL LABORATORIES This research project is a key component
of a large, coordinated, multi-investigator program, Surface Heat Budget of the
Arctic (SHEBA) Ocean. The research program will be conducted for 14 months from
a ship frozen into the ice pack. These investigators will utilize measurements
of the thermal and dynamic conditions of the permanent ice cap of the Arctic
Ocean to be incorporated into a modeling project that will determine the factors
responsible for the summer melting of the sea ice. Their results will help
determine how atmospheric and oceanic heating is coupled to adsorption of heat
by the ice. These measurements are critical to understanding how heat is
reflected or absorbed by the sea ice as it melts in the summer and thickens in
the winter in response to seasonal variations in climate. The modeling program
makes an essential contribution to the SHEBA team of researchers who will
measure atmospheric and oceanic variables with a large array of instruments on
the ice floe and aircraft flying above as well as ice and ocean property
measurements made on and below the ice floe. The combined set of measurements
and sea ice models in SHEBA will allow refinement of climate models for the
Arctic region. Those improved models will lead to better predictions of the
climate and the permanence of the Arctic ice cap under a proposed global warming
that could occur if atmospheric carbon dioxide levels are increased above
present levels.