* 9701988
* CAREER: Integrated Dynamic Control for Robust               Quality-of-Service Routing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1997,10/27/1999
* Abraham Matta, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 10/27/1999
* USD 200,000.00

This proposal deals with the dynamic control of large networks that integrate
real-time and non-real-time applications with heterogeneous Quality-of-Service
(QoS) requirements. To meet these requirements, adaptive algorithms are needed
for the routing, scheduling and admission control components. Routing provides a
selection of routes, which should have sufficient resources to satisfy the
applications' QoS. Scheduling allocates link resources (bandwidth, buffers,
etc.) among the different service classes. Admission accepts or rejects a new
incoming application, based on the requested QoS and the available resources.
Because each control component causes and reacts to changes in the network
state, there is a strong time-dependent interaction among them. By taking this
interaction into account, the proposed work will develop QoS routing algorithms
that will provide significant improvements in performance. To this end, we will
develop dynamic integrated models. A novel numerical-analytical technique,
called "Z-iteration", will be used to solve these models. The Z-iteration
promises to provide rapid and accurate solutions to transient performance of
integrated networks consisting of both wired and wireless links. Networks based
on ATM and integrated services IP will be considered. The proposed work will
develop software educational tools and projects for integrated networks, and
will experiment with providing QoS support to educational multimedia
applications. More information about this project can be found in
http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/matta/proj/project.html