* 9701302
* Algebraic Cycles and Arithmetic
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Alexander Goncharov, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 07/31/2000
* USD 60,341.00

Goncharov 9701302 This award funds research of Dr. Caterina Consani, a
postdoctoral associate of Professor Goncharov. The project describes a number of
ideas relating algebraic cycles with arithmetic. There are three main themes in
the project. The first theme deals with an interpretation of the local Euler
factor of a projective, smooth variety over a number field at a finite prime of
semistable reduction. Consani gave in her Ph.D Thesis a description of the local
factor at an Archimedean place as a characteristic polynomial of an operator
playing the role of the geometric Frobenius at infinity. The Frobenius acts on
an infinite dimensional real vector space of invariants for the action of an
arithmetic monodromy. Supported by this description and by the fact that an
Archimedean fiber of an arithmetic variety should be thought as completly
degenerate, Consani hopes to show a corresponding description also at a place of
semistable reduction. Consani intends to better understand the analogy between
the Archimedean and non Archimedean fibers by studying, in a quite concrete way,
the pole of the L-function of a product variety XxX at a non Archimedean
semistable reduction prime of X, associated to the monodromy map N. This
represents the second main theme of the project. The operator N can be
interpreted as a cocycle into the middle dimensional cohomology group of XxX
correctly twisted. Via the spectral sequence of the nearby cycles one should be
able to read that element as a cocycle and eventually as an algebraic cycle,
into the disjoint union of the 3-fold intersections of the components of the
special fiber of a resolution of the model of XxX. The last theme reported in
the project describes a closer relation between algebraic cycles and
differential forms over the fiber at infinity of an arithmetic variety. Consani
hopes to introduce a higher Arakelov theory and a higher arithmetic Riemann Roch
theorem. This project falls into the general area of arithme tic geometry - a
subject that blends two of the oldest areas of mathematics: number theory and
geometry. This combination has proved extraordinarily fruitful - having recently
solved problems that withstood generations. Among its many consequences are new
error correcting codes. Such codes are essential for both modern computers (hard
disks) and compact disks.