* 9701966
* Playing God?- Cultural Change and the Ethics of Human       Genetic Engineering
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Robert Wuthnow, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/1999
* USD 5,675.00

9701966 Wuthnow In recent years there has been a renaissance in the sociological
examination of cultural changes in society such as the increase in individualism
at the expense of collectivism (e.g., Bellah et al., 1985) and in people's use
of human centered over theistic legitimization for their actions (e.g., Hunter
1991). However, in these studies society-wide level of analyses, macro-level
explanations, and lack of comparable measurements of the past and present
culture prevent deeper understanding of the processes underlying cultural
change. This Doctoral Dissertation research investigates the micro-foundations
of this broader cultural change through examining one limited public issue --the
debates about the propriety of the genetic modifications of humans. The primary
data are from a systematic study of the printed debates on this topic from 1958
to present. Specifically, a sample of all books, book chapters, and articles
produced on this subject will be analyzed using the citation study method. In
this method patterns (or raw numbers of instances) among citations are used to
evaluate hypotheses about the construction of knowledge. Additional information
will be collected through interviews with writers of books and articles that are
most cited during specific time periods. Lastly, case studies will be done on
two commissions, one state created (The President's Commission) and one
voluntary sector created (The United Methodist Church), that were empowered to
discuss this issue. Through examining changes in the debate on genetic
engineering, this research will increase our understanding of the processes
involved in broader social change. ****