* 9701332
* Dissertation Research: Investigations of the Relationship   Between Biodiversity and Ecosystem Function by Examination  of Acidified Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* William Lewis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 04/30/2000
* USD 5,190.00

9701332 Lewis While biodiversity continues to be the focus of many ecological
studies and conservation efforts, its relation to ecosystem function remains
unresolved. The literature provides examples of both interdependence and
independence between biodiversity and functioning of ecosystems. The purpose of
this project is to test three hypotheses, as follows: (1) a given biotic
compartment in an incrementally stressed ecosystem will show suppression of
biodiversity first, and suppression of biomass subsequently; (2) suppression of
ecosystem function is primarily related to suppression of biomass, rather than
to biodiversity per se; and (3) suppression of biomass differs among biotic
compartments according to a predictable series of thresholds: multicellular
organisms &lt; unicellular autotrophs &lt; microbial decomposers. These
hypotheses will be tested on a group of streams, some of which have been
stressed by acidic mine drainage. These streams are excellent model systems
because they include a wide gradient of multiple stresses (low pH, high
concentration of metals, oxide deposition), each of which is quantifiable. Pilot
studies on these streams are consistent with the three hypotheses. The project
will focus on expansion of the information on benthic insects and periphyton as
necessary to test the hypotheses, and use of molecular techniques to obtain
comparable information on microbial decomposer compartments.