* 9701104
* Dissertation Research: Developmental Maintenance of         Evolutionary Conservatism: A Comparative and Experimental   Analysis of Sphenoid Skeletogenesis in Birds and Mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1997,11/30/1998
* Kathleen Smith, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 11/30/1998
* USD 8,775.00

Smith 9701104 Basic mechanisms underlying morphological conservation are not
well understood. While some anatomical regions undergo major evolutionary
transformations, others are resistant to change. The relations among structures
in one part of the vertebrae head, the sphenoid region, have remained constant
during five hundred million years of evolution despite numerous modifications in
other parts of the skull. Classical comparative anatomy and contemporary
molecular and cellular approaches are combined to investigate morphogenetic
processes involved in pattering the sphenoid skeleton and t characterize
developmental properties that may enable evolutionary conservation of this
region across vertebrates. Two complementary studies are proposed. The first
identifies specific elements that are important in pattering the sphenoid
skeleton. Previously performed experiments such as gene knockouts, surgical
manipulations, and teratogen treatments are analyzed to generate data on how
perturbations to the neural tube, notochord, trigeminal nerve, and pituitary
gland affect the sphenoid skeleton possess intrinsic patterning information.
This involves new experimental transplantations of neural crest and mesodermal
cells. This investigation 1) provides and understanding of how morphogenetic
events affect skeletal patterning, 2) gives new insights on the integration of
complex cranial structures, and 3) contributes important examples to the study
of developmental interactions in morphological evolution.