* 9701135
* Dissertation Research:  The Evolutionary Persistence of     Gynogenetic Lineages and the Role of Frequencey-Dependent   Expression of Mating Behaviors
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* David Hillis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 06/30/2000
* USD 6,075.00

9701135 Hillis One of the more puzzling genetic questions is how clonal species
maintain themselves through time. Gynogenetic species are clonal animals that
face an obstacle to long-term persistence because reproduction is dependent on
males of another species. A gynogenetic species cannot persist in isolation; it
must coexist with another species whose males it is capable of parasitizing
behaviorally. However, simple population models of such interactions predict
that gynogenetic species should rapidly become extinct. The existence of
gynogenetic species indicates that these models are an insufficient description
of reality. One factor that would allow the persistence of the gynogenetic
species is frequency-dependent behavior. This investigation will examine
frequency-dependent behaviors and their role in the maintenance of gynogenetic
species. A mathematical model will be constructed that incorporates frequency-
dependent mate selection, and then the model will be tested using two species of
poeciliid fish: the gynogenetic specie and the species upon which it depends.
The model will establish the levels of frequency-dependent mating that
theoretically can result in a stable equilibrium of a gynogenetic species and
the species upon which it depends. The experiments will determine if mate
selection is frequency-dependent and if frequency-dependence is great enough to
explain the coexistence of gynogenetic species and the species they parasitize.