* 9701299
* Dissertation Research: Effects of Omnivorous Fishes and     Shrimps on Community Structure Along a Tropical Stream      Continuum, Puerto Rico
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1999
* Catherine Pringle, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 04/30/1999
* USD 9,650.00

9701299 Pringle Tropical streams are typically characterized by an abundance of
omnivorous fishes and shrimps; however little is known about the relative roles
of these macroconsumers in structuring stream communities. These species
typically have migratory life cycles, inhabiting both lowlands and headwaters
during their lifetime. High levels of water withdrawal from lower stream reaches
are resulting in direct mortality of these biota and changes in their
distribution and abundance. Proposed research will determine the effects of
fishes and shrimps on benthic community structure along the continuum of the Rio
Espiritu Santo in northeastern Puerto Rico. In this study, the following
questions will be addressed: (1) Do omnivorous fishes and shrimps significantly
affect patterns of sediment accrual (i.e. the benthic depositional
environment)?; (2) Do trophic cascades occur when omnivorous fishes and shrimps
are excluded? and (3) How do effects of fishes and shrimps vary along the stream
continuum? Effects of fishes and shrimps on insects, algal resources, and
sediment accrual will be experimentally examined by manipulating their presence
and absence at three sites along the river continuum using an in situ electric
exclosure technique. Proposed research will provide information on the role of
omnivory in structuring a tropical stream community and will expand our previous
studies of effects of fishes and shrimps on leaf decomposition to include their
effects on primary producers, sedimentation, and community structure along the
river continuum. This research will also enhance our ability to predict how
these threatened stream ecosystems respond to anthropogenic disturbance.