* 9701688
* Light Scattering Experiments and Fluid Flow
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Walter Goldburg, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 300,000.00

9701688 Goldburg This experimental research project is concerned with the study
of laminar turbulent flow in 2 and 3 dimensions, and the influence of polymer
additives on this flow. Special emphasis is placed on the quasi- two dimensional
flow produced in soap films, and the interaction of flowing film with the
surrounding air. In addition, experiments are carried out on turbulence
generated by an oscillating grid in a closed container. This experiment probes
the velocity fluctuations in the bulk of the fluid and for particles floating on
the surface. The spatial correlations of the fluctuations are measured from the
measurement of the velocity at two separated points. %%% Soap films can serve as
a model for the flowing of fluids in nature. The films exhibit various types of
commonly observed flows, including the very difficult type of turbulent flow.
One area of special interest is the effect of shear in low in a soap film and
the role paid by the concept of the viscosity of the liquid. It is of great
interest to note that the soap film is observed to have a viscosity a hundred
times that of water, even though the film is 99% water and 1% additive. Another
problem studied is the surface motion on the turbulent fluid which is related to
the study of the motion of buoys or the dispersion of a contaminant of the
surface of a turbulent sea. ***