* 9701699
* Studies of Nonstoichiometry, Transport, and Interface       Characteristics of Pr(x)Ce(1-x)O(2-y) with Applications to  Gas Sensors with Enhanced Selectivity
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Harry Tuller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2002
* USD 713,393.00

9701699 Tuller Semiconducting gas sensors presently lack sensitivity and
selectivity to specific types of gases including hydrocarbons and NOx important
for automotive systems. The Crystal Physics and Electroceramics laboratory at
M.I.T. and the Ford Research Laboratory have teamed up to explore the
praseodymium-cerium- oxygen system that exhibits a number of features attractive
for the design of a versatile multi-component chemical sensor. The proposed
research will examine the relationships between composition, temperature and
partial pressure of oxygen, as well as the nonstoichiometry, phase stability and
transport properties (electronic and ionic). Key features to be studied are: (1)
control of the n- and p-type character corresponding to the position of the
Fermi energy and relevant sensitivity and selectivity to various HC and NOx
molecules; (2) the chemical diffusivity important with respect to aging of the
"bulk" properties; (3) surface reaction kinetics relevant to selectivity and
response times. Fundamental project studies will be carried out at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; sensor response and characterization
studies are to be performed at Ford Research Labs. The participants of this
GOALI project view their feedback and exchange on materials, data, models, and
concepts essential to the success of this project. The project is jointly funded
by the Ceramics Program of the Division of Materials Research and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate. %%% Semiconducting gas sensors presently lack sensitivity and
selectivity to specific types of gases including hydrocarbons and nitrogen
oxides important for automotive systems. The Crystal Physics and Electroceramics
laboratory at M.I.T. and the Ford Research Laboratory have teamed up to explore
the praseodymium- cerium-oxygen system that exhibits a number of features
attractive for the design of a versatile multi-component chem ical sensor. This
collaborative research project is jointly funded by the Ceramics Program of the
Division of Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. ***