* 9701771
* CAREER:  Optimization Under Property Prediction Uncertainity in Molecular Design
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Costas Maranas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2001
* USD 319,400.00

Abstract - Maranas - 9701771 The purpose of this project is to design molecular
products which optimally meet a set of design objectives while accounting for
inaccuracies in the employed structure-property relations. Existing approaches
for computer-aided molecular design suffer from two limitations: (1) they may or
may not converge to the best molecular design depending on their initialization
and the adopted search strategy; and (2) even if by chance the mathematically
best molecular design is found, it is still unclear if the best molecular is
truly at hand due to the uncertainty in the structure-property expressions. This
research aims at overcoming these shortcoming. To this end, a blend of chance-
constrained programming, statistical analysis, mixed-integer linear and
nonlinear programming algorithms, and deterministic global optimization will be
utilized. By eliminating the pitfall of unknowingly converging to suboptimal
molecular designs and quantifying the effect of property prediction uncertainty
on obtained molecular designs, the PI expects to improve the chances and
expedite the identification of molecular products. This will permit experimental
efforts to be concentrated on only the most promising molecular candidate
products. The educational initiatives planned in this CAREER grant are two-fold:
(a) course development, and (b) student mentoring, advising and introduction to
research. By taking advantage of the planned research on optimization in
molecular design and prior work on molecular structure identification, a course
on molecular design (which currently does not exist at Penn State) is planned to
be offered in two years. A course on advanced process synthesis and optimization
will shortly be submitted for approval by the Faculty Senate to fill a vacancy
in advanced process synthesis courses in the Chemical Engineering curriculum at
Penn State. The course will follow a preliminary version taught over the summer
semester and will borrow heavily from the PI's resea rch work in optimization.