* 9701507
* CAREER:  Soft Chemical Synthesis of Porous Materials Based  on Cluster-Network Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2003
* Andreas Stein, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 04/30/2003
* USD 335,000.00

9701507 Stein Metal polyanion or -cation clusters will be used as building
blocks (or as metal precursors) to synthesize extended inorganic-organic network
structures to design new classes of functional materials. The clusters will be
preorganized in two- and three-dimensional structures using surfactants to
optimize the cluster arrangements for linking; salt-gel reactions will be used
to convert the pre-organized salt structures into high surface area mesoporous
materials, with the salt-gel reactions studied in collaboration with Argonne
National Labs; methods for the linkage of the inorganic clusters by organic
connectors through hydrogen bonding, coordination polymerization, and covalent
bonding will be developed; and optimized linking mechanisms will be combined
with templating techniques to produce well-ordered structures with accessible
void spaces. %%% New classes of functional porous materials based on cluster-
network structures will be designed with void spaces for applications in
catalysis, separations, sensing, optics or electronics. Integrating these
current high-priority materials research challenges with the educational
curriculum of this CAREER Program results in the training of students in areas
of growing relevancy thereby advancing science and technology while improving
job prospects for students. ***