* 9701323
* Dissertation Research: Adaptation and Differentiation Among Serpentine Populations of Platystemon californicus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1998
* Donald Stratton, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 11/30/1998
* USD 4,685.00

9701323 STRATTON The chemistry of serpentine soil is such as to preclude the
growth of most species of plants. This project investigates the nature of traits
underlying the ability of some populations of the plant species Platystemon
californicus to tolerate serpentine soil. First, the tolerance of populations
growing on serpentine soil is being compared with that of populations native to
other habitats. Second, the levels of nutrients and heavy metals in each of the
soils are being assayed along with the physiological responses of plants from
each population to variations in those same chemical factors. Third, a DNA
geneaology of the populations is being produced to determine whether serpentine
habitat has been colonized multiple times independently. And fourth, artificial
hybridizations among serpentine populations are being performed to determine
whether the genetic basis of serpentine tolerance differs among populations.
Serpentine tolerance in P. Californicus appears to represent a case where
natural selection is acting independently, but more or less in parallel, in
geographically isolated serpentine populations. It is currently unknown whether
such parallel selection pressures retard or accelerate genetic divergence among
populations. That is, does parallel selection hmmogenize a species or cause it
to diversify? The resolution of this issue is relevant to a number of
theoretical and applied population biology problems - from the conservation of
geographically fragmented species to the coordinated control of agricultural
pests and human diseases.