* 9701210
* Dissertation Research: Endosperm Development,               Embryology, and Gametic Fusion in Basal Angiosperms
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* William Friedman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/1999
* USD 7,728.00

9701210 Friedman Graduate student Sandra Floyd, under the direction of advisor
Dr. William Friedman at the University of Colorado, is conducting intensive
studies of the anatomy and development of plant embryos in several species of
putatively primitive flowering plants, to document cellular events leading to
double fertilization and the formation of (usually triploid) endosperm in these
exemplars of ancient angiosperms. Flowering plants, or angiosperms, are
distinguished from other vascular and seed plants by a series of seemingly
unique fertilization events, leading to the formation of the plant embryo with
surrounding nutrient tissue called endosperm. Pioneering microscopic research by
Dr. Friedman, using powerful microspectrofluorometric measurements of DNA
content in cells, has demonstrated similar events in seed development in the
peculiar gymnosperms of the order Gnetales. Ms. Floyd is extending the research
program to basal lineages of angiosperms, to explore the cellular details of
anatomy and development involved in the evolution of early angiosperm embryos.
Fine-scale morphological or ultrastructural characters of embryo development in
primitive groups of angiosperms hold promise of helping to resolve the
phylogenetic relationships among early lineages of flowering plants, a question
still unanswered in light of DNA sequence data accumulating for many of these
plants. Access to the specialized equipment and skills needed for this kind of
research are significant attributes of this doctoral dissertation improvement
grant.