* 9701253
* The Classification of Finite Simple Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Richard Lyons, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph P. Brennan
* 05/31/2001
* USD 210,000.00

LYONS/SOLOMON 97-01253 This project is a continuation of the revision project
begun with Danny Gorenstein for the proof of the classification of the finite
simple groups. The proposers contemplate publishing three volumes during the
period of the grant(two already having been published). The first of the three
is devoted to laying the groundwork for establishing the many properties of the
known simple groups necessary for the proof. The second and third are devoted to
various uniqueness theorems, the key underlying theorems for the proof. In the
second will be Bender's strongly embedded subgroup theorem and variations; new
theorems on p-component uniqueness subgroups; and a version of the global
C(G,T)-theorem, partly in collaboration with Richard Foote. In the third will be
preparation theorems for the uniqueness case for groups of even type, connecting
p-uniqueness and 2- uniqueness case from an amalgam-theoretic point of view,
written by Gernot Stroth. The finite simple groups were classified in an ever-
accelerating process which culminated around 1980, in a proof depending on
hundreds of articles totaling tens of thousands of pages. Because of the central
position of this result in group theory and its many applications, as well as
the length and complexity of the proof, the current effort was begun. The goal
is a coherent proof, as direct and clear as possible and using the best ideas at
present. The proof is now conceived as a series of roughly ten volumes, of which
the first two have already appeared.