* 9701911
* CAREER:  Foundations of DNA Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Mitsunori Ogihara, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Sloan
* 12/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

DNA computing is a new interdisciplinary research area that bridges the gap
between computer science and biochemistry. The potential strength of DNA
computing lies in the high memory capacity of DNA molecules and the intrinsic
massive parallelism of biochemical operations. In 1994, it was demonstrated that
it is possible to engage DNA in combinatorial computation through well-
established biochemical techniques. The ultimate goal of this four-year project
is to establish the foundations of DNA computing while tackling important issues
through research and education activities. The following topics are
investigated: Establishing theoretical models for DNA computing. Development of
computational models, data structures and high-level operations for DNA
Computing. Development of a complexity theory for DNA computing. including
trade-offs among resources and reducibility. Development of DNA computers
algorithms that are more efficient than algorithms on existing computers.
Educational plan: An interdisciplinary undergraduate course on DNA computing.
The course will be teamtaught. The objective of the course is to introduce
students to the basic principles of liquid- phase DNA chemistry and to the
relevant notions in computer science. In the last third of the course, students
will be divided into teams to work on team projects based on research related
problems.