* 9701017
* Arithmetic of Cohomological Modular Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Haruzo Hida, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 06/30/2001
* USD 283,000.00

9701017 Hida After several years of basic research on the Arithmetic of modular
L-values,p-adic Hecke algebras, Galois representations and their Selmer groups,
number theorists can now start building up the theory in a little more
sophisticated way. After the proof of the Shimura-Taniyama conjecture by A.
Wiles and R. Taylor, which include the proof of Mazur's conjecture on Hecke
algebras and deformation rings of modular Galois representations, there are now
effective tools to deal with non-abelian Selmer groups; in particular, those of
adjoint modular Galois representations. This award will support research into
five projects connected to Selmer groups. From the view point of Iwasawa's
theory, number theorists need to construct p-adic analytic L-functions on the
spectrum of the Hecke algebra to supply tools to describe such Selmer
groups(Project II). Since adjoint L-values are often non-critical, one needs to
find out how to compute the algebraic part of the L-values in an automorphic way
feasible enough to connect them directly to Selmer groups even in non-critical
case (Project I).Since the work of Taylor and Wiles is now generalized to the
Hilbert modular case by K. Fujiwara, one can try to attack the two variable main
conjecture for the adjoint Selmer groups (Project III). Two key tools in
studying this problem are: (i) analysis of base change via Hecke algebras and
deformation rings, and (ii) theory of p-adic nearly ordinary Hecke algebras for
symplectic groups constructed by J. Tilouine and E. Urban. Thus it is natural to
study how functorial operations on Galois representations are reflected by
deformation rings and Hecke algebras (Project IV) and to generalize the theory
to more general groups, perhaps unitary groups (Project V). This project falls
into the general area of arithmetic geometry -a subject that blends two of the
oldest areas of mathematics: number theory and geometry. This combination has
proved extraordinarily fruitful - having recently solved problems that w
ithstood generations. Among its many consequences are new error correcting
codes. Such codes are essential for both modern computers (hard disks) and
compact disks.