* 9701320
* Dissertation Research:  Maintenance of Polymorphism in a    Natural Plant-Pathogen Interaction
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Phyllis Coley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 05/31/1999
* USD 4,289.00

9701320 Coley The relationships between plants and their pathogens are not well
understood, yet these systems present fascinating questions which bear upon
fundamental issues of evolutionary ecology. This research will address one such
topic, the maintenance of resistance and virulence polymorphisms. This study
will undertake an integrated investigation of various hypotheses for the
maintenance of polymorphism in the native wild sunflower (Helianthus annuus) and
its fungal rust (Puccinia helianthi). First, a series of garden experiments will
determine whether there are detectable fitness costs associated with bearing
unnecessary resistance or virulence alleles. Such costs might balance the
benefits of resistance or virulence, resulting in polymorphic populations. In
addition, both direct and indirect fitness benefits of resistance will be
examined in natural populations. A frequency-dependent advantage for rare
resistance or virulence genotypes might also be important to the maintenance of
polymorphism, and a controlled garden experiment will be performed to test this
hypothesis. Finally, surveys of natural populations in Utah will compare
polymorphism in areas favorable or unfavorable for the rust, and will examine
polymorphism in populations of differing sizes and degrees of isolation. The
proposed research will critically test a variety of hypotheses for the
maintenance of virulence and resistance polymorphisms, and will make a valuable
contribution to our understanding of the evolutionary dynamics of natural plant-
pathogen systems.