* 9701250
* Dissertation Research: Mechanisms of Species Compositional  Change Due to Gap Creation in a Tallgrass Prairie
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Deborah Goldberg, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 04/30/1999
* USD 5,716.00

9701250 Goldberg In this proposal, the PIs develop a framework to determine the
mechanisms of species compositional change following the creation of a gap. It
is critical that we learn the mechanistic basis for these changes to understand
the process of, and thereby develop models for, gap dynamics. Release from
competition due to reduction of neighbor biomass has been the assumed, but
largely untested, mechanism responsible for species compositional change in
disturbances. The competitive release hypothesis predicts that the competitive
hierarchy remains unchanged but competitive inferior species are able to
colonize a gap faster than the dominants. However, the PIs suggest that the
competitive hierarchy may also shift in favor of species adapted to disturbed
conditions. At least two other mechanisms of change could cause this shift in
hierarchy: alterations in the abiotic environment independent of biotic effects
and changes in neighborhood size-structure. The PIs will separate these three
potential mechanisms of change in factorial manipulations of neighbor biomass
(removed or present), abiotic soil alteration (soil disturbed or undisturbed)
and neighborhood size-structure (juvenile colonists or adults). Data on the
absolute and relative performance due to each of these components will allow us
to compare the responses of six target species. Preliminary results suggest that
the experimental design is able to separate these effects and that species
characteristic of gaps respond differently to components of change compared to
non-gap species.