* 9701180
* Dissertation Research: Control of Insect Populations by     Generalist Predators:  Impact of Intraguild Predation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* David Wise, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 04/30/1999
* USD 7,260.00

9701180 Wise The proposed research will investigate the dynamics of predation by
generalist ground predators - wolf spiders (Lycosidae) and ground beetles
(Carabidae) - on insect pests of vegetables. Carabids and lycosids, which
consume a wide spectrum of herbivore species, also prey on each other - behavior
defined as intraguild predation (IGP). Four specific questions will be
addressed: (1) Does predation by lycosids and carabids suppress densities of
herbivorous insects? (2) Do lycosids and carabids negatively impact populations
of other predators? (3) Does IGP limit carabid and lycosid populations? (4) Does
the size structure of the ground-predator guild influence its impact on
herbivore populations? Manipulative field experiments will address the above
questions by controlling immigration of lycosids and carabids into fenced
vegetable gardens, and observing effects on pest densities, densities of other
predators, and plant productivity. The field experiments will be complemented
with laboratory feeding trials. The research will elucidate the extent to which
IGP limits the impact of generalist predators on herbivore densities. Since the
study will be conducted in an agricultural system, results will improve
understanding of the limitations and strengths of indigenous generalist
predators as biological control agents, which will contribute to their more
effective use in integrated pest management.