* 9701502
* CAREER:  New Methods for Systems Analysis of Environmental  Technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2003
* H. Christopher Frey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 05/31/2003
* USD 235,000.00

9701502 Frey This research program features several major activities: (1) the
development of detailed engineering-economic models of clean technologies for
the purpose of understanding trade-offs among process performance, emissions and
cost; (2) the development of new methods for quantitative analysis of
uncertainty and variability in environmental technologies; (3) the combination
of probabilistic analysis with optimization capabilities to yield approaches for
optimizing technologies in the face of uncertainties; and (4) detailed case
studies to illustrate the use of systems models and the benefits of the
probabilistic and optimization methodologies. The detailed case studies will
focus on selected innovative gasification technologies. These technologies offer
promise for low environmental discharges, waste utilization, and efficient use
of fossil fuels. For example, coal gasification technologies represent a rich
area of study regarding process optimization, uncertainty analysis, and
pollution prevention because of the wide range of possible process
configurations. These technologies are emerging as the preferred alternative for
the next generation of coal-based power generation, with nearly a dozen
demonstration plants underway in the U.S. and Europe. By failing to rigorously
quantify the risks of new technology, traditional approaches to estimating their
performance, emissions, and cost have been misleading, exposing decision makers
to unnecessary costs and risks. The billions of dollars now being spent on the
development of coal gasification technologies should be targeted to those
systems that offer the greatest potential for emissions reduction and favorable
costs. Therefore, there is a critical need for systems modeling of these
technologies. Opportunities to extend the methodology to evaluation of other
types of technologies will be considered as part of collaborative work. The
educational program will include the development of modular inst ructional
materials in air pollution control, air quality engineering, systems
engineering, and related topics. These modules will be adaptable for use in
courses in transportation engineering, chemical engineering, and textiles.
Modular materials are amenable to systematic evaluation and targeted refinement
through pre- and post-testing. Modular materials will also facilitate distance-
learning course offerings. A key focus in the development of instructional
materials will be the development of multi-media pedagogical computer models of
major emission sources that transfer the research results into the classroom.
Such models will enable students to explore the sensitivity of model predictions
to different mechanistic assumptions regarding mass and energy balances,
chemical equilibrium, chemical kinetics, and empirical approaches to estimating
pollutant formation and control, and to deal with uncertainty in model structure
and input parameters. ***