* 9701525
* CAREER:  Resource Sharing and Performance Analysis          Algorithms for Integrated-Services Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2003
* Rayadurgam Srikant, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Taieb Ben Znati
* 06/30/2003
* USD 200,000.00

Integrated-services communication networks that carry multiple traffic classes
with different Quality-of-Service (QoS) requirements such as voice, video and
data are becoming a reality. Each traffic class is characterized by the amount
of bandwidth that it requests from the network, and the statistics of its
arrival process and holding time in the network. A key feature of emerging high-
speed networks is that these characteristics for the various traffic classes
tend to be widely different. We focus on two important issues in such networks:
(i) resource sharing for traffic with different bandwidth requirements and (ii)
performance analysis algorithms to evaluate routing and admission control for
such networks. High bandwidth calls typically experience high blocking
probabilities without some form of admission control that reserves a certain
portion of the network's resources to handle these calls. A goal of this
research project would be to develop admission control and routing schemes to
improve the blocking performance of high bandwidth calls without adversely
affecting the network utilization. The presence of a large mixture of bandwidth
classes also poses unique challenges in evaluating the performance of such
admission control and routing schemes. We will develop a combination of
analytical and simulation techniques that would provide fast and accurate
estimates of the blocking probabilities for all traffic classes in the network.