* 9701121
* Dissertation Research: Ontogeny and Evolution of Frog Hind  Limb Bone &amp; Muscle Morphology &amp; Material Properties: Effects of Varying Developmental Duration on Jumping Perfor
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Andrew Biewener, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 12/31/1999
* USD 10,000.00

Biewener 9701121 The effects of developmental duration on the ontogeny of
musculo-skeletal morphology and bone material properties in frogs will be
evaluated, expanding knowledge of these features to a broader range of
vertebrate species. Variation in developmental duration is hypothesized to
affect the morphology and material properties of the hind limb bones and muscles
and, consequently, the locomotor performance of newlymetamorphosed frogs. The
effects of variations in developmental duration on the musculoskeletal system
will be compared in field collected frogs and experimental frogs raised at two
temperatures. Analysis of high speed videos of jumps from field-collected and
laboratory-raised frogs will be used to correlate performance with musculo-
skeletal morphology and bone material properties. Musculo-skeletal
characteristics will be examined through a combination of histological
sectioning, radiographs, four-point bending, and asking. Ontogenetic and
phylogenetic scaling of all parameters will be used to understand the influence
of age and size. This study will assess potential trade-offs in the evolution of
developmental durations in frogs. Though rapid, larval development is often
ecologically advantageous, this study will evaluated its cost to locomotor
performance in terms of the morphological and physiological capabilities of the
musculo-skeletal system.