* 9702107
* CAREER:  Advancing Experimental Computer Science in Storage Management and Education
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Scott Nettles, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 02/28/1999
* USD 105,000.00

This work will advance automatic storage allocation through the use of
experimental techniques, and will advance education in experimental computer
science. Automatic deallocation of dynamically allocated storage is called
"Garbage collection" (GC). GC helps to avoid a variety of common but serious
programming errors. Unfortunately, it may adversely affect program performance.
Modern collectors probably provide acceptable performance, but there is a lack
of experimental evidence to support this claim, hindering the adoption of GC,
despite its advantages. The goal of this work is to provide a better
understanding of GC performance, both aiding its adoption when performance is
adequate, and providing detailed quantitative information about how performance
needs to be improved when it is inadequate. In particular, the work will compare
the performance of copying and mark-and-sweep collection on modern computer
architectures. The focus of the work will be building a GC testbed, which will
facilitate the systematic comparative study of a variety of GC techniques. The
educational goal is to improve the teaching of experimental computer science. A
new course is proposed that will explicitly teach experimental CS. The
pedagogiaal approach is the standard one used to teach other experimental
sciences, in which well-known experiments are repeated, enabling students to
gain hands-on experience with the basic methodologies and techniques.***