* 9702662
* CAREER:  Variation Risk Management Early in the Product      Development Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Anna Thornton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 06/30/2002
* USD 260,000.00

This grant provides funding for the development of tools and methods to manage
variation risk during the early stages of product development. The methods will
use a common model set to enable an integrated approach to variation management
by linking identification of risk areas, the consequence and likelihood of
failure as well as the development of strategies to mitigate risk. Variation
risk identification will be achieved by identifying the system level Key
Characteristics(KCs) of a product -- the product features, manufacturing process
parameters, and assembly features that significantly affect a product -- and
flowing them down to the contributing features. The likelihood of risk will be
measured by propagating the expected variation through the model. These measures
will be used to weight the relative importance of a set of system level KCs and
begin to determine the best approach for mitigating risk. Tools to measure the
likelihood and consequence of variation risk under uncertainty will also be
developed. Three risk mitigation strategies will be developed by this research:
change the product architecture to create a more robust design, improve the
manufacturing process to reduce the input variation, and/or implement
measurement plans to track variation in production. The tools will be used to
optimize the selection of the lowest cost mitigation strategy. The early
identification and mitigation of variation risk will enable product developers
to increase product complexity, reduce design cycle times, and improve the cost
and quality of the products. Specifically, these methods will reduce several
consequences of variation--design changes, institutionalized rework, and low
quality. The use of the integrated models will enable an organization to
effectively manage risk throughout the development and production of the
product. The use of quantitative methods will improve the efficiency and
accuracy of the risk management process.