* 9702520
* CAREER: The Physical Chemistry of Disordered Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2002
* Vicki Colvin, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 04/30/2002
* USD 324,000.00

This CAREER award to Vicki L. Colvin at Rice University is supported by the
Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry Division. The main focus of the
research will be the behavior and properties of nanomaterials from two different
aspects. The first project will address the nature of the interface between
nanoparticles such as zinc selenide, titania and zirconia and polymers such as
polyacrylates and polymethacrylates. By exploiting the recent advances in the
size and and surface control of inorganic nanoparticles, model interfaces will
be chemically created. The effect of the interfaces on the bulk polymer
structure will be explored by NMR and thermomechanical analysis. Atomic force
microscopy will be used as a nanomechanical probe of the interfacial region. The
second project will exploit the ability to create clusters of different sizes to
probe the origins of disorder in glass. The stability of disordered silica
clusters will be measured by monitoring the temperature and/or pressure at which
the systems undergo structural changes. The size dependence of cluster stability
over the 1 to 100 nm range will provide an important test for models of glass
formation. Size transformations will be probed by vibrational spectroscopy.
These projects will help bridge the gap between the laboratory synthesis of
nanoscale solids and their ultimate use in real world technologies. The teaching
aspect of this CAREER award will focus on the synergy between basic and applied
science in the area of materials. A graduate level course will be developed that
provides students with an appreciation of technological issues. The curriculum
will focus on the technical assessment of three to four emerging technologies
which rely on complex materials such as read-writeable CD disks or
electroluminescent flat panel displays. Students will combine technical data
from the literature and analysis of potential markets to evaluate the potential
for these new applications. This approach will also benefit undergraduate level
courses, especially physical chemistry. Examples suggested by the graduate
course, such as the photophysics of a laser printer will be used in lectures to
illustrate the wide-ranging applications of physical chemical principles.