* 9702032
* Dissertation Research: The Effects of Elevated Temperature  on Symbiotic Dinoflagellates: Possible Sites of Damage and  Protection and Coral Bleaching
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1999
* William Fitt, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 05/31/1999
* USD 8,410.00

Fitt 9702032 The majority of reef building corals throughout the tropics contain
high densities of the symbiotic dinoflagellate Symbiodinium sp.commonly called
zooxanthellae. These algae are vital to the health of the individual coral
colony as well as major contributors to the overall primary productivity that
allows these reefs to flourish in the oligotrophic waters in which they reside.
Recent wide spread bleaching events, correlated to elevated water temperatures,
have occurred world wide in which corals have lost their zooxanthellae at
alarming rates. While it has been shown that these algae are adversely effected
by elevated temperature, the precise mechanisms of the cellular events that lead
to a loss in photosynthetic ability have yet to be established. Objectives of
this proposal are: (1) to investigate if different types of zooxanthellae in
vitro exhibit differential levels of damage or protection to specific
polypeptides of photosystem II at the biochemical, translational, and post-
transcriptional level, and (2) to determine if similar processes exist for
dinoflagellates living in different hosts that reside within habitats with
different levels of temperature variability. These mechanisms of damage and
protection appear to play a major role in determining the ecological
distribution, as well as the ultimate fate of algalinvertebrate assemblages
during periods of environmentally relevant stress.