* 9702291
* PECASE:  Information Processing Models of Memory Retrieval  and Response Priming
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Trisha Van Zandt, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 04/30/2001
* USD 400,000.00

9702291 Van Zandt An important area of research in cognitive psychology is how
information, whether directly impinging on the senses or retrieved from memory,
is transformed during cognition to allow performance of simple tasks.
Understanding this process of transformation provides the basis for
understanding human behavior more generally. This research will emphasize a
theoretical, model-driven approach to the study of behavior, in which a number
of models of human information processing will be developed and tested. In
particular, this research will use neural network models and certain statistical
models to explain the interactions between behavioral variables (such as
reaction time, response accuracy and confidence) in memory retrieval tasks. In
addition, the research will involve the construction of biologically plausible
models of simple decision-making in an interdisciplinary, collaborative effort
with Dr. Ernst Niebur of the Zanvyl Krieger Mind/Brain Institute. These models
may represent a step toward the development of biologically realistic models of
human cognition. As psychological science becomes more specialized, students
require more mathematical and statistical training. The research and educational
activities in this project will teach graduate and undergraduate psychology
students about modeling human behavior. Changes to the undergraduate psychology
curriculum at the Johns Hopkins University will incorporate laboratory and
research experience in introductory level experimental psychology courses.
Redesigned statistics and experimental design courses will emphasize computer
methods and psychological applications. As a result, Hopkins undergraduates will
have a deeper appreciation for scientific and quantitative methods in
experimental psychology. Furthermore, students with interests in cognition and
neuroscience will have opportunities to do collaborative research in these areas
by assisting directly with the research in this proj ect. This research,
assisted by undergraduates and graduate students, will progress toward an
understanding of the differences and similarities between network models and
more traditional statistical models of cognition. Finally, the application of
these kinds of dynamic models of cognition to problems in memory retrieval will
increase our understanding of the ways that humans use information in making
decisions about the world and ultimately enable the development of automated
methods to help people make such decisions in more effective ways. ***