* 9702449
* CAREER: Development of a Mobile Architecture                (Mobi-Arch)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/1997,02/16/1999
* Tracy Camp, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 02/16/1999
* USD 220,000.00

Research Plan: The second roundtable on the state of the Internet in September
1996 stated that the evolution of the Internet will follow three paths:
multimedia, multicast, and mobility. This project combines two of the three
evolution paths: multicast and mobility. Laptop and palmtop computers are now
available at affordable prices; studies indicate that laptop computers are
currently 35% of computer sales. With the explosive interest in laptop
computers, there is now the desire for continuous Internet access no matter
where users are. In other words, users desire an Internet version of the
cellular telephone. Multicasting capability (transmitting a message to a group
of hosts instead of a single host) are an important facility on the Internet.
Thousands of users currently obtain data from the MBONE or multicast backbone
through its numerous multicasting applications (e.g., video-conferencing
system). Furthermore, since a multicasting facility is part of the next version
of the Internet Protocol (IPv6), even more users will begin using multicasting
applications on a regular basis. This project concerns both mobility and
multicasting. The Internet Engineering Task Force lists multicasting as a
desired service in our future mobile environment. However, the current Internet
protocol for mobile hosts does not handle multicasting and the current Internet
multicasting protocol does not transmit messages to mobile hosts. This project
is to develop protocols that will allow mobile hosts to transmit and receive
multicast messages in the Internet efficiently. For more information, see
http://cs.ua.edu/faculty/camp/camp.html/mobi-arch.html Education Plan: The
education aspect of this project revolves around the ``women in computing''
issue. Over the past year, we have been exploring gender issues in computer
science, since the decreasing percentages of women in our field is discouraging.
During this project, we will initiate programs a t the university and in the
community to try to reduce the decreasing female trend that we are seeing in our
field. For more information, see
http://cs.ua.edu/faculty/camp/camp.html/women.html