* 9702108
* CAREER: Electronic Packaging - Process Development and      Microelectronics Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Janet Lumpp, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 07/31/2001
* USD 210,000.00

Proposal Number: ECS-9702108 Principal Investigator: Janet K. Lumpp The
metalization of ceramics is investigated, which is an important problem area in
electronics packing. The specific research activities will focus on development
of improved adhesion of copper films on aluminum nitride by investigating
brazing alloys and copper electroless plating. Aluminum nitride is a very
promising high thermal conductivity material and investigation into this area
represents the current state of the art. In order to get the heat generated in
the conduction lines (almost always copper) from source to sink, good thermal
contact (referred to as metallization)) is essential. In the plating process to
be developed in this research, an excimer laser is used to define fine pitch
interconnect patterns without the need for masks or photoresist patterning. The
metallization procedures will be developed with industry collaboration and
incorporated into microelectronics courses at the University of Kentucky (UK).
The educational plan involves an extremely wide spectrum of participation by
local industry, state government, local school systems and multidisciplinary
activities within University of Kentucky. Specific elements of the educational
plan include: improvement in graduate and undergraduate courses in
microelectronics; participation in the Kentucky Electronics Education Project
(KEEP) which is aimed at education and retention of middle school and high
school students in technical careers; industrial input on the development of the
above projects; and an electronic assembly project field trip for young students
sponsored by the Center for Manufacturing systems at the University of Kentucky.
This was truly an integrated research and education proposal. The goal of the
plan is "informed students, prepared teachers, and electronic assembly
curriculum materials generated by a partnership between the University of
Kentucky College of Engineering, the UK Center for Manufacturing Sy stems,
industrial members of the Microelectronics Society (ISHM) and industry sponsors
such as Lexan International. University of Kentucky students will gain
experience in microelectronics course, electronic packing research and
introducing young students to the electronic packaging industry.