* 9702643
* (CAREER) Timing and Distribution of Erosion and Extreme     Hydrologic Events
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Paul Bierman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2002
* USD 200,408.00

9702643 Bierman The densely populated northeastern United States is subject to
extreme hydrologic events that impact the landscape. Some of these events are
meteorological; nor'easters, hurricanes, and convective thunderstorms generate
rainfall of sufficiently high intensity and duration to cause property damage,
ecologic disturbance, and erosion. Other events are human-induced; a century
ago, the region was almost completely cleared of forest, increasing rates of
runoff and erosion. The history of deforestation and reforestation is well
documented; yet 200 years of data are insufficient to characterize the spatial
and temporal distribution of the largest storms, those having the greatest
recurrence intervals, those capable of the greatest damage, and those causing
the most significant, episodic landscape change. It is our working hypothesis
that in the well-forested Northeast, where infiltration rates are typically
high, lacustrine and alluvial fan sedimentation occurs primarily during very
intense and/or long duration storms when soil pore pressure increase
sufficiently to trigger landslides and saturation overland flow. Our data
indicate that sedimentation can also be triggered by deforestation, such as
occurred during colonial land clearance; yet, pollen, charcoal, and macrofossil
data indicate that New England has been clothed in forest continuously since
11,000 years ago. Although local erosion and sedimentation events could be
triggered by tree die back, fire, or localized storms, large-scale storms seem
the most reasonable explanation for regionally synchronous sedimentation events.
To further my long-terms goals, understanding rates of landscape change and
using research-based inquiry as a teaching tool, this proposal seek funds to
collect, analyze, date and compare 30-40 Holocene sedimentary records from the
Northeast (New England and New York). By comparing the ages of sedimentation
events at wide-spread sites, we will determine the percentage and timing of
deposit ional events that are regionally synchronous. To establish the timing of
lacustrine sedimentation events, we will collect, date, and analyze cores from
15-20 "hydrologically sensitive" ponds, those with large, steep, drainage
basins. To constrain ages of terrestrial sedimentation events, we will trench,
describe and date deposits in 15-20 alluvial fans. We will use both data sets to
map (for the past 10,000 years) the temporal and spatial distribution of
sedimentation events and by analogy, the paleo-distribution of storm events
capable of causing significant hillslope erosion. Not only will we publish our
data through conventional channels, but we will create a dynamic Web site and
interactive exhibit in the heavily used Perkins Geology Museum at UVM. The Web
site will be both a data repository updated as the project progresses and a
teaching tool for Earth Science education from the pre-college through the
University level.