* 9702106
* CAREER:  2-Alkylidene Oxetanes:  A Versatile Molecular      Scaffold for New Molecules and Advanced Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Amy Howell, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2001
* USD 283,200.00

Professor Howell's research focuses on the synthesis of 2-alkylideneoxetanes and
their use as potential inhibitors of serine and cysteine proteases as well as
precursors for the synthesis of medium-ring carbocyclic compounds and
spiroketals. Compounds bearing structural analogy to simple insect pheromones
will be prepared using the latter methodology, which is designed to be simple
and chemoselective, without extensive use of protecting groups, while proceeding
under mild conditions. Approaches to other functionalities through the
intermediacy of 2-alkylideneoxetanes will also be explored, as will the
polymerization of 2-alkylideneoxetanes, expected to yield polyketones. Professor
Howell will seek to facilitate student and faculty interactions with industry in
order to achieve three goals: (1) to increase student appreciation of industrial
career opportunities, (2) to improve faculty understanding of how to assist
students with their job searches, and (3) to foster academic-industrial and
industrial-academic collaborations. With this CAREER award, the Synthetic
Organic Program supports the research and educational activities of Dr. Amy
Howell of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Connecticut.
Professor Howell examines the chemistry of a class of versatile precursor
molecules that, to this point, have received little attention from the synthetic
community. These compounds, comparatively small in size but containing a number
of reactive groupings of atoms, permit synthetic access to a wide range of
important compounds, including molecules anticipated to display unusual
biological activity, as well as polymeric materials. Professor Howell's
educational activities target the enhancement of student awareness of career
opportunities in industry and the development of faculty-industry collaborations
through workshops, in-house courses taught by industrial chemists, and
internships in academic and industrial laboratories.