* 9702884
* CAREER: Faculty Early Career Development Program
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1997,12/31/2002
* Ellen Arruda, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 12/31/2002
* USD 310,000.00

Arruda 9702884 The research component of this proposal is concerned with
experimental testing, characterization and constitutive modeling of polymers.
The strain rate and temperature dependent behavior of semicrystalline polymers
is not well characterized nor completely understood. Existing models for
semicrystalline polymers have not been developed in conjunction with a
reasonable range of experiments for verification of actual material performance.
There are many technologically important applications for this work, the
relationship between polymer properties and part performance is one of today's
major engineering challenges. The PI of this proposal is experienced in the
design, implementation and analysis of mechanical tests and in traditional
materials science characterization methods for polymers. The PI has also
successfully developed internal variable based constitutive models of amorphous
(glassy and rubbery) polymers that accurately predict their three dimensional
response. The proposed work involves extensive mechanical testing and material
characterization of semicrystalline polypropylene to relate the physical
mechanisms associated with deformation to experimentally observed results. Also,
this research will involve internal variable based constitutive modeling of the
strain rate and temperature dependent behavior of semi-crystalline
polypropylene. The goal of this work is a model that accurately predicts the
experimental data. The specific objectives of the proposed study are: (i) to
gain an understanding of the important and prominent deformation mechanisms in
polypropylene over a range of strain rates and temperatures through mechanical
testing and characterization, (ii) to determine the state of deformation
dependence of polypropylene through tests on isotropic specimens in uniaxial
compression, plane strain compression and tens ion, (iii) to study the evolution
of structure with straining and quantifying structural state, (iv) to develop an
internal variable based, three dimensional constitutive model of the deformation
response and (v) to implement the model into a commercially available finite
element package via a user defined material option for verification. The
teaching component is outreach to middle school girls designed to foster
continued interest in math and science based careers. The planned activity
targets girls at a critical time in their education process when they begin to
start believing they no longer are good at math and science. In middle school
they are surrounded by influences against math and ;science careers for women.
Girls fail to continue to elect math and science courses in adolescence which
quickly steers them towards non-technical academic paths. To emerge from
adolescence with confidence in their math and science abilities, girls need more
encouragement to continue to elect advanced math and science courses. They need
to understand the many varied career opportunities that rely on a solid math and
science education. To become women with an interest in engineering careers,
girls need to see women succeeding in their engineering careers. They need to
hear from women engineers about the aspects of engineering they found appealing
when the women made their career choices. And they need to learn engineering
principles from women who are enthusiastic about the subject. The PI plans to
develop, implement and evaluate an engineering career module that engages women
faculty and undergraduates in teaching middle school girls about engineering.
The module involves the PI going to middle schools in Washtenaw County, MI to
highlight the research work of women at universities nationwide. It will provide
opportunities for girls in the program to interact with these women through the
internet and email. The girls in the program will also engage in design projects
utilizing hands-on, team learning strategies that are attractive to girls. The
importance of problem solving in society and the usefulness of math and science
classes for future career opportunities will be stressed. Dissemination plans
for this outreach activity include enlisting undergraduate women from the
College of Engineering at Michigan to develop similar modules in various
engineering disciplines, and sending the packaged modules to women engineering
faculty at colleges and universities nationwide.