* 9702715
* CAREER: Improved Estimation of Extreme Rainfall for Flood   Hazard Assessment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Allen Bradley, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2002
* USD 285,000.00

9702715 Bradley The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award focuses on
research and enhanced educational opportunities in extreme rainfall estimation
for flood hazard assessment. Estimation of the upper limits of storm rainfall
for design of high hazard structures is based on the probable maximum
precipitation (PMP). Many of the concepts in PMP estimation were developed in
the 1930's and 40's. In recent years there have been substantive advances in the
observation, understanding, and modeling of convective weather systems. Research
will be carried out to improve PMP estimation using modern meteorological
methods. The principal objectives of the research plan are to: (1) develop
unique climatological information on extreme rainstorms in the central United
States, to improve our understanding of the hydrometeorological controls on
extreme rainfall, (2) examine fundamental concepts of the PMP approach,
including moisture maximization, using mesoscale numerical modeling, (3) develop
and evaluate a probable maximum precipitation procedure for major river
drainages in the central United States based on descriptions of the large-scale
circulation anomalies associated with extended periods of excessive rainfall.
The objectives of the educational plan are to: (1) integrate the use of remote
sensing information from modern weather observing equipment into graduate and
undergraduate courses, (2) develop Internet-based instructional material to
support education in remote sensing technologies and hydrometeorological data
analysis. ***