* 9702535
* CAREER:  Generic Phase Diagram of the Mixed State of Type IISuperconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Hugo Safar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/1998
* USD 75,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9702535 Safar This experimental CAREER grant project
focuses on the phase diagram describing the flux penetration in Type II
superconductors. The discovery by the PI of the solid-liquid transition
undergone by the flux lattice in the cuprate superconductors spurs investigation
more generally among Type II superconductors of this phase diagram. Of
particular interest are the effects that anisotropy, disorder and thermal
fluctuations have on creating the newly observed vortex liquid and related
states of the Type II superconductor. The experiments will measure the
temperature and magnetic field dependencies of the linear and nonlinear
resistivities which arise by flux motion. In addition, the critical currents,
and energy barriers (activation energies) will be measured. The experimental
measurement of flux- flow voltages will cover a very broad voltage dynamic
range: sub- picovolt to nanovolt range using a custom-built SQUID-based
voltmeter, and from nano to millivolts using state of the art commercial
voltmeters. The materials to be studied include both cuprate and conventional
layered superconductors. The proposed research will be integrated into an
education plan to help enhance student learning and to train future scientists,
including members of under-represented minority groups. %%% This CAREER grant
project involves fundamental experimental research on the interaction of
magnetic fields with the superconducting state. It is focused on the Type II
superconductors, which are more tolerant of magnetic field than Type I
superconductors, in that magnetic field can penetrate the Type II superconductor
in the the form of quantized flux lines or vortices, without necessarily
destroying the zero resistance state. Electrical resistance, and therefore
heating effects, occur in Type II superconductors when the current density,
exerts a sufficiently strong force on the flux lines to cause them to move. This
field of research therefore is relevant to the current handling capacity of
superconductors in applications involving high currents and high magnetic
fields, such as electric power cables and windings in motors or generators. A
new phenomenon in this connection, melting or liquid-like motion of the
quantized flux lines, has been discovered in the past few years in the high
transition temperature cuprate superconductors, which are particularly promising
for applications in current carrying cables. The fundamental research carried
out in this project therefore is expected to contribute in the long term to an
improved electric power technology. The research will be integrated into an
education plan to help enhance students learning and to train future scientists,
including members of under-represented minority groups. ***