* 9702631
* CAREER:  Microanalytical Methods for Investigation of       Metabolism and Transport of Substance P
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Susan Lunte, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 03/31/2002
* USD 240,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the development of
analytical methods to quantify the partitioning of substance P through the blood
brain barrier. Professor Lunte and her students at the University of Kansas will
study methods to derivatize substance P so that it can be analytically detected.
One strategy involves pre- or postcolumn derivatization of substance P with
naphthalene-2,3-dicarboxaldehyde combined with capillary electrophoresis so that
laser induced fluorescence detection can be used. The second approach involves
precolumn derivatization with the biuret reagent followed by chromatographic
separation with dual electrode electrochemical detection. This CAREER project
will enable students to learn state-of-the-art methods for quantifying picomolar
concentrations of biologically significant analytes and to test the hypothesis
that substance P crosses the blood brain barrier and plays a role in central
nervous system function. Substance P is a neuropeptide that plays a role in
maintaining the functional status of the brain at very low concentration levels.
The nature of its role has not been quantified because there are no functional
groups on the molecule that impart either spectroscopic or electrochemical
responses that can be used as analytical signals. In this CAREER research
project Professor Lunte and her students will develop two separate methods that
permit the analysis of substance P at the concentration levels required.
Substance P will be modified so that a fluorescence signal can be measured in
one procedure and an electrochemical modifying agent will be used in a second
procedure so that an electroanalytical signal can be measured. These
modification procedures will be coupled with the separation method capillary
electrophoresis in order to make the analyses selective for substance P. In
addition to the educational impact of involving students in this work, Professor
Lunte will implement a course for all science students designed to improve the
efficacy of communicating scientific information between scientific disciplines
and to the public at large.