* 9702690
* Career:  From Strongly Correlated Insulator to Metal:       Transport and Magnetic Properties of Carrier Doped          Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* John DiTusa, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 304,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9702690 DiTusa This experimental CAREER grant,
supported by the Division of Materials Research and the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) will advance the state of knowledge of
the properties of lightly doped semiconductors and insulators, with emphasis on
magnetic oxides such as those which have been transformed into high temperature
superconductors by suitable doping. The proposed work will explore the magnetic
and transport properties of such carrier-doped strongly-correlated insulators.
The low temperature properties of doped insulators will be measured to determine
if the ground states are ordinary band insulators in the insulating state, and
Fermi liquids in the metallic state. Thin films of the materials will be
produced to explore the potential of making electronic devices based on the
small band gaps and the doping-controllable magnetic ground states of these
materials. The research will be integrated into an education plan to help
enhance student learning and to train future scientists, including minority
scientists. The PI's education plan involves a physics laboratory course open to
students from his own institution and also to students from the nearby HBCU
Southern University. %%% This CAREER program project, supported by the Division
of Materials Research and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), involves fundamental experimental research on the classes of
semiconductors and insulators which have in the past decade been found to yield
high temperature superconductivity when the materials are suitably doped with
additional chemical elements which have the effect of producing electrical
conductivity. The materials to be studied here are magnetic in the undoped
state, but lose this property as they gain electrical conductivity . One aspect
of the work will be to assess more generally the opportunities to make
electronic devices based on thin films of such materials. The long term results
of this project may include improved magnetic sensing devices, such as are used
in computer magnetic disk drives. On the educational side the PI plans to
enhance student learning and to train future scientists, including those from
under- represented minority groups. A joint physics laboratory course will be
featured which is open to students of the PI's institution and also to students
from the nearby Southern University, which is in the HBCU class (Historically
Black College or University). ***