* 9702399
* CAREER: Modeling The Failure of Advanced Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Simon Spearing, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 12/31/2001
* USD 309,700.00

Spearing 9702399 Structures made from composite materials and laminates
generally fail by a combination of interacting damage modes operating over a
continuum of length scales. Design against failure is complicated because,
unlike monolithic metal alloys, no single failure mode dominates. It is,
therefore, critical to develop models with a predictive capability that include
the effects of such damage for the efficient design of structures, using
polymer, metal and ceramic-based advanced materials. Dr. Spearing's core
research activity is the development of physically-based models for the failure
of advanced materials. These models will be presented and actively communicated
in a form suitable for use as structural design tools, in aerospace applications
and elsewhere. Dr. Spearing has a strong grounding in this activity through his
involvement in previous projects, in industry and academia, on polymer and
ceramic matrix composites and layered ceramic materials. Research will include
modeling, using closed-form and numerical, solid mechanics and fracture
mechanics solutions supported by appropriate mechanical testing and
observational techniques. The emphasis will be on conducting research on
technologically important topics in conjunction with partners in industry,
academia and government agencies. Dr. Spearing's educational goal is to excel at
classroom teaching, student supervision and mentoring activities. He will
continue to develop a new graduate course to give students a solid grounding in
the failure mechanics of composite materials, particularly focusing on the use
of mechanics of materials models to predict structural performance. This course
links directly to the established departmental curriculum, through an existing
course on the "Mechanics of Filamentary Composites," taught by Dr. Spearing in
1995. In additi on the new course complements the research plan outlined above.
A longer term goal of this curriculum and research integration is to refine the
teaching of this important subject to the point where it can be written as
textbook or as a computer-based teaching tool. Dr. Spearing co-teaches an
undergraduate laboratory course on the manufacture and mechanical testing of
composite materials, which provides a strong link between the department's
research activities and the undergraduate curriculum. Dr. Spearing will continue
to act as an advisor for undergraduate and graduate students, on academic,
career and other concerns, He will also continue to educate graduate and
undergraduate students through the supervision of research activities. The award
of this grant under the CAREER Faculty Early Career Development Program will
support the educational and research activities described in this proposal. In
particular it will allow the investigator and a graduate student to devote time
to the integration of these activities. In addition it will enable increased
collaboration with colleagues, in universities, government agencies and
industry. The overall aim is to achieve the synthesis of more generalized models
for the failure of advanced materials, and to communicate them in such a way as
to inform and educate current and future generations of engineers.