* 9702403
* CAREER:  Structure of and Transport in Microporous Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2002
* Michael Deem, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2002
* USD 320,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9702403 This is a four-year Career project. The field of materials
science and chemistry has benefited tremendously from recent advances in
synthesis, characterization, and processing. Novel mocroporous materials,
including zeolites clays, and porous carbons, are discovered and their
properties examined at an increasing pace. Stochastic "diversity synthesis"
provide a new route to a tremendously increased number of solid-state, organic,
and biological compounds, and associated selection schemes allow sorting of
these libraries based upon physical, chemical, or biological properties of
interest. Simultaneously, among the most exciting developments in statistical
mechanics over the past decade have been powerful methods for the computer
simulation of materials. To date these methods have been developed and tested
mainly on model systems. In many cases, however, formulations appear possible
that allow investigation of the properties of novel materials of current
interest. Moreover, new field-theoretic techniques in statistical mechanics
allow computation of meso- and macroscopic material properties from such
atomistic simulations. This project relates to the Deem group's research and
teaching interests in the area of structure and transport in disordered
microcrystalline materials. Diffusion is of great importance in catalytic
sorptive, ion-exchange, and conducting materials. The diffusing entity may be
structural defects in the nearly-crystalline solid, catalyst particles,
occluding molecules, reactants, or products. The chemical and transport
properties of the material depend crucially on the diffusion coefficients of the
constituent species. The influence of disorder on the diffusing species can be
difficult or impossible to capture in a fantasize simulation. Field theory is
discussed as a possible means to mitigate finite-size effects and to account
for, the effect of macroscopic disorder on transport properties. This approach
complements microscopic molecular dynamics calculations to provide a
comprehensive theory for transport. Zeolites continue to be svnthesized at a
furious pace. Perhaps soon the techniques of diversity synthesis will be
introduced to the field, with a tremendous explosion in the number of synthetic
zeolites. The derivation of an atomic-scale model of the framework crystal
structure of a newly-synthesiz d zeolite is a non-trivial task: roughly one-
hundred framework structures have been solved out of the thousands of existing
synthetic zeolites. A direct method making use of ideas from importance-sampled
Monte Carlo is proposed for determining the structure of microcrocrystalline
materials from powder diffraction data.