* 9702217
* PECASE:  Optimization Under Uncertainty:  Monte Carlo       Sampling-Based Techniques for Stochastic Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2003
* David Morton, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Suvrajeet Sen
* 05/31/2003
* USD 500,000.00

9702217 Morton Optimization algorithms from linear, nonlinear, and integer
programming are powerful tools for solving mathematical models of many important
planning problems. Strictly deterministic models, however, do not capture the
uncertainty inherent in many systems, and their "optimal solutions" often fail
to hedge against model uncertainties. Stochastic programming techniques, on the
other hand, explicitly capture uncertainty, but have to date suffered from a
high degree of computational complexity. The research plan of this CAREER award
is directed toward developing and constructing computationally tractable
algorithms for two approaches to solving stochastic programs. The first approach
is based on solving an approximating problem generated by randomly sampling a
set of scenarios. The second approach takes advantage of the associated special
structure within a sequential approximation method. Both approaches will make
use of promising variance reduction techniques to reduce computational overhead.
In the educational plan, the investigator will undertake a number of activities,
including facilitating the active involvement of students in local industry,
developing a new course in stochastic optimization, and building a computational
operations research laboratory. In the past decade, advances in computing
technology have prompted renewed interest in developing optimization algorithms
that directly incorporate uncertainty for a wide range of short- and long-term
planning problems. Large-scale stochastic programming models have been used
quite successfully in such diverse industries as electric and natural gas
utilities, freight vehicle transportation, manufacturing, structural design, and
telecommunications. This work has the potential to significantly advance the
state-of-the-art in planning models for these fields, and should therefore lead
to improvements in the delivery of the products and services produced by these
industries.