* 9702033
* Dissertation Research: Origin and Evolution of Adaptations  as Revealed by a Study of Proximate Developmental Mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Barry Sinervo, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 05/31/1999
* USD 9,220.00

Sinervo 9702033 Adaptive phenotypic plasticity is fundamentally a developmental
phenomenon; expression of developmental pathways is modified in response to
environmental cues, generating continuous trait variation or discrete,
alternative morphologies. Understanding the proximate developmental basis of
such plasticity can reveal much about the general role of development in
evolution. Experimental manipulation of four species of spadefoot toad tadpoles
will be used to investigate the proximate developmental basis underlying the
production of a derived, inducible larval morphology. When typical, omnivorous
larvae of some species in this clade consume prey high in thyroid hormone (TH),
they may undergo transition to an adaptive, carnivorous tadpole. Manipulating TH
levels in larvae from these species tests hypotheses addressing the role of TH
in inducing the alternative morph. Similar manipulations of larvae from species
that do not naturally become carnivorous tests hypotheses addressing how
environmental factors (diet high in TH) may have perturbed development in the
common ancestor, initiating evolution of the fully adapted plastic response seen
today in the more derived species. Such an integrative approach may elucidate
how proximate developmental mechanisms influence the route by which novel traits
are produced, predisposing the production of certain phenotypes and influencing
the path of evolutionary change.