* 9702237
* AMP:  North Carolina Alliance for Minority Participation    (NCAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2005
* Harold Martin, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2005
* USD 5,026,000.00

HRD-9702237 Martin Despite efforts aimed at amelioration, the nation's cadre of
scientists and engineers continues to reflect an inadequate level of
participation of underrepresented minorities. To some extent, this is a natural
and inevitable consequence of individual choice, but several of the reasons for
the lack of minority science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET)
majors are largely reversible. These include: (1) negative attitudes toward
science and mathematics; (2) few or no role models; (3) lack of motivation; (4)
little or no knowledge of scientific engineering career options open to them;
(5) engineering's unexciting public image, and (6) a number of academic and
cultural barriers that are particularly discouraging to minorities. Development
of quality educational programs to attract and retain underrepresented
minorities in SMET careers is a well-established national priority. This
proposal describes a program designed to improve the educational framework for
emerging minority scientists and engineers. The proposal focuses on
undergraduate education as its core component as well as the essential elements
required to increase the percentage of students in post-graduate SMET programs.
The partners in the prmposed Alliance represent diverse programs, yet have
remarkably common objectives. The unifying goal is to build on the existing
knowledge base relative to minority participation in SMET fields and to expand
the available opinions to enrich programs at partner institutions and beyond.
North Carolina A&amp;T State University (lead campus), Fayetteville Sate
University, North Carolina Central University, North Carolina State University,
the University of North Carolina-Pembroke, the University of North Carolina-
Chapel Hill, the University of North Carolina-Charlotte, and the University of
North Carolina-Greensboro join in this project to increase access and
opportunities for minority students in SMET. The goals of the Alliance are: 1)
to improve the quality of the learning environment for minority SMET students at
all schools, 2) to substantially increase the numbers of minority students
graduating with degrees in SMET disciplines, and 3) to develop and implement
effective methods of attracting talented minority students who would not
otherwise choose careers in SMET. The project emphasizes collaborative learning
approaches, positive and sustained interaction with faculty, intensive
interaction with other support persons, and hands-on research and internship
experience. Using this philosophy, three project areas have been chosen as
crucial focal points for achieving that qualitative and quantitative goals of
the project. These project areas utilize strategies with demonstrable
effectiveness in the retention of minority students in SMET. They also focus on
innovative methods interesting community college students in SMET careers and
concentrate on the transition point to graduate school. All project areas
involve faculty and industry members in the design and implementation of
improvements. In this program, assessment is built into each project areas as a
result of the formulation of specific, measurable quantitative and qualitative
objectives. These objectives are reviewed and revised on an ongoing basis.
Advisory committees composed of administrative personnel from the eight
universities oversee all aspects of the program. Communication and ongoing
exchange of ideas among partner institutions and beyond the Alliance are primary
objectives contributing towards the creation of permanent, positive changes in
the infrastructure of education for minority students in SMET disciplines.