* 9702370
* CAREER: Power Electronics and Motor Drives Technology       Enhancement Through Education and Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Iqbal Husain, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2002
* USD 359,295.00

ECS-9702370 Husain The objective of the proposed career plan is to develop a
strong power electronics and motor drives program linking undergraduate
education with graduate research at The University of Akron. The outline of the
proposed project is as follows. A research project and an undergraduate special
program will proceed concurrently. Fundamental problems in switched reluctance
motor (SRM) drives will be addressed in the research portion of the plan. A
converter topology for SRM will be developed through undergraduate research
guided by the principal investigator and a Ph.D. graduate student. The proposed
research project will generate one Ph.D., two MS, and a group of specialized BS
graduates. The education portion of the plan proposes to form an NSF Power
Electronics Group through selection from junior level EE students. The applicant
(principal investigatmr) and the Ph.D. student will supervise the group. The
group will be guided through a comprehensive power electronics and motor drives
program. The career plan will initiate a continuing program in the area of power
electronics and motor drives. In the future, a group of undergraduate students
and a Ph.D. student will be selected every year along with a suitable research
topic. The plan is expected to be continued through industrial sponsorship after
the completion of the NSF project. In addition, the PI will assemble a group of
faculties from electrical, mechanical and chemical engineering to supervise
undergraduate projects on electric/hybrid vehicles. The unique contribution of
the proposed research is torque ripple minimization simultaneous with indirect
position sensing control in SRM drives, and a novel, efficient, regenerative SRM
converter topology for low-voltage applications. The indirect position sensing
scheme to be developed will be suitable for all types of applications and will
cover a wide speed range including zero speed. The scheme is based on sliding
mode observer theory where the rotor po sition will be estimated as a state
variable from terminal measurements of voltage and current only. The sliding
mode observer has the advantage of insensitivity to parameter variation. The
torque ripple minimization scheme proposed is based on optimal current profiling
of the motor phase currents. The developed SRM model will consider the effects
of magnetic saturation. The working schedule of the proposed research has been
divided into four phases; (1) converter topology development,(II) indirect
position sensor development, (III) torque ripple minimization, and (IV)
integration of the drive. The proposed career plan will generate a group of
specialized students from bachelors through doctoral level in power electronics
and motor drives. The training period for these students in industries will be
reduced significantly. Significant exposure of undergraduates to the research
environment will attract more US students towards the graduate program.
Fundamental research, not linked to any industrial development project, is
possible through this proposed plan. The research will benedit the automotive,
aerospace and consumer product industries.