* 9702963
* CAREER: On the Design of Randomized Algorithms for Robust   Control Problems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Ashok Tikku, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

ECS-9702963 Tikku Robust multivariable control analysis and design have been
central problems in control theory over the last fifteen years. Most of the
robust control research has been dominated by worst-(!a-,;e deterministic
formulations of the control analysis and design problems. Despite the
considerable successes of the worst-case deterministic approach such as Hoo 16
and 12,13 control theory, most of the robust control analysis and design
problems involving real parametric and/or structured uncertainty remain open.
Analytical results, such as the celebrated Kharitonov theorem 45 , apply to
rather specialized problems. For general and comprehensive formulations such as
the structured singular value theory --- u theory ---- analysis and design
problems have turned out to be. very difficult, and the focus of research has
been on obtaining upper and lower bounds on the quantities of interest. Recent
research on the computational complexity of robust control analysis and design
problems indicates that these difficulties are, most likely, inherent to the
worst-case deterministic problem formulations rather than a lack of ingenuity.
In view of these results, it appears we must abandon attempts to design
deterministic algorithms that perform well on every problem instance, and/or
change the worst-case robust control paradigm The focus of this proposal is on
the design and analysis of randomized algorithms for certain very general robust
control problems. A randomized algorithm is an algorithm that makes random
choices during its execution. Randomized algorithms have received considerable
attention in the last twenty years 33, 55 Surprisingly efficient randomized
algorithms have been designed for problems in diverse areas such as number
theory 65, 73 , computational geometry 57, 9 , parallel and distributed
computing 39 , pattern matching 37 , approximate counting problems 34, 35, 36,
74 etc.. We contend the successes of randomized algor ithms in solving difficult
computational tasks in such diverse areas, and the apparent shortcomings of our
current approaches to robust control are compelling reasons to focus research
efforts on the design of randomized algorithms. Our research will take two
directions. The first will focus on the design of (Las Vegas type) randomized
algorithms which deliver the worst-case guarantees we seek in the traditional
robust control paradigm, and, at the same time, perform well (e.g. have short
execution times) with high probability for every possible problem instance. The
second will focus on the design of (Monte Carlo type) randomized algorithm that
deliver probabilistic statements of the form that a "certain
(stability/performance) property holds for most of the systems in a prescribed
set (given by uncertain parameters in compact sets, unmodeled dynamics given by
balls in function spaces, etc.) with a high degree of confidence." We intend to
investigate the application of randomized algorithms to a host of heretofore
intractable robust multivaxiable control problems including: 1) m analysis
problem; 2) m synthesis problem; 3) fixed order m synthesis problem; 4) reduced
order Hoo. design problem; 4) Hoo model reduction problem. The focus of our
education activities over the next four years will be on the design/development
of four new courses: an introductory course on randomized algorithms; a class on
the application of randomized algorithms to robust control problems; a class on
linear matrix inequalities in control theory; a course on modeling and system
identification. The introductory course on randomized algorithms will establish
necessary background in the area and will present randomized algorithms from
various application areas. It will play a vital role in preparing students to
implement such algorithms. The follow up course on randomized algorithms will
stress the application of randomized algorithms in robust control and will
present the la test developments in the area. The course will target graduate
students who want to conduct research in this area.