* 9702744
* CAREER: Soil Improvement for Mitigating Seismic Hazards to  Waterfront Retaining Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2004
* Stephen Dickenson, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan M. Pestana
* 02/29/2004
* USD 275,239.00

9702744 Dickenson This action is to support an integrated research and
educational-enhancement project submitted under the NSF Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Program. The primary objectives include investigating the
use of soil improvement for insuring acceptable seismic performance of
waterfront retaining structures, and creating an interdisciplinary, design-
oriented course sequence for undergraduates in civil, construction and
environmental engineering that will emphasize university-industry collaboration.
The research component addresses the use of soil improvement as a means of
limiting to acceptable levels the earthquake induced deformations of waterfront
retaining structures. Recent experience has shown that waterfront retaining
structures are vulnerable to damage from earthquakes, even under only moderate
levels of ground shaking, a primary cause being the liquefaction of the
saturated loose sandy soils that typically prevail at port facilities. The
economic impact of these losses to the affected ports and to commerce dependent
on port operations has been severe. Although soil improvement technology has
been used to mitigate liquefaction hazards at numerous ports around the world,
engineering standards for specifying the extent of remedial soil treatment
required to insure the serviceability of the waterfront components after a
design level earthquake have not been developed. The methods to be employed
include centrifuge modeling of anchored sheetpile bulkheads and rockfill dikes,
and supplementary numerical analyses. Anchored bulkheads and rockfill dikes have
been selected for investigation due to their extensive use at port facilities in
the United States. Technology transfer is a key component of the research. The
results of this study will provide port engineers with improved methods for
evaluating the seismic performance of common waterfront retaining structures, as
well as design guidelines for mitigating liquefaction hazards to these
structures. The principal objective of the educational component is to develop
the curriculum for an integrated sequence of courses that provide a "capstone"
design experience for senior-level undergraduates. The capstone sequence is
intended to provide students with a project that requires: (1) the formation of
a multi-disciplinary design team, (2) synthesis of acquired knowledge in the
planning and design of a significant civil engineering project, and (3)
additional experience with oral and written presentation skills. Course
sequences will reflect the partnerships that exist in contemporary engineering
practice. The synthesis and application of prior course work will be fostered by
the student's participation in a "real-world" design experience. In addition to
the coordinated engineering design, the projects will emphasize ethics in
practice, economics, environmental impacts, and the influence of socio-political
factors on design. This integrated program will include: interdisciplinary team
building and the role of collaboration in practice, and the influence of "non-
engineering" factors on the design and construction of civil engineering works.
The significance of the capstone program is that this instructional technique
has been identified as a method of enhancing student's preparation for careers
in the dynamic field of civil and environmental engineering.