* 9702723
* CAREER: Measurement and Analysis of Particle/Turbulence     Interaction within Two-Phase Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Kenneth Kiger, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 04/30/2001
* USD 233,042.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9702723 Kenneth T. Kiger University of Maryland The research
objective is to advance the state of knowledge concerning particle-turbulence
interaction in dilute, disperse, two-phase flows, through progress in
understanding how mass, momentum and energy is exchanged in dispersed systems by
detail experimentation, analysis, and simulation. New instrumentation which will
enable the simultaneous measurement of particle concentration, particle velocity
and fluid velocity within a three-dimensional volume will be developed. A
scanning particle image velocimeter will be constructed using a high-speed
copper-vapor laser, scanning optics, and a drum camera to measure two velocity
components of both phases and the particulate concentration on multiple planes
within the measurement volume. The measurements will provide detailed
information about the organization of particulates in relation to the turbulent
fluid structure, as characterized by cross-correlations of the particle and
fluid velocity and particle concentration. Experiments will be conducted to
study the coupling influence of heavy particulates within homogeneous turbulence
to provide experimental validation currently unavailable in the literature that
details the nature of the particle/fluid coupling within an unorganized
turbulent flow. The experiments will be conducted under conditions that will
allow direct comparison with previous numerical simulations and the conditions
will be extended to those regimes currently inaccessible to computational
solution. Results from this research will have impact upon many engineering
fields which utilize two-phase dispersed systems such as spray combustion,
particulate precipitators, spray drying, sediment transport, and cloud physics.
The educational objective is to develop an integrated approach to engineering
instruction that will provide connectivity to elements of design processes in
conjunction with fundamental instruction. As an example of a commitment toward
this goal, i t is proposed that a design component be added to the current
undergraduate fluid and thermal sciences curriculum, to enhance the students'
exposure to open-ended problem-solving and increase their understanding and
interest in the topic through connection with relevant applications.