* 9702768
* CAREER/REU: Complete Sensor Based Planning for Highly       Articulated Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2003
* Howard Choset, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Junku Yuh
* 04/30/2003
* USD 381,000.00

The realistic deployment of highly articulated robots relies on a provably
complete sensor based planner for these robots. Consequently, the operation of
such robots motivates the long- term research effort to develop a sensor based
planner for a broad class of highly articulated robots. The research considers
the next step towards this goal: this approach introduces a new roadmap
structure for an arbitrary shaped object. The roadmap is termed the hierarchical
configuration Voronoi graph (HCVG) and it can be used to plan a path between two
points and to explore and map an environment. Furthermore, and perhaps more
importantly, the HCVG applies to situations where the robot has no a priori
information about its environment and thus, the robot must rely on its sensor
information to achieve its goal. A powerful feature of the HCVG is its
incremental construction procedure, which is a necessary component of a sensor
based planner because there typically is no one vantage point from where the
robot can ``see'' the entire environment; the robot needs to couple sensing with
motion. Four key aspects of this ppocedure are (1) it uses only line of sight
distance information, (2) it requires minimal sensor processing, (3) it need not
explicitly compute the configuration space of the robot, and (4) it is complete.
This incremental construction procedure is general to any roadmap method and
thus provides a framework in how local line of sight information can be used to
create a global map. This award is coordinated with a companion award from the
Office of Naval Research in support of this research.