* 9702338
* Molecular Systematics and the Evolution of Habitat Specificity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Keith Crandall, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2002
* USD 431,000.00

Crandall 9702338 Phylogenetics is a field of study that is of central importance
to others such as ecology, molecular biology, systematics, and evolutionary
biology. As applications of phylogenetics increase, so too does the breadth of
~ese applications. From molecular studies of the biochemical function of genes,
to human studies such as transmission patterns in HIV-I, "phylogenetic thinking"
has lead to major discoveries in a broad array of disciplines. The object of
this study is to bring phylogenetics to a broader array of peop e through high
school outreach, museum displays, and undergraduate/graduate education. In
addition, phylogenetic thinking is pervasive in my research program. The primary
research goal is to establish phylogenetic relationships among the 24 species
within the two sister subgenera of freshwater crayfishes, Jug~cambarus and
Glareocola (Decapoda: Cambaridae). Once phylogenetic relationships are
established, the PI will test the monophyly of these two subgenera relative to
representatives from five other subgenera within the genus Cambarus.
Phylogenetic estimates will be based on nucleotide sequences from the 1 6S
region of the mitochondrial genome and the nuclear gene astacin. Once,a
phylogeny is estimated and monophyly is established, the PI will explore the
evolutionary biology of habitat specificity using comparative methods. The
beauty of this group of freshwater crayfishes is that they are distributed into
the four main ecotypes within which crayfishes are found: lotic waters (8
species), lentic waters (5 species), primary burrowers (semi-terrestrial, 5
species), and caves (subterranean, 6 species). Therefore, they provide a unique
opportunity to study the evolution of habitat specificity in crayfishes. Do
crayfishes invade a habitat and radiate within that habitat? Is there a repeated
evolutionary sequence of habitat specificity, such as lotic to lentic, to
burrower, to cave? Or are habitat specif~cities randomly distributed over the
phylogeny? The PI's research will address these questions and use the answers as
examples of the utility of the phylogenetic approach in my educational programs.