* 9702689
* Japan STA Program: Optimization of High Altitude Long Range Observational Platform
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1997,07/31/1998
* Mark Ford, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 07/31/1998
* USD 3,000.00

9702689 Ford This award supports a six month Science and Technology Agency
Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Mark Ford at the Mechanical Engineering
Laboratory (MEL), Agency for Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Japan.
Dr. Ford will work with Dr. Masahiko Onda, Director of the Instrumentation and
Control Division at the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory on a research project
entitled, "Study of High Altitude, Long Range Observational Platform." The
proposed research will focus on a variety of topics, including system
optimization, propulsor development, computational fluid dynamic modelling, and
alternative energy source creation, all of which are connected to the
development of an advanced, highly maneuverable, lighter than air vehicle --
hereafter called HALROP (High Altitude Long Range Observational Platform). As a
multi-role platform, HALROP will accommodate different payloads, specific
examples being: 1) land, sea, and air mobile communications, environmental and
remote sensing; 2) observation and repair of the ozone layer; 3) space
observation, and; 4) cargo delivery. The fundamental requirement shared by these
various applications is the long- duration maintenance of a high-altitude,
stationkeeping position. Solar power, active boundary layer control, and a novel
hull shape are three of the key technologies that will enable this next
generation airship to fulfill the stated research requirements. The proposed
research addresses both applied and fundamental engineering science issues, with
the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory being unique in that it is currently
exploring all the research agendas associated with the proposal. Mark Ford and
Masahiko Onda are among the leading researchers in the world in this project,
and the collaborative effort will likely yield positive and mutually beneficial
results for the United States and Japan. ***