* 9702103
* CAREER: Physics-Based Computer Aided Geometric Design:      Theory and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Hong Qin, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 01/31/1999
* USD 130,000.00

Computer Aided Geometric Design (CAGD) is of fundamental importance in geometric
computing, graphics, visualization, robotics, and other disciplines. This
project is to develop Physics-Based CAGD, a new interdisciplinary paradigm which
marries geometric modeling with computational physics. The objective of this
project is to dramatically enhance the CAGD process by creating advanced
parametric and implicit geometric models with highly intuitive behaviors that
are governed by physical principles. This project takes the following three-fold
approach to achieve its goal: (1) Continue the research endeavor on Dynamic Non-
Uniform Rational B-Splines (D-NURBS); (2) Explore and devise novel physics-based
modeling techniques and algorithms based on powerful new representations,
including subdivision wavelets, manifold splines, and implicit functions; and
(3) Exploit the theoretical advances of the earlier stages of this project to
develop an extensive set of efficient algorithms and interactive software
routines of Physics-Based CAGD for a wide range of applications. This project is
further augmented by the following educational initiatives: (1) Develop new
graduate and undergraduate courses; (2) Write a textbook on Physics-Based CAGD;
(3) Promote and participate in interdisciplinary research and education
projects; (4) Produce highly trained personnel by supervising graduate students,
directing senior projects of undergraduate students, participating in outreach
and mentoring programs, etc; and (5) Promote the rapid dissemination of Physics-
Based CAGD technology to national enterprise through collaboration with the CAGD
industry. The results of this project will yield highly interactive CAGD
techniques. Furthermore, these research and education advances will demonstrate
that Physics-Based CAGD can serve as a unified basis for various traditional
design techniques.