* 9702514
* CAREER:  Theoretical Studies of the Electronic, Structural, and Vibrational Properties of Molecule-Surface Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Andrew Rappe, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/2001
* USD 204,000.00

9702514 Rappe This is a CAREER award to a new faculty member. The research
component involves theoretical studies of the interactions of molecules with
surfaces. Because these interactions are strong, it is important to treat the
molecule-surface as a single system. Theoretical models will be developed and
applied to increase our understanding of the electronic, structural and
vibrational properties of molecules interacting with metal surfaces. The
methodology to be used will be state-of-the-art quantum mechanical density
functional theory. The educational component of this award involves extensive
participation of undergraduates in research projects and the development of
distributed research projects for all undergraduate science majors. %%% This is
a CAREER award to a new faculty member. The research component involves
theoretical studies of the interactions of molecules with surfaces. Because
these interactions are strong, it is important to treat the molecule-surface as
a single system. Theoretical models will be developed and applied to increase
our understanding of the electronic, structural and vibrational properties of
molecules interacting with metal surfaces. The methodology to be used will be
state-of-the-art quantum mechanical density functional theory. The educational
component of this award involves extensive participation of undergraduates in
research projects and the development of distributed research projects for all
undergraduate science majors. ***