* 9702233
* CAREER/EPSCoR:  Geospatial Database-Driven Extraction of    Information from Digital Aerial Imagery
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2002
* Peggy Agouris, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2002
* USD 322,712.00

This project aims at the advancement of the ability to extract spatial
information from digital aerial imagery by taking advantage of geospatial
databases to support and guide object extraction operations. It deals with
aerial images representing scenes for which prior or complementary information
already exists. Examples of such information are pre-existing digital maps,
digital terrain models, and spatial information systems in general. The research
plan involves: (1) matching images to existing databases for change detection;
(2) analysis of scale differences between database information and image; and
(3) developing metadata structures to convey accuracy information for objects
contained in geospatial databases. By embedding object extraction processes
within the framework of spatial information systems, digital image analysis will
be able to exploit the advantages offered by the availability of spatial data
from various sources and in diverse formats, and, in turn, contribute to the
improvement of the temporal and quantitative quality and completeness of the
data contained in those sources. The educational aspect of the project includes
initiatives designed to take advantage of and incorporate the project research
advancements in the graduate and undergraduate curriculum, as well as in the
high-school outreach program of the Department of Spatial Information
Engineering. A 3-day workshop, with participation of U.S. and international
experts is also planned. Combined, the issues addressed in this project will
substantially advance science in digital image processing and analysis, and will
complement parallel advancements in a variety of related disciplines, most
notably digital libraries, geographic information systems, and remote sensor
technology.