* 9702609
* Career:  The Personal Terabyte Disk:  Managing and          Exploiting Large Future Magnetic Disks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Ann Chervenak, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Yuan-Chieh Chow
* 06/30/2002
* USD 205,002.00

Magnetic disk drives are expected to increase in capacity and drop in price at a
rate of over 50% per year for at least a decade. By 2010, a terabyte of magnetic
disk storage for personal computers will cost a few hundred dollars. The
Personal Terabyte Project is developing a set of tools for managing and
exploiting this large personal data repository. To guarantee reliability of
personal terabyte data, backup techniques including compression, incremental
backups, and selective backups of essential data will be implemented, as will
disk array redundancy techniques. Future homes will have a variety of network
connections, from high-bandwidth, inexpensive broadcast connections to higher-
cost, lower-bandwidth point-to-point links. The personal terabyte will cache
relevant data that arrives on broadcast networks and aggressively prefetch
additional data over point-to-point, on-demand connections. As data are stored
on the personal terabyte, the toolkit will perform automatic indexing of text,
images and video to facilitate finding data on the massive file system. To
address the gap between memory and disk access times, the toolkit will prefetch
data from disk to main memory. Finally, to improve application performance, the
toolkit will facilitate sharing of the disk cache among local and remote
processes.***