* 9702088
* CAREER:  Mechanically-Induced Dysfunction:  From the Cell to the Organ
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Susan Margulies, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Sohi Rastegar
* 07/31/2001
* USD 209,657.00

9702088 Margulies The primary objective of this integrated research and
educational plan is to develop research and educational programs that span the
interdisciplinary chasm between the level of the cell and the organ, with an
emphasis on the effects of applied physical forces on function and structure.
The research plan is a first step towards the long-term goals of understanding
the deformations of the epithelial lining of the lung in vivo, and determining
the effects of these deformations on the lung's adverse effects. Barotrauma, or
the presence of extra-alveolar air after rupture of over-distended alveoli, is
the consequence of a sustained mechanical ventilation with large tidal volumes.
The overall hypothesis is that the alveolar epithelial lining of the lung is
vulnerable to injury from large static and dynamic deformations during
mechanical ventilation. The research plan relates mechanical deformation to
disruption of the epithelial surfactant-producing and barrier properties of the
lung using in vitro cell culture studies, mathematical models, and in vivo
experimental studies. The long-term goal of the educational component of the
career development plan is to create Bioengineering graduate courses that
integrate fundamental engineering theories with biomedical applications. Three
courses will be developed: 1) a course in integrated cardiothoracic physiology
that brings together basic knowledge and recent research findings from the
molecular, cellular and organ levels to correlate cellular and molecular
mechanisms with macroscopic functional responses; 2) a course in viscoelastic
tissue behavior and large strain measurement techniques and analysis; and 3)
experimental design and analysis, and scientific responsibility. The dual
mission of the integrated research and educational career development plan is to
meet the growing need for research and educational opportunities that cut across
disciplines to answer fundamental scientific questions. ***