* 9702021
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Ultrafast Processes in      Semiconductors, their Nanostructures and Optoelectronic     Devices, Award in US and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Jagdeep Shah, Lucent Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 05/31/2000
* USD 28,310.00

9702021 Shah Description: The research "Ultrafast Processes in Semiconductors,
their Nanostructures and Optoelectronic Devices, Award in US and Indian
Currencies" is a new collaboration linking the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research (TIFR)in Bombay with the University of New Mexico, the CNRS Laboratoire
de Microstructures et de Microelectronique in France, and Bell Laboratories, New
Jersey. This research in ultrafast optoelectronics developed from an earlier
collaboration (INT-9022623) between PI Shah and co-PI Arora of TIFR that
established the first and only picosecond spectroscopy laboratory in India. The
scientific focus is: (1) energy relaxation processes and rates in low-
dimensional semiconductors and the effect of relaxation dynamics on the
performance of optoelectronic devices fabricated from such structures; (2)
development of fabrication and characterization techniques for photoconducting
switches and electro-optic samplers, and (3) the use of such optoelectronic
devices for measuring the response of ultrafast electronic devices. Scope: This
award will provide the linkage costs for US and Indian collaborators. This
study, while in the realm of fundamental physics, is in an emerging research
area that combines ultrafast optics and electronics. The topic is of
considerable current interest and the devices under study may in the future be
integral to all communication and computer systems. In addition to initiating
new scientific collaborations, this project will contribute toward the ultrafast
spectroscopy laboratory at TIFR becoming a world-class facility. All the
experimental work will be performed at TIFR and will include advanced graduate
students and postdocs. The scientific and technological benefits are mutual and
the research results will be published in international journals. ***