* 9702661
* CAREER:  Mesoscopic Physics of Disordered Superconductors:  An Arena for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2002
* Ying Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2002
* USD 310,500.00

9702661 Liu This experimental CAREER grant project focuses on the effects of
disorder on meso-scale superconductors. A central research goal is to determine
experimentally whether a negative local superfluid density exists. The
experiments will make use of e-beam lithography and ultrathin film fabrication
techniques and a well equipped low temperature measurement laboratory. Some
specific aims are measurement of magnetoresistance and electric field effect in
single and arrays of mesoscopic superconducting bismuth rings; measurement of
mesoscopic fluctuations in magnetic fields in Auln alloy and Bi samples. The
completion of these experiments will have a strong bearing on the question of
the negative superfluid density. The proposed research will be integrated into
an education plan to help enhance student learning and to train future
scientists. The education plan is designed in part to promote women's
participation in science, which will be beneficial for science and its well
being as a profession. the fundamental knowledge which will be gained in this
work will deepen our understanding of the fundamental nature of Cooper pairing
correlation in disordered superconductors and may have significant impacts on
several related fields. The behavior of mesoscopic scale superconductors is also
relevant in potential applications including sensitive sensors of
electromagnetic radiation and high performance low dissipation logic circuits.
%%% This experimental CAREER grant project probes the fundamental changes in the
phenomenon of superconductivity as the samples become very small or very thin,
and as the superconducting material itself becomes disordered. The questions
being studied are made more important and interesting by the essentially quantum
mechanical nature of superconductivity. A focus of the work is to search for a
particular theoretically possible eff ect, called a negative superfluid density.
The existence of such as effect, if proven by work such as is proposed, would
have implications for related areas of science. The long term outcome of such
research could include the development of improved electronic devices for
detecting electromagnetic radiation and/or for making rapid calculations. The
education plan included in this project integrates research and education and
aims to promote women's participation in science. ***