* 9702699
* CAREER:  Educational and Research Opportunities in          Environmental Engineering:  Catalysis as a Tool for Solving Environmental Problems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Fabio Ribeiro, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 05/31/2002
* USD 334,438.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Title: Educational and Research Opportunities in Environmental
Engineering: Catalysis as a Tool for Solving Environmental Problems. Proposal
Number: CTS-9702699 Principal Investigator: Fabio H. Ribeiro Institution:
Worcester Polytechnic Institute This study will be focused on the
hydrodechlorination of chlorofluorocarbon compounds on Pd single crystal and Pd
supported on carbon and other supports. Better understanding of these catalytic
reactions will impact environmental technologies of remediation as well as
pollution prevention. The scientific issues are the identification of mechanisms
of dechlorination and of Pd deactivation, and of the structural effects on
catalytic activity and selectivity. Among the possible structural phenomena, the
PI will address organic compound structure effects, metal structure sensitivity,
support effects, and crystallite size effects. The techniques to be used include
surface structure and composition analysis under UHV conditions (LEED, AES, XPS,
TPD), in-situ ultraviolet Raman in a high-temperature (500 C) and high-pressure
reactor (1.5 atm), and isotopic exchange reaction in a separate batch reactor.
The restructuring of Pd on supports other than C will be studied while
addressing in detail the role of the support in the reaction. The educational
plan includes the strengthening of an environmental orientation for WPI chemical
engineering students. Projects at the junior through graduate levels will
involve students studying and solving real problems prompted by existing
environmental agency regulations or defined in accordance with industrial
collaborators.