* 9702707
* CAREER: Scalable Software and Hardware for Image and        Video Processing Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Brian Evans, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2001
* USD 210,000.00

This research involves improving quality, reducing cost, and shortening the
time- to-market for image and video processing systems, such as video
telephones, multimedia systems, and confocal microscopes. Image and video
processing systems are difficult to design because they consist of a variety of
algorithms implemented by a variety of electronic devices and software programs.
In industry, it is common practice to divide the design of an image or video
processing system into simpler parts and design the parts separately. Until all
of the individual parts are designed and built, it is difficult to guarantee
that the parts will work together, and know how the decisions in the design of
an individual part will affect the cost and quality of the entire system. As an
alternative, this research explores design techniques and computer tools that
allow all the parts of an image and video processing system to be designed at
the same time. The principal investigator is establishing a research and
education program in the design and implementation of image and video processing
systems. The research focuses on automating the design of scalable software and
hardware for image and video processing systems. The performance of a scalable
implementation improves as more processors are allocated to the task, until the
number of processors reaches upper limit. Scalable hardware can expand to a
variable number of processors, whereas scalable software adapts to the
processors that are available. Scalable software is available on desktop
computers, and scalable hardware is commonly used in high-performance computing.
The education program trains undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-
the-art design methods and technologies. As part of this training, the
investigator is introducing new courses in communication system design, image
and video processing, and embedded software systems. By forging research
partnerships with industry, the investigator is developing new stude nt design
projects to solve system design bottlenecks in industry.