* 9702856
* CAREER: Set Theortic Methods for Reconstructing PET Images  From Denoised Data
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2002
* John Anderson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 03/31/2002
* USD 210,000.00

For about the last forty years, Positron Emission Tomography (PET) has been used
to assess biochemical processes in the human body. Using data obtained from PET
scanners, reconstruction algorithms generate images that contain important
information about the functionality of an organ or region of interest. This
research involves the development of fast, robust reconstruction algorithms that
provide accurate PET images. With more accurate images, physicians and
researchers will be able to better understand the functionality of vital organs;
and subtle differences between healthy and unhealthy tissue would become more
distinguishable. The knowledge gained through the research will be shared with
both undergraduate and graduate students. In particular, undergraduate students
from under-represented groups will be mentored through summer research programs
and senior projects. To reconstruct PET images, the investigator is undertaking
a two part strategy. First, Poisson noise in the data is reduced using a
modified wavelet denoising method. Specifically, a variance stabilizing
transformation, known as Anscombe's transformation, is applied to the data to
convert the Poisson noise to Gaussian noise with mean zero and variance one. The
transformed data is then further processed using a well-known wavelet denoising
method due to Donoho and Johnstone. Once the Poisson noise has been reduced, the
desired images are reconstructed using set theoretic estimation methods. An
advantage of using a set theoretic formulation is that it is flexible enough to
incorporate all available a priori information and to address the uncertainty in
the transmission data used to correct errors due to attenuation. The resulting
algorithms will be tested using real phantom and subject data from PET centers
at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, MA and Emory Hospital in
Atlanta, GA.