* 9702610
* CAREER:  Microdesigning Model Material Systems to Probe     Dissipative Interface Motion in Heterogeneous Ceramic       Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Jeffrey Bullard, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 05/31/2000
* USD 285,677.00

9702610 Bullard The objective of the Faculty Early Career Development project is
to investigate the energetics and kinetics of the evolution of thin film
clusters and multiphase polycrystals. This objective will be accomplished by
using the new technology of microcontact printing to study the dissipative
interface motion of ceramic "microfeatures" on solid substrates. The unique
capabilities of the proposed methods can avoid the chemical and geometrical
complexities of typical systems. Specifically, the project will address the
following issues: 1) development of a new and straightforward procedure for
estimating the interphase boundary energy density between two solids, 2) the
influence of film/substrate coherency, and thus the interphase boundary energy
density, on the equilibrium shapes of oxide thin film islands, 3) identification
of those aspects of interfacial energy densities (relative magnitudes,
anisotropy) that can significantly influence the kinetics of coalescence and
coarsening of oxide film clusters, and 4) the role of geometrical factors, like
proximity correlations between growing and shrinking domains, that can cause
coarsening dynamics to depart significantly from existing theories of Ostwald
ripening. In addition, the principal investigator will restructure and modernize
the undergraduate ceramics processing laboratory course. This includes acquiring
modern equipment and designing new lab exercises on powder synthesis from
alkoxides, reaction sintering, etc. Additionally, new computer simulation
methods, developed through the PI's research, will be integrated to reinforce
theoretical concepts and their practical applications. A lab manual, including
brief descriptions of the scientific principles underlying each experiment, will
be produced and made available on the World Wide Web, along with instructional
video modules of each experiment. %%% Characterization of the equilibrium shapes
and coarsening of thin film islands, using adv anced high-resolution spatial and
chemical analysis, will be used to study the energetics and kinetics of the
evolution of thin film clusters and multiphase polycrystals. The approaches will
yield fundamental new information about the dynamics of interface motion.
Educational innovations at the University of Illinois will focus on
restructuring and modernizing the undergraduate ceramics processing laboratory
course. ***