* 9702484
* CAREER:  Understanding Stellar Overflows
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2003
* Adam Frank, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen D. Eastwood
* 05/31/2003
* USD 368,983.00

AST-9702484 Abstract - A Frank Bipolar outflows and highly collimated jets are
nearly ubiquitous features associated with stellar mass loss. From Young Stellar
Objects (YSOs) to Luminous Blue Variables (LBVs) and Planetary Nebulae (PNe) -
the stellar cradle to the grave - there exists clear evidence for collimated
gaseous flows in the form of narrow high velocity streams or extended bipolar
lobes. In YSOs, LBVs and PNe collimated highly supersonic outflows are observed
to be transporting prodigious amounts of energy and momentum from a central star
. Outflows and jets must play a significant dynamical role in the evolution of
the parent stars. The similarity of jets and bipolar outflows across the
Hertzsprung- Russell (H-R) diagram must tell us something fundamental and quite
general about the nature of stellar evolution, as well as the interaction of
stars with their environments. A large database of high resolution observations
, including observations from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST)) are available. A
general, well tested suite of theory for explaining outflow collimation and
propagation could serve as a powerful diagnostic tool linking the outflows to
their often obscured sources. This could initiate substantial progress in two of
the most fundamental issues facing modern astronomy: the need to understand
stellar birth and stellar death. The research goals of this project are
ambitious but attainable. First, to develop and refine such a general theory of
collimated stellar outflows by detailing the basic physics which drives the
collimation process. Second, to extend our understanding of the collimation and
propagation of the outflows to include more realistic physics such as the effect
of microphysical processes and magnetic fields. The research focuses on two
major investigations. One goal of this study is to use PNe and PPNe morphologies
to determine the route which stars like the sun follow as they evolve from the
Giant to the Dwarf stage. The second project is a long range study of radiation-
gasdynamic and magneto-gasdynamic collimation of jets from Young Stellar
Objects. The final products of the research will be a suite of well tested tools
which can bridge the gap between the theory and reality, allowing the histories
of individual objects and classes of objects to be recovered. The educational
and outreach goals of the project are equally ambitious: to use the
accessibility inherent to numerical simulations (i.e. graphics and animations)
along with the visual power of real and "synthetic" bipolar outflow observations
as the core of a series of innovative programs in curriculum development,
interactive planetarium displays and middle school outreach efforts. The efforts
as a "popular" science writer and as a regular contributer to both DISCOVER and
ASTRONOMY magazines have provided experiences in effective strategies for
bringing science to wider audiences. These skills, and the fruits of the
research, will be integrated into education initiatives which will introduce
Planetarium visitors, college and middle school students to stellar astronomy as
well as to wider issues in the workings of science as a whole.