* 9702824
* CAREER:  Host-Endosymbiont Co-evolution and Host Speciation: Wolbachia pipientis and Drosophila simulans
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,12/31/2001
* J. William O. Ballard, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2001
* USD 525,000.00

9702824 Ballard The aim of this innovative CAREER proposal is to integrate Dr.
Ballard's research with a three-phase education, curation and study program that
targets young women and minority groups from Chicago's inner city. The research
is aimed at testing a central prediction of co-evolutionary theory that the
interaction of a host and an endosymbiont should evolve from disease toward
symbiosis. Specifically, the research will investigate ways in which naturally
occurring Wolbachia pipientis, an alpha proteobacteria, influences genetic
divergence in common Drosophila simulans fruit flies. Wolbachia typically causes
a reduction in gene flow between uninfected females and infected males and among
individuals infected with different strains of Wolbachia. The education program
will build students' knowledge and interest in environmental biology and will
culminate in students and teachers conducting a small project directly related
to Dr. Ballard's research. In phase I, 7th and 8th grade students will be
introduced--through a series of lectures, exhibit tours and a "behind-the-
scenes" excursion--to The Field Museum. In phase II, teachers and students will
be involved in discussions where they will learn about biodiversity and the role
of museum collections. They will also participate in the construction of a
species-level insect database, a priority of the research staff in The Field
Museum's Division of Insects. In phase III, a subset of students/teachers will
conduct a supervised study that investigates a specific aspect of co-evolution
that directly contributes to Ballard's research. The three phase program will
build self-confidence and will foster interest in science careers by providing
direct and frequent interaction with research scientists.