* 9702733
* CAREER: Control and Integrated Design of Mechanical Systems via Linear Matrix Inequality Based Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,05/31/2003
* Karolos Grigoriadis, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Masayoshi Tomizuka
* 05/31/2003
* USD 332,833.00

This CAREER project develops a systematic and unified methodology for control of
mechanical and structural systems such that an integrated design of plant
parameters and control parameters is achieved to provide optimized total
systems; low-order controllers are obtained to satisfy hardware and control
implementation constraints; special mathematical form of structural system
models is exploited to provide simplified design schemes and simpler control
laws; saturation constraints and control-loop time-delays are taken into account
explicitly in the design process; and innovative computational algorithms using
a unified Linear Matrix Inequality (LMI) based formulation are developed. The
education component seeks to address some important challenges in the effective
teaching and training of students and practicing engineers in the systems and
controls field today. In particular, the education goals of this career plan are
the following: (i) to promote an interdisciplinary systems and controls
education at the university of Houston (UH) by fostering cross-departmental
teaching activities, (ii) to contribute to the continuing education of
practicing control engineers that are disconnected from the rapid changes and
advances in the field, (iii) to provide industry's perspectives in systems and
control education and to address real-world problems in the systems and controls
curriculum, and (iv) to attract freshmen students into control engineering and
to motivate high-school students towards science and engineering. A project on
control of plasma process is used as a demonstration paradigm for the
interdisciplinary teaching of systems and controls at UH. This education project
will be pursued in collaboration with the Chemical Engineering faculty at the
Plasma Processing Laboratory. Close collaboration with Cummins Engine Company,
Hughes Aerospace, the Payload Integration Company and other companies is pursued
to strengthen the industrial relevance of research and education components of
this project.