* 9702476
* CAREER:  In-situ Determination of Pesticides and Other      Environmental Pollutants with a Fiber Optic, Surface        Resonance Based Sensor
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Karl Booksh, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol A. Haney
* 03/31/2001
* USD 299,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the development and
characterization of novel fiber-optic sensors for the determination of part-per-
billion concentrations of pesticides in real environmental samples. Professor
Booksh and his students at Arizona State University will develop a variety of
such sensors including antibody immobilized devices that utilize attenuated
total reflectance of their surface plasmon resonance signals in order to achieve
selectivity and sensitivity. The probe geometry will be optimized for this
application and multivariate calibration algorithms will be used to improve data
quality when system parameters vary. This CAREER research project will also
expose students at the undergraduate and graduate levels to the power of
multivariate methods when analytical measurements involve complex real world
samples. Professor Booksh will also mentor disabled students interested in
scientific careers. The determination of the concentrations of pesticides in the
environment is an important health problem that is highly complex due to the
variability of real world sample composition. Professor Booksh and his students
at Arizona State University will develop fiber-optic sensors based on
antibody/antigen reactions that produce analytical signals that can be reliably
interpreted over time. This CAREER project will provide students with a
stimulating research experience in an area of immense societal importance. The
extreme sensitivity and selectivity of antibody/antigen reactions coupled with
fiber-optic sensor probes will be exploited using attenuated total reflectance
of surface plasmon resonance signals that follow these reactions. In addition to
the pedagogical value of teaching students useful applications of this chemistry
Professor Booksh will mentor disabled students interested in scientific careers.