* 9702011
* CPMSA: Achieving Systemic Change in Math and Science
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2006
* Dennis Chaconas, Oakland Unified School District
* Cooperative Agreement
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2006
* USD 3,608,393.00

PI: Getridge, Carolyn Demographics: The Oakland Unified School District is a
minority majority system with 93% of its 52,269 students ethnic minorities, 46%
of whom are AFDC eligible, while 60% qualify for free/reduced lunch. 26% are
Limited English Proficient. This proposal targets African American and Hispanic
students, who make up 73% of the school population, score significantly below
District averages, have lower enrollment and success rates in gateway math and
science courses, and have the lowest college enrollment rates. All 1200
elementary and the 435 secondary math and science teachers will participate
directly, but systemic reform will impact all students and teachers. Background:
The District and the six federal laboratory, university and community partners
in this proposal have invested approximately $13.5 million over three years
piloting best practices to develop a systemic strategy of reform. Math/science
reform has been the District's primary vehicle to create a culture of inquiry at
all grade levels and to implement a thinking-centered, student-centered
curriculum that will lead underrepresented minorities to succeed in math and
science. The District has: adopted core curricula that is aligned with state
frameworks and national standards. aligned the elementary instructional program
with that curricula. adopted hands-on, inquiry-based math and science texts and
kits in 1992. implemented the staff development program in math and science for
elementary teachers. initiated Efficacy Training, a 3 year program to train all
employees in processes that maximize student learning potential and success.
implemented a technology plan to support professional collaborations and
inquiry-based learning. Through this effort the Distriat has gained the depth of
understanding of the tremendous effort required to take reform to scale in a
large, high poverty urban district. Goal/Objectives: The District's objectives
fo r this five year proposal are to: Double the number of minority students who
enroll in Algebra in grade 9 by year 5. Double the number of minority students
who successfully complete the college preparatory a.-f. course sequence and are
prepared to enter college by year 5. Increase by 1 0% the number of students who
take the SAT; improve math scores by 1 0%. Increase average performance on the
new standardized tests by 5 percentile points. Increase participation of
minority students in AP math and science classes by 100%. The District believes
that these ambitious objectives can only be achieved through sustained systemic
reform. The District has the requisite leadership and political will. System-
wide transformation now requires a bridge of new resources and the concentration
of all existing District resources on a set of well- defined, sustained
strategies that will actually impact the learning of children. Proposed
Activities: The District will continue to refine science, engineering and math
(SEM) standards, align policy with reform goals and complete a K-12 SEM pipeline
for all students. The District is establishing more rigorous graduation
requirements and re-writing policies for attendance, grading, retention and
promotion of students, and accountability. Building on the successful work at
elementary grades funded in part by NSF, the District will continue to implement
an inquiry- based SEM curricula at the middle and senior high school levels, a
process tied to 1997-98 grade reconfiguration. To sustain reform on a District
wide basis, the District will build its internal capabilities to deliver
services now provided to a limited number of schools by the six partners in this
proposal. With its partners the District proposes (a) to create the
infrastructure to ensure that classroom teachers gain in-depth experience in
inquiry based instruction through meaningful in service activities coupled with
in-classroom support and timely access to the appropriate materials (b) build
in-house expertise in SEM content, pedagogy, mentoring and change management and
(c) through these efforts train a critical mass of classroom teachers able to
implement the SEM curriculum which the District then will be able to sustain
through existing re-aligned staff development funds and people resources. A new
Math and Science Resource Center will manage this change process, coordinate
partners' support services, and implement a cost effective materials
distribution system. The District will establish a continuum of student support
and family involvement activities to address academic, attitudinal and
socioeconomic barriers to learning. The District's new comprehensive School
Improvement Systems assessment program will ensure accountability at all levels
and monitor student achievement of well defined SEM benchmarks.