* 9702684
* CAREER:  A Systems Approach to Assessing Impacts of Multiple Human Activities on Panda Habitat in Wolong Nature Reserve Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2002
* Jianguo Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 07/31/2002
* USD 321,055.00

LIU 9702684 In this CAREER award, the investigator will use a systems approach
to determine the effect of four major human activities - timber harvesting,
fuelwood collection, house building, and construction of hydroelectric stations
- on panda habitat in the Wolong Nature Reserve, China. The PI will 1) assess
the spatio-temporal interrelationships of multiple human activities; 2) evaluate
land cover change and survey vegetation and panda habitat conditions along
gradients of human activities; and 3) develop a spatially explicit landscape
simulation model that predicts multi-scale interactions and ecological
consequences of human activities. The research will provide important insights
into understanding the relationship between multiple human activities and
wildlife habitat dynamics. The proposed research will be tightly integrated with
educating future leaders in landscape ecology. The trainees will gain
international research experience and will learn leadership skills by being key
members of the organizing committee for the 1998 US-IALE Landscape Ecology
Conference. The PI will also incorporate the research methods and results into
three courses so that many students can benefit from the research activity. The
interrelated research and educational activities will help students fully
prepare for their professional careers and add a significant dimension to their
understanding and solution of complex global ecological problems.