* 9702805
* CAREER:  Semantics-based Program Analysis via Symbolic      Composition of Transfer Relations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Christopher Colby, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 07/31/2000
* USD 146,693.00

9702805 This project investigates the task of automatically determining
properties of the run-time behavior of computer programs before the programs are
actually executed. Optimizing compilers have long motivated research in this
area, commonly known as static program analysis. More recently, there has been
interest in using program analysis to verify correctness or safety properties of
software before it is put into service. However, due both to the phenomenon of
accumulated imprecision, which is akin to accumulated rounding error, and to the
inadequacy of invariant properties in the presence of loops and recursion,
useful and accurate program analysis is hard to achieve in practice. This
project examines a new methodology for program analysis designed to address
these problems. This methodology is distinctive in that it does not analyze
execution states, but instead analyzes the changes, called transfer relations,
between those states, thus enabling previously unsolved analyses of programming
constructs such as first-class functions, concurrency, pointers and references,
assignment, mutable data structures, and arrays. The research investigates the
application of these analyses to urgent issues such as ensuring safety of
untrusted foreign code and increasing reliability of large software systems. The
project applies this research to an educational plan including course
development, mentoring of masters students, and the development of an annual
summer school on program analysis, including a new text. ***