* 9702297
* CAREER: Commutativity Analysis: A New Analysis Framework    for Automatically Parallelizing Object-Oriented Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Martin Rinard, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 09/30/2001
* USD 205,000.00

Automatic parallelization of object-oriented computations is becoming
increasingly important with the widespread acceptance of object-oriented
languages such as Java and C++, and the adoption of small-scale shared-memory
multiprocessors as the mainstay of enterprise computing. A key problem that
complicates the automatic parallelization of object-oriented programs is the
pervasive use of irregular linked data structures such as lists, trees and
graphs. The project will investigate a fundamentally new analysis technique,
commutativity analysis, that is designed to automatically parallelize object-
oriented computations that manipulate linked data structures. The project will
focus on practical techniques such as the generation of self-tuning code, or
code that dynamically changes its behavior to adapt to changes in the execution
environment, and optimizations that reduce synchronization overhead. It will
also investigate advanced analyses such as relative commutativity analysis,
which enables the automatic parallelization of computations that build linked
data structures, and replication analysis, which enables the dynamic replication
of objects to eliminate serialization. The overall goal is to develop techniques
that enable a dramatic reduction in the cost and difficulty of developing
software for parallel machines. Educational contributions include the
involvement of students in the research and the development of a new class in
program analysis.***