* 9702605
* An Institutional Ecology of Law Firms in Silicon Valley
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1997,09/30/2003
* Mark Suchman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2003
* USD 301,115.00

This is a study of law firms in California's Silicon Valley, supported under
the Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program. It links organizational
sociology with the sociology of law to explore the role of law firms, as
organizational and legal actors, in local development. The project integrates
three objectives -- theoretical, empirical, and educational. Theoretically, the
project will address ongoing debates over the characteristics of emerging
organizational communities, over the interorganizational impact of the modern
law firm, and over the role of formal contracts as economic governance
mechanisms. Empirically, the project will construct and analyze two related data
sets, one on the origins and effects of a key Silicon Valley legal device (the
standardized venture capital financing contract, or "VCFC"), and the other on
the structure and dynamics of the larger Silicon Valley legal community. The
VCFC Study will allow multivariate statistical analysis of the emergence and
diffusion of a novel contractual device within a new organizational field. The
Legal Community Study will explore the dynamics of the heretofore largely
unstudied population of professional organizations that promulgated this legal
innovation. Educationally, the project will introduce a sequence of innovative,
experiential courses in legal and organizational sociology, whereby
undergraduate and graduate students will gain new insights into the socio-legal
environment of entrepreneurship and into the structure of professional careers.
The design incorporates three components -- two empirical and one instructional.
To examine the emergence, diffusion and impact of the standardized VCFC, the
project will compile data on approximately 300 first-round high-technology
financings, occurring from 1975 to 1990. Data collection will link content-
analytic information on the terms of each VCFC with (a) contextual data on the
economic and institutional conditions surrounding the transaction and (b)
outcome data on the subsequent fate of the start-up company. Data analyses will
seek to identify distinct "financing archetypes," and to uncover the
determinants and effects of choosing one such archetype over another. To examine
the structure and dynamics of the Silicon Valley legal community, the project
will compile longitudinal data on the population of law firms operating in the
region -- and on the population of attorneys practicing within those firms --
from 1960 to 1990. Data analyses will examine whether the fates of these legal
actors were shaped by the development of the surrounding organizational
community and by the actors' own adoption or rejection of specific
interorganizational roles. Finally, to integrate these empirical efforts into an
ongoing program of teaching and research, the project will develop two new
seminars, emphasizing experiential and collaborative learning techniques. The
first seminar will focus on Law, Innovation and Entrepreneurship; the second, on
the Sociology of the Legal Profession. The project will also enhance preexisting
courses and launch a number of extramural outreach efforts. Silicon Valley
offers a rare opportunity to examine the mechanics of entrepreneurship and
community development, and to link these crucial organizational phenomena to the
activities of concrete inter-organizational pollinators. Previous research
suggests that Silicon Valley law firms often play this pollinator role,
transmitting basic operating know-how between otherwise isolated start-ups. Over
time, it is likely that such activities have transformed the local business
community, giving rise to institutionalized practices that today's community
members largely take for granted. At the same time, however, local law firms
have, themselves, experienced numerous pressures emanating from the turbulent
environment around them. Thus, these firms must be seen as both creations and
creators of the shifting community order, simultaneously shaping and reflecting
surrounding flows of resources and i nformation in an ongoing coevolutionary
interchange. A fuller understanding of this complex process promises to shed
light on critical issues regarding organizational innovation, regional
development, and the role of the legal profession in economic change.