* 9702466
* CAREER:  Enhanced Software Distributed Shared Memory as a   Compiler Target
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Sandhya Dwarkadas, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 06/30/2001
* USD 205,000.00

This research aims to improve the ease-of-use and performance of parallel
systems by combining state-of-the art compiler technology with an enhanced
implementation of software distributed shared memory (DSM). The programming
interface, compile- time analysis, and runtime support necessary to achieve
these goals will be developed. Compilers that target the underlying message
passing on distributed systems offer good performance for applications whose
access patterns are regular. However, other types of accesses, if compilable at
all, currently require complex run-time support. Run-time DSM systems provide
good overall performance by fetching data on-demand, but incur additional
overhead for regular accesses The research supported by this grant aims to
develop enhancements to the DSM interface that will utilize static information
about program behavior, including data accesses and consistency requirements,
and provide a uniform interface and implementation for different levels of
hardware support for shared memory, as well as for the hierarchical structure of
memory in some architectures. The proposed work will contribute to the better
utilization of distributed systems for parallel computing. To further this goal,
a course on parallel computing will be developed that will target not only
undergraduate students in computer science, but also potential parallel computer
users in other science and engineering disciplines. Every opportunity will be
used to stress the interaction among different system components, and their
effect on performance and programming. ***