* 9702616
* CAREER:  Tractable Formal Methods for the Synthesis of      Concurrent Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Paul Attie, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 09/30/2000
* USD 148,673.00

9702616 The problem of developing concurrent programs from formal specifications
is addressed. Concurrent programs consist of a set of interacting components
each running on a single computer. A formal specification states precisely the
correct behavior required of the program. The project investigates automatic
program synthesis: given a formal specification, the synthesis method
automatically produces a correct program. Synthesis obviates the need to
manually compose a program and manually construct a proof of its correctness. A
serious drawback of previous synthesis methods is that they are too inefficient
to generate any but the smallest programs. The objective is to produce synthesis
methods sufficiently efficient to synthesize large concurrent programs. The
approach taken uses "pairwise analysis." Previous approaches considered all
program components simultaneously, requiring the analysis of a very large number
of combined behaviors. This research looks only at pairs of components at any
one time, greatly reducing the analytical burden. Almost all large, practical
programs are concurrent; the interaction among their many independent components
is very difficult to design properly. The significance and impact of this
research is that it will eventually provide conceptual tools to help programmers
create such programs and analyze whether their behavior conforms to the program
specification. ***