* 9702195
* CAREER: Efficient Numerical Solutions in Geophysical        Subsurface Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,09/08/1999
* Qing Huo Liu, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir J. Lumelsky
* 09/08/1999
* USD 200,000.00

The goals of this career program are to develop efficient forward and inverse
techniques to solve electromagnetic and elastodynamic problems in geophysical
subsurface sensing, and to foster an effective, interdisciplinary educational
program. In geophysical subsurface sensing, electromagnetic and acoustic sensors
are widely used to probe the complex geological structures from within a
borehole. The interpretation of these important measurements, however, remains a
challenging problem because of the complexity of the underground medium and of
the presence of the wellbore. Simulating realistic three-dimensional models
encountered in these problems can easily exceed the capacity of any modern
supercomputer if conventional methods are used. Therefore, there is a pressing
demand for more efficient numerical techniques to simulate large-scale
electromagnetic and acoustic measurements. These simulations are also critical
in processing the collected data and in computer-aided design of new measurement
systems. In this research, efficient forward and inverse solutions will be
developed for electrodetype, induction, and sonic well logging tools in three-
dimensional inhomogeneous media. In forward solutions, the measurement data are
simulated given the physical properties of the medium. In inverse problems, on
the other hand, the physical properties of the medium are determined from the
measurement data, which is the ultimate goal of geophysical subsurface sensing.
As the focus of research, a series of efficient forward models will be developed
as a backbone of nonlinear inversion for 3-D electromagnetic and elastodynamic
problems. The techniques proposed will allow one to solve much larger problems
than conventional finite-difference and finite-element methods on a
supercomputer. The forward solutions will be effectively coupled with the
inverse algorithms. In the educational program, the principal investigator (PI)
proposes to strengthen the interactions among faculty members and students in
electrical engineering, geophysics, and mechanical engineering departments by
developing interdisciplinary courses and by collaboration. Three new cross-
department courses will be developed, and the use of computers and network in
electromagnetic education will be incorporated to improve the teaching
effectiveness. The research program will be fully integrated with the
undergraduate and graduate electrical engineering education. This integrated
career program Will significantly advance the capability of simulating large-
scale forward and inverse electromagnetic and elastodynamic problems in
geophysical subsurface sensing. The petroleum industry will benefit from this
research program through the publication of knowledge and software developed.
This program will also benefit subsurface mapping of underground buried waste
and the medical imaging industry. The students involved in this research will
have the unique opportunity to acquire interdisciplinary knowledge on the
applications of electrical engineering in geophysical exploration.