* 9702753
* CAREER:  Novel Materials Based on Metal-Terpyridyl Building Blocks
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1997,09/23/1999
* Debra Mohler, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 09/23/1999
* USD 293,600.00

The focus of this research is the development of of nanostructures and polymers
by means of metal complexation of terpyridal ligands. Using building blocks
containing two or more terpyridal units, rigid rod polymers, rings and molecular
monolayers will be constructed. The use of carboxylate-substituted terpyridal
groups in the synthesis of rings and molecular monolayers will allow the self-
assembly of nanotubes and organometallic zeolites. Applications as molecular
wires, slow release devices and as channels for cross-membrane transport of ion
and molecules will be stressed. Course and curriculum development featuring
polymer laboratory and lecture courses will be the focus of the educational
component of the award. With this CAREER award, the Synthetic Organic Program,
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Office of Experimental
Programs to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) are supporting the research
and educational efforts of Dr. Debra L. Mohler of the Department of Chemistry at
West Virginia University. Professor Mohler will focus her work on developing
methods for the assembly of new materials by metal complexation of terpyridal
ligands. The resulting nanostructures will be will be examined for the ability
to act as molecular wires and slow release devices and as channels for the
cross-membrane transport of ions and molecules. The experience gained from the
research will be be applied to the development of an undergraduate lecture and
laboratory polymer courses.