* 9702913
* CAREER: A Research and Teaching Plan for Computer           Integrated Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Sanjay Sarma, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2001
* USD 310,000.00

*** 9702913 Sarma This grant provides funding for the development of a new
language and control strategy for programming computer-controlled machine tools.
The goal is to modularize the important functions of machine control into
convenient building blocks from which composite systems can be assembled
rapidly. The language developed in this research will enable users to specify
complex behaviors and coordinate them with external sensors and robotic devices
over factory networks. Communication between devices will be standardized
through open interfaces, which can be accessed by the user at a high level
without a need to deal with implementation details. A prototype control system
that interprets the new language will be implemented on an commercial high-
performance machine tool called a Hexapod. The system will be tested by
conducting experiments in process inspection with measuring probes, and process
control using force and vibration sensors. The system will also be used as a
"glue" to integrate other technologies under development by the researcher,
including new tool-path generation algorithms and an automatic workholding
system. If successful, this research will lead to improvements in machine and
factory automation. The new language is proposed as an update to the machine
programming paradigm that exists today, which provides few facilities for
interaction and integration with external devices. With the new system, users
will be able to harness new sensor technologies, or control external devices, by
plugging them directly into the standardized interfaces. Machine programs can
then be designed to be self-correcting by monitoring sensors to detect faults.
This will enable a level of autonomy that not only reduces operating costs, but
also improves quality. Multiple machines can be controlled over a central
network to create automatic factory systems. Today such automation can only be
achieved through expensive "customized" integration. ***