* 9702980
* CAREER:  Using Critical Path Length as a Practical          Peformance Metric
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Bradley Kuszmaul, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 05/31/2001
* USD 210,000.00

The goal of this research is to investigate the use of critical-path length to
accurately predict performance in several domains, including wide-area
multithreading, microprocessor architecture, and high-performance filesystems.
For wide-area multithreading, the strategy is to develop conservative work
scheduling algorithms for a distributed-RAM model of computation, and to
demonstrate that the critical-path length can be used to predict the performance
of the resulting system. For microprocessor architecture, the strategy is to
gain a fundamental understanding of the average parallelism of ordinary serial C
programs by compiling them into dataflow graphs and measuring their critical-
path length. Given that understanding, the effectiveness of hardware mechanisms
can be evaluated. For high-performance filesystems, the strategy is to use
critical-path length to measure the average parallelism of a filesystem
workload. The educational component of this project includes teaching how to
measure and achieve high-performance using a critical-path length methodology. A
new course in advanced computer architecture is being developed which will focus
on microprocessor performance, and a senior/graduate-level operating systems
course will be reoriented to emphasize performance. Eventually, a course on
algorithmic parallel computing will be developed.***