* 9702882
* Novel Biodegradable Electrically Conducting Polymers for    Nerve Regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Christine Schmidt, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 02/29/2000
* USD 18,000.00

9702882 Schmidt The proposed research focuses on the synthesis of a novel
biodegradable polymer that will be inherently electrically conductive. This
research is motivated by past work which demonstrates that electric fields and
electrical charges improve the healing of several tissues, including bone and
nerve. There are drawbacks to the presently available approaches. External
electromagnetic fields suffer from the inability to accurately localize the
electrical effect to the desired tissue, and the use of non-biodegradable
electrically-conducting or electrically - charged materials can pose long-term
risks that are associated with any permanent material. Thus, there is ample
motivation to develop a biodegradable polymer, which has desirable electrically
conductive properties that can be localized to the tissue of choice, and which
will not pose long-term health risks. Such a polymer does not currently exist.
In addition to its possible utility for peripheral nerve regeneration, the
polymer could also be applied to other areas of tissue engineering as well, such
as spinal cord regeneration and muscle tissue. To synthesize a biodegradable
electrically conducting polymer, electrically conducting pyrrole oligomers will
be coupled to one another via hydrolyzable (degradable) urethane linkages.
Pyrrole was selected based on extensive previous research by the PI showing that
poly(pyrrole) is biocompatible and can be used to significantly s the extension
of axons from nerve cells. Poly(pyrrole), in the form of guidance channels, has
also been shown by the PI to guide peripheral nerve regeneration better than
inert materials such as silicone. Unfortunately, poly(pyrrole) in its present
form is not biodegradable and not easily processed into different shapes. Thus,
pyrrole oligomers will be coupled with urethane linkages to render it
biodegradable an d more easily processed. The urethane linkage was selected for
many reasons, including urethane's prior use in clinical applications such as
heart valves and the fact that urethane, in its uncrosslinked form, is
biodegradable and pliable. Other cross linking chemistries (e.g., an ester
linkage) will be utilized in the unlikely event that the polymer product proves
to be deleterious to living tissue. In summary, the proposed studies will focus
on the synthesis of a novel biodegradable electrically conducting polymer, based
on previous work showing that electrical charges are beneficial to wound
healing, and in particular, to nerve regeneration. Thus, the resultant polymer
will be a useful material not only for devices to aid peripheral nerve
regeneration (e.g., nerve guidance channels), but for other tissue engineering
applications as well. ***