* 9702115
* PECASE:  Applications-driven Research in Multiprocessor     Architecture and Software Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2005
* Jaswinder Singh, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Branicky
* 02/28/2005
* USD 500,000.00

In this effort research and education at the boundary of parallel systems and
applications will be performed. It is motivated by the need for application
insights to make fundamental advances in parallel systems, and the recent
convergence in multiprocessor architectures to general purpose nodes connected
by a communication architecture. On the research side, challenging, irregular,
dynamic applications will be parallelized on real systems in close collaboration
with domain researchers, particularly in probabilistic protein structure
determination and adaptive unstructured meshing, and their implications for
parallel architecture and software understood. General techniques for
partitioning such complex applications will be developed, particularly for the
emerging class of cache- coherent distributed-memory multiprocessors. The
applications will be distributed as benchmarks to the parallel computing
community. Architectural implications, particularly communication demands,
scaling and resource distribution, will be examined, and scaling methodologies
developed. Funds permitting, a range of commercial systems will be evaluated
using applications, to understand the impact of their communication
architectures and tradeoffs, and insights into programming and performance
debugging environments studied. On the education side, a new undergraduate
course in parallel architecture will be developed, and a textbook on parallel
architecture is being written to articulate the convergence and develop parallel
architecture as an engineering rather than exotic discipline.