* 9702287
* CAREER:  Aqueous Conformations of Organic Molecules,        Functional by Design
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2002
* Arthur Cammers, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 04/30/2002
* USD 325,000.00

Professor Cammers-Goodwin's research focuses on three different manifestations
of molecular structure: molecular recognition, pi stacking and secondary
solution structure. Phosphate and pyrophosphate recognition is examined through
interactions with guanidinoindole derivatives synthesized in accord with
computer-aided molecular design parameters to maximize host-guest hydrogen
bonding and electrostatic interactions. A systematic variation of substituents
designed to achieve both electron-rich and electron-poor aryl moieties in a
series of benzyl biphenyls is utilized to determine overall stability achieved
through pi stacking in fluid solution. The decarboxylation of a
carboxybenzisoxazole is exploited to determine the role of hydrogen bonding in
the stabilization of helical protein structures by trifluoroethanol. Educational
activities include developing an interdisciplinary biological chemistry course
and a course that targets drug design through molecular modeling based on
available protein crystal structure data, and through a community outreach
program, tutoring and mentoring disadvantaged teenagers. With this CAREER award,
the Organic Dynamics Program supports the research of Professor Arthur Cammers-
Goodwin of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Kentucky. Professor
Cammers-Goodwin's research addresses, through study of model systems, the nature
of the interaction between biological molecules and ions and the factors
dictating the three-dimensional structure of biological molecules in solution.
By focusing on comparatively small model compounds in place of the often complex
biological molecules, hypotheses regarding specific factors governing the form
of the natural molecules are tested. Professor Cammers-Goodwin's educational
activities include developing an interdisciplinary course on biological
chemistry course and a course on pharmaceutical synthesis, and through a
community center, mentoring minority high school students.