* 9702044
* Forging Connections Between Business, Education and         Government for Strengthening Technological Skills Among     Urban Students
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Nancy DeSombre, City Colleges of Chicago Harold Washington College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/1998
* USD 84,427.00

The City of Chicago along with nine other large urban cities is conducting a
national conference to create partnerships between urban community colleges,
businesses and industry, secondary schools, and government to prepare students
in urban communities to enter and succeed in the technical workforce. With the
increased use of technology by corporate America, industry can no longer accept
people who lack technical skills. Urban community colleges and their high school
partners are uniquely positioned to assume a lead role in preparing the
workforce necessary for industry to remain productive in urban areas.
Partnerships between industry, urban based public schools, and community
colleges must be established that have as a central purpose the preparation of
students for technical careers and access of students to other careers which
depend on use of technical information. The conference is involving city mayor s
offices, business and industry, the Superintendent of the public schools, and
Chancellor or President of the community college system in nine major urban
cities (Chicago, Los Angeles, Miami, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Baltimore, New York,
St. Louis, and Detroit). To set an agenda for such a highly visible national
workshop, a national Steering Committee is taking the lead in planning and
coordinating the effort.