* 9702196
* CAREER: Modeling Three-Dimensional Machining Processes for  Variable Tool-Chip Interfacial Friction Using Explicit      Dynamic Finite Element Techniques
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Michael Lovell, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* KAMLAKAR P RAJURKAR
* 07/31/2000
* USD 285,000.00

Due primarily to the complex interaction of metal cutting which combines high
strain rate deformations with friction, there still exists no adequate model of
metal cutting. In this Career proposal, an innovative finite element model will
be introduced to investigate, under a diverse range of operating conditions, the
following: (1) three-dimensional explicit dynamic effects, (2) velocity-
temperature dependent friction, (3) cutting tool coating, and (4) cutting tool
chip-groove geometry. The results obtained from the finite element simulations
will provide innovative knowledge in several areas which are vital for obtaining
high quality and productivity in machining. Experiments will be performed to
validate the model. The education strategy will incorporate moderate changes in
teaching approach and introduce the following: (1) the development of an
engineering software course, (2) the incorporation of numerical solution
techniques into several core mechanical engineering courses, and (3) the
utilization of computer based solution techniques in a capstone team design
project. The success of metal cutting and other machining processes requires a
complete knowledge of the tribological behavior involved. Substantially new and
usable information can be gained from this study about the influence of coating
thickness and materials on machining performance. Finite element results on
grooved cutting tools will provide guidance for obtaining desired chip-breaker
characteristics. The education plan will better prepare engineers that are team
oriented, with computer based problem solving skills which are adaptable over
time.