* 9702991
* CAREER: Parallel Algorithms and Software for Irregular      Scientific Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Srinivas Aluru, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 08/31/2000
* USD 205,000.00

The goal of this Career project is to apply techniques from parallel computing
and computational geometry to develop theoretically sound and practically
efficient parallel algorithms for a class of irregular scientific applications
and to infuse the resulting knowledge into parallel computing and computational
science programs. The main goal of the research is to develop parallel
algorithms and software for scientific applications that depend upon
interactions between entities (such as particles, atoms) located in two or three
dimensional space. To achieve this goal, a two- pronged strategy will be used:
Firstly, efficient parallel solutions will be developed for specific
applications. Secondly, general techniques useful for parallelizing irregular
applications that depend on multidimensional point sets will be investigated.
Two specific applications, considered to be Grand Challenge problems by the High
Performance Computing and Communications (HPCC) Subcommittee, will be studied:
The N-body problem and Protein Accessible Surface Area Calculations. The N- body
problem is to simulate the motion of particles under the influence of mutual
force fields based on an inverse square law. N-body computations are useful in
such diverse fields as astrophysics, plasma physics, molecular and fluid
dynamics, computer graphics and numerical complex analysis. Protein Accessible
Surface Area calculations are used to study the structure of proteins, an
important problem in computational molecular biology. The access patterns
required by many scientific applications that depend on distribution of
particles/atoms can be abstracted into primitive queries on multidimensional
point sets. General techniques for efficient parallel execution of such
applications will be investigated and software to aid programming such
applications will be developed. Education Plan: The main goal of the education
plan is to develop curriculum in parallel computing and computational science at
New Mexico State University and to train students to apply computer science
principles in solving important scientific applications on future generation
computing systems. A course in parallel computing has already been developed and
a textbook on algorithm design for parallel computers is being written.
Additional courses in parallel computing will be developed and introduced. It is
intended to develop curriculum and establish a new computational science program
on campus. The results of the proposed research will be integrated into courses
in parallel computing and computational science.