* 9702561
* PECASE: The Integration of Education &amp; Research in          Transportation Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2003
* Linda Nozick, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 05/31/2003
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract Proposal: CMS 97-02561 PI: Linda K. Nozick, Cornell University "Career:
Integration of Education and Research in Transportation Engineering" This
research focuses on the development of more robust methods to optimize the
routing and scheduling of hazardous materials shipments. Analyses with which
these decisions are currently made fail to fully consider the multi- objective
nature, the stochastic elements, and the inherent time dependency aspects of
this problem. The research will develop advancements in multi-objective network
analysis and methods to identify the appropriate scope of analysis given the
decision situation. Careers in transportation are increasingly systems-oriented,
extend beyond the bounds of traditional civil engineering, focus on
opportunities for the inclusion of non-traditional resources to cope with
increasing financial and environmental pressures, and involve multiple
stakeholders often with conflicting objectives. Therefore, transportation
professionals are increasingly being asked to conduct analyses which are multi-
objective, involve the evaluation of the inclusion of "non-traditional;"
resources and high levels of uncertainly. For these reasons, the teaching
activities to be accomplished here involve the redesign of three courses at the
undergraduate level. At the M.S. level, the activities focus on the creation of
two semester, real-world team design projects which incorporate many of these
same elements and ask the students to propose creative solutions which can be
realistically implemented based on sophisticated analyses. The characteristics
of hazardous materials transportation decision situations include all the
elements necessary to provide an excellent set of homeworks and projects for
both the undergraduate level courses and the master's level projects. ***