* 9702725
* CAREER:  Strain Effects in Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Alexander Zaslavsky, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 304,500.00

9702725 Zaslavsky Technical CAREER Abstract The focus of the proposed research
is the effect of strain on electronic properties of semiconductor
nanostructures. Strain-induced effects in 1D wires and 0D dots are relatively
unexplored, because the strain is strongly inhomogeneous and lacks the in-plane
symmetry of the much studied 2D heterostructures. We will study two distinct
classes of structures: silicon-germanium (SiGe) wires and dots, and strained
III-V wires and rings fabricated by regrowth. The SiGe research will build on
our recent measurements of strain relaxation and strain-induced quantization in
submicron SiGe Quantum dots. The III-V structures will be fabricated by
modulation-doping regrowth of in-situ patterned surfaces etched in strained
heterostructures in a chamber attached directly to an MBE system. This research
is relevant not only to strained nanostructure physics, but also to a number of
proposed nanodevices that incorporate strained regions. In addition to graduate
student training, this research will provide an ample number of semester and
year-long projects for students interested in laboratory experience. %%%
Nontechnical CAREER Abstract: As technology advances, semiconductor devices that
underpin modern computers and lasers are becoming ever smaller. These ultrasmall
structures are affected in complex ways by the mechanical strains that arise
during their manufacture. We will experimentally investigate strain effects in
two types of semiconductors: silicon, which is used for most electronic
circuits, and gallium arsenide, which is crucial for applications that require
very high speed operation or optical signals. In shedding light on strain in
ultrasmall structures and gauging the promise of novel devices, this research
will couple to the education of graduate and undergraduate students in
semiconductor physics and technology at Brown. The education plan includes an
update of semiconductor device courses and the revamping of a semester-long
transistor fabrication laboratory, upon completing which students will have the
background to take on semester and year-long supervised projects on sub-
sections of the proposed research. ***