* 9702058
* CAREER: An Intelligent 3-D Base Isolation System for High- Tech Industrial Buildings
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* I-Kwang Chang, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 08/31/1998
* USD 60,000.00

9702058 Chang The goal os this research project is to develop an intelligent 3-
Dimension seismic base isolation system aimed at protecting critical high-tech
manufacturing buildings and their contents. The building contents, which usually
are far more valuable than the building itself, consisting of delicate
equipment, computers, chip or disk products, etc. The ratio of the content loads
to the structural dead loads is typically high for such high-tech industrial
plants. These content loads change in magnitude and location frequently and
usually will cause horizontal and vertical eccentricities which in turn will
cause ampliation of torsion, tilting, and rocking responses. The intelligent
protective systems proposed are designed to generate liquid artificial mass as
needed to maintain the fundamental natural frequencies of the isolated building
as a constant, and also produce a sound alarm if any isolator is over loaded.
The smart system can also adjust its own properties to fine tune the isolation
system automatically. If the smart system does not have to be active during a
strong earthquake in order to function effectively both for vertical thrust
fault prone regions or lateral strike-slip fault prone regions. An integral,
companion educational program O.K. consisting of innovative system design,
demonstrations and workshops will capture the interest of young adults, to give
undergraduates the opportunity to indulge their academic curiosities, and to
prepare graduate students for a productive career in intelligent building design
will also be implemented. ***