* 9702726
* CAREER: Investigations of Ordered Conducting Polymer Solids and Nanostructures: A Multidisciplinary Approach to Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2002
* James Hutchison, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 04/30/2002
* USD 328,000.00

This CAREER award made to James E. Hutchison at the University of Oregon is
supported by the Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry Division. The goal
of the research is to develop new molecular approaches for optimizing the
conductivity, processability, nonlinear optical response and/or electrochromism
of pi-conjugated conducting polymers. Two new classes of self-organizing
polythiophenes will be studied: (1) regioregular poly-4-alkyl-2,2'-bithiophenes
prepared by chemical polymerization methods, and (2) polybithiphene/polypeptide
hybrids prepared by molecular templating. Physical studies of these polymer
classes will determine their extent of conjugation, degree of interchain charge
transport, conductivities, band gaps and nonlinear optical responses. The
polythiophene/polypeptide hybrid polymers provide enhanced supramolecular order
and opportunities to prepare discreet molecular wires of Angstrom-scale diameter
which may be useful as interconnects between molecular electronic devices such
as transistors, molecular switches or sensors. The CAREER educational plan will
provided research and classroom training to better prepare students to excel in
multidisciplinary research environments. Objectives include integrating research
into the undergraduate curriculum, promoting peer- and self-learning and
instilling a `can-do` problem-solving attitude in all students. Establishment of
virtual office hours, and a surface science discussion group will foster
collaborations. Faculty-mentored, self-taught courses will be designed to build
problem-solving skills.