* 9702361
* CAREER:Quantification of Horizontal Gene Transfer as Adaptive Response to Containment Stress in Subsurface Microbial Communities-Development of an Experiential Environ. Eng. Course
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Barth Smets, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 06/30/2002
* USD 320,419.00

9702361 Smets This is an award to provide support for research on appropriate
use of natural attenuation to develop biologically-based technologies for
removal of hazardous substances from soil that is contaminated with these
substances. The research is based on a hypothesis that the exchange and
rearrangement of horizontally transmissible genetic material is a major
contributor to the short-term adaptation of existing microbial communities in
soil and that characterization of the transfer process in the presence of stress
can provide insights that can be applied to engineering design of systems for
decontamination of soil. This award also provides support for the continuation
of this investigator's early development as an educator. His education plan
involves addressing the engineering profession's demands for engineers who
couple a significant technical base of knowledge with an ability for synthesis
and cross-disciplinary integration. The proposal leading to this award was
submitted in response to NSF 96-115, "Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program." Quantitative knowledge of how microbial communities adapt to
contaminant stress can assist in the engineering design of systems and
procedures to exploit the capability of naturally occurring communities of
organisms to removal of contaminants from soil and contaminated aquifers. ***