* 9702329
* CAREER: Reliability and Failure Analysis of Optoelectronic  Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Patricia Mead, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 06/30/2001
* USD 289,997.00

9702329 Mead In spite of the rapid developments in semiconductor laser
performance and the expanding role that these devices now play in the
optoelectronics industry, well defined models describing long term reliability
and degradation processes continue to lag behind in their developments. As an
example, several reports on the reliability of 980nm semiconductor lasers given
over the past two years cite gradual degradation rates as observed from
characteristic power-current (PI) curves obtained from long term continuous wave
(CW) testing. Most often, the tests are performed at high temperature to
accelerate the degradation process. This methodology treats the environmental
temperature as a global parameter which initiates degradation, and it is assumed
that an exponential relationship defines the rate at which degradation actually
occurs. This research plan describes a rigorous experimental approach to
development of reliability models for degradation of laser diode devices using
Raman studies on devices which have been aged in a variety of environmental
seetings. The approach is in agreement with a three step reliability model
criteria designed to produce physics based models of device degradation. The
academic plan includes a multifaceted approach that is designed to encourage
participation of women and underrepresented students. The author has
demonstrated a commitment to outreach programming and engineering curriculum
transformation. These activities are enhanced through implementation of this
research. ***