* 9702242
* CAREER:  Dynamics and Phase Space Structure of Condensed    Matter Systems with Mesoscopic Degrees of Freedom
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* A. Alan Middleton, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/2001
* USD 211,000.00

97022242 Middleton This is a CAREER award to a new faculty member who is
conducting research on computational methods to investigate transport properties
in condensed matter systems with strongly interacting degrees of freedom. The
education component of this award will focus on the integration of computational
methods into courses and departmental infrastructure. The research component is
comprised of two parts. The first is a study of ground states and barriers in
extended systems such as fluid interfaces and magnetic domain walls. New methods
for finding low-energy configurations of interfaces and multiple interacting
lines will be applied. The second component involves charge transport in arrays
of mesoscopic islands: in particular, charge transport in low temperature arrays
of sub-micron sized conducting dots coupled by tunnel junctions. The educational
component involves developing courses which communicates to both undergraduate
and graduate students the rich interaction between condensed matter physics and
computational physics. Modern physical examples from research will be introduced
into the classroom to teach students how to effectively use computational tools
to study scientific problems. %%% This is a CAREER award to a new faculty member
who is conducting research on computational methods to investigate transport
properties in condensed matter systems with strongly interacting degrees of
freedom. The education component of this award will focus on the integration of
computational methods into courses and departmental infrastructure. The research
component is comprised of two parts. The first is a study of ground states and
barriers in extended systems such as fluid interfaces and magnetic domain walls.
New methods for finding low-energy configurations of interfaces and multiple
interacting lines will be applied. The second component involves charge
transport in arrays of mesoscopic islands: in particular, charge transport in lo
w temperature arrays of sub-micron sized conducting dots coupled by tunnel
junctions. The educational component involves developing courses which
communicates to both undergraduate and graduate students the rich interaction
between condensed matter physics and computational physics. Modern physical
examples from research will be introduced into the classroom to teach students
how to effectively use computational tools to study scientific problems. ***