* 9702612
* CAREER: Efficient and Robust On-Line Control of Large-Scale Dynamic Traffic Systems with Information Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Srinivas Peeta, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/2002
* USD 322,000.00

Abstract Proposal: CMS 97-02612 PI: Srinivas Peeta, Purdue University "Career:
Efficient and Robust On-Line Control of Large- Scale Dynamic Traffic Systems
with Information Systems" " This research addresses the performance optimization
and the efficient on-line robust control of large-scale traffic systems as a
substantive example of large-scale man-made dynamic systems with capacity
constraints and different degrees of uncertainties in system inputs, in which
flows must be routed on-line from one node to another without complete a priori
information on future entries/demands to the system. The current lack of such
accurate and detailed real-time data on the state of the traffic system has
precluded a clear understanding of the dynamic phenomena that govern system
performance, limiting the development of feasible and effective real-time
control strategies for large traffic systems. This research will use nonlinear
adaptive and robust control theory and neural networks to develop a new realm of
on-line control strategies that seek the performance optimization of large-scale
traffic systems under certain future demands and network state conditions. The
work will involve a blend of theory, simulation, and operational experiments.
Real-time data obtained from a recently installed advanced traffic management
system (ATMS) on a major interstate corridor in an on-going collaborative effort
with the Indiana Dept. of Transportation and Hughes Transportation Management
Systems will be used to validate and evaluate the proposed models and
algorithms, leading to an enhanced performance efficiency of existing road
networks. The education objectives are to systematically bridge the gap between
evolving technological advances in information systems in the transportation
arena and their absence from existing curriculum through teaching and
experimentation, specifically in the areas of advanced sensor systems, on- line
data extraction and processing techniques, robust on- line control theory, and
high performance computational techniques. Undergraduate students will be
involved with real-time data accessing and processing, and programs accenting
professional development and extension course development are included in the
companion educational plan. ***