* 9702313
* CAREER:  A Systematic Study of Miscible and Immiscible      Polymer Blends Containing a Liquid Crystalline Polymer
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,01/31/2003
* Mark Dadmun, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2003
* USD 325,966.00

- - ~ 9702313 Dadmun In this CAREER award the effect of varying the amount of
hydrogen bonding present in a polymer blend containing a liquid crystalline
polymer and an amorphous polymer on its phase behavior and engineering
properties will be explored. The amorphous polymer will be a copolymer where one
monomer (vinyl phenol) can participate in hydrogen bonding while the other
monomer can not (styrene). The amount of hydrogen bonding present between the
two polymers will be systematically varied by altering the composition of the
amorphous copolymer. The effect of this variation on the phase `ehavior and,
consequently the engineering properties (i.e. storage and loss modulus, tensile
strength, viscosity) of the blend will be determined. It is expected that the
change in the amount of hydrogen bonding present will produce systems which
exhibit wide range miscibility, primarily immiscibility, and systems where the
miscible/immiscible window is accessible. This last system will be utilized to
examine the influence of the polymer chain anisotropy of the liquid crystalline
polymer on the phase decomposition kinetics. The results will provide a
fundamental understanding of the physical chemistry of blends containing a
liquid crystalline polymer which can be utilized in the development of novel
materials with tunable properties. The preparation of undergraduate and graduate
students for careers demands different emphases from an instructor/advisor.
Faculty primarily interact with undergraduate students via the classroom while
the maturation of graduate students involve learning in both the classroom and
the laboratory. Therefore, a description of a teaching philosophy which is
followed is presented. A summary of the proposed teaching philosophy is to
utilize effective teacher-student interaction to insure that students learn and
understand the desired curriculum; to make chemistry accessible through more
everyday examples; to inspire students to think a nalytically by detailing
complex relationships in lecture and in workshops; and to prepare students for a
vocation by introducing them to the methods by which chemical concepts are
utilized in industry via industrial visitors and trips to local chemical plants,
by attacking and solving problems as groups, and by introducing them to common
engineering principles. %%% The proposed research program will examine how
manipulation of the microscopic structure of high performance, liquid
crystalline polymers can be utilized to create new materials with target
properties. It is hoped that the results will provide fundamental information
which can be used to guide product development such that the desirable
characteristics of liquid crystalline polymers can be efficiently exploited
commercially. ***