* 9702615
* CAREER:  A Multiscale Hierarchical Approach to Reaction     Processes and Its Integration Into the Curriculum
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2002
* Dionisios Vlachos, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2002
* USD 210,000.00

Abstract CTS-9702615 The desire to design and control large scale chemical
processes based on an understanding of molecular phenomena, and therefore, from
"first principles" and to microfabricate new materials with atomic resolution
for diverse areas such as superconductivity, ferromagnetism, selective
catalysis, and separations is one of the future trends in chemical engineering.
A factor in the development of this new trend is the revolution in computational
capabilities which has opened the horizon to modeling of nanometer length scales
and pico to nanosecond time scales. Despite the many available models at
different reactor length scales, no general engineering strategies exist for
designing homogeneous-heterogeneous reactors based on a molecular scale control
strategy and for teaching future engineers how to link molecular with
macroscopic scales. The PI plans a research program of integrating continuum
state-of-the-art fluid-phase models and molecular simulations for multicomponent
reacting flows and experimentally validating them. The specific research
objectives include: (1) To develop efficient Monte Carlo simulations (higher
hierarchical level models) which can handle multicomponent surface reaction
systems and surface inhomogeneities (e.g., absorbate-adsorbate interactions and
surface dynamics). (2) To integrate multiple reactor scales by linking surface
Monte Carlo simulations with existing detailed continuum fluid mechanics --
multicomponent transport -- detailed gas-phase kinetic models using hybrid
models. (3) To validate the proposed methodology with well-designed experiments.
The new methodology will be applied to methane oxidation and selected subsystems
over noble metals to consider simultaneously: selectivity, safety, and
environmental aspects. Such problems are of significance to partial oxidation
reactors )e.g., conversion of natural gas to synthesis gas or methanol,
propylene to propylene oxide, etc.) and complete oxidation reactors for energy
productio n with reduced pollutants (e.g., catalytic gas turbines). The
integration of the methodology into the curriculum, through a new classroom
model (funded by General Electric) of interactive computing and visualization,
will train future engineers with decision making by design skills on multiscale
processes. Specific educational objectives include: (1) To improve the decision
making by design skill of students on real-life, open-ended problems by
integrating the research multiscale hierarchical strategy into existing courses
and engaging students in research activities. (2) To examine a new evaluation
method and improve teaching techniques by increasing active participation of
students through a new classroom model of interactive computing and
visualization. (3) to employ the research methodology into a new course on the
synthesis of inorganic materials (to be an elective for undergraduate and first-
year graduate students).