* 9702220
* CAREER:  Nanoscale Controlled Supramolecular Light Emitting Devices by Novel Self-Assembly Techniques
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1997,10/31/2002
* Fotios Papadimitrakopoulos, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 10/31/2002
* USD 315,000.00

9702220 Papadimitrakopoulos This CAREER project addresses fundamental materials
science issues of organic Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs). Low molecular weight
sublimable organics, such as 8-hydroxyquinoline metal chelates have been
advantageous because of the inherent semiconductor purity levels attainable with
simple high-vacuum evaporation. Although advantages have been envisioned for
their high molecular weight polymeric analogs, they have not materialized due to
intrinsic impurities and defects associated with macromolecular architecture.
The objectives of this project encompass a broad fabrication methodology which
effectively addresseq these issues and permits complex supramolecular structures
to be constructed via a facile self-assembly approach. Some specific anticipated
features include: Direct chemical attachment to the substrate, with increased
lateral stability by dense packing and two dimensional crosslinking, leading to
pinhole-free devices of increased stability; Film forming uniformity, regardless
of shape and size of the starting substrate; Chemical surface patterning and
subsequent localized growth permitting complex device fabrication in simple,
additive, buildup fashion as opposed to conventional etching techniques. %%% The
project addresses forefront research issues in a topical area of materials
science having high technological relevance. The research will contribute basic
materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of
organic photonic materials and devices, in general. An important feature of the
program is the emphasis on education, and on the integration of research and
education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant research area. For example, the innate simplicity of
the chemistry and versatility of molecular architecture help bridge a broad
array of scientific disciplines, while maintaining accessibility to educational
levels from undergraduate students to highly qualified research scientists . The
actual fabrication of proto-type devices in the research activity directs and
motivates young minds into science and engineering, providing them a strong
foundation in the advanced technologies of the future. ***