* 9702165
* CAREER:  Bioaerosols in Environmental Engineeing:  A Career Development Plan to Expand Teaching and Research into       Microbial Air Pollution
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1997,12/31/2003
* Mark Hernandez, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 12/31/2003
* USD 330,000.00

9702165 Hernandez While much research effort is already directed at
characterizing aquatic and terrestrial microbial processes, relatively little
work has approached microbiological aspects of air pollution from an engineering
perspective. Rapid, quantitative, microscopic aerosol assays will be used to
characterize the viability, identity and distribution of bacteria and fungi
suspended in indoor air. Using direct epi-fluorescent microscopy, the goal of
this work is to accurately characterize the airborne concentrations of cellular
and sub-cellular microbial components prevalent in commercial and residential
aerosols. The work will focus on both laboratory chamber studies and field
measurements to determine the biostability of airborne microorganisms commonly
encountered indoors. Biostability is defined here as the ability of
microorganisms to retain their metabolic capabilities and their physical
integrity; it does not constitute the ability to be isolated or quantified by
culture. The overall goal of this project is to expand and improve the research
and teaching of microbiology germane to modern civil and environmental
engineering practice. As an educational goal, a new coursework series on applied
environmental microbiology is being developed for permanent integration into the
civil/environmental engineering curricula at the University of Colorado. This
series will consist of a total of four undergraduate and graduate level courses,
including associated laboratories. The courses will be structured according to a
novel, problem-based cooperative learning format and taught in a brand new,
state-of-the-art engineering facility specifically designed to combine computer
aided, multi-media presentation with classroom instruction (Integrated Teaching
and Learning Laboratory (ITLL)). The undergraduate level courses will provide
fundamentals needed to und erstand microbial processes and ecology in engineered
systems. The graduate level courses will analyze environmental microbiology
applications emphasizing the interface between modem molecular biology and
civil, sanitary, geotechnical, and atmospheric engineering. The applications
courses will intensively examine the microbiology of domestic water supply,
wastewater treatment, aquifer/soil bioremediation, biofouling, industrial
corrosion, and air pollution. The courses have a dual purpose: they are designed
to prepare practicing civil engineers and other environmental scientists with a
working knowledge of applied microbiology, as well as provide a coursework,
laboratory and literature foundation for research oriented students. Results
from this work may have several important implications for understanding human
exposure to airborne microorganisms while expanding environmental engineering
curricula to include the atmospheric environment as a biosphere. The projected
benefits of this work stem from the development of a robust microscopic
technique capable of stringent microbial characterization with relatively minor
modifications to commonly used, inexpensive sampling equipment. Direct
microscopic measurements have been widely adopted in water treatment engineering
and health sciences as they provide a superior basis for process evaluations and
epidemiological studies. These visual techniques provide absolute measurements
that offer a more accurate picture of bioaerosols than their enrichment based
counterparts as nutritional selection and culturabihty do not bias the results.
Applications of direct aerosol microscopy include a reliable means to evaluate
the effectiveness of engineered rnitigation methods to help control common
microorganisms and/or their fragments present in indoor aerosols. Using widely
accepted fluorescent biological s tains and fluorescent genetic probes, the
technique will also be applied to determine the ecological structure of
bioaerosols and the presence and activity of a wide range of pathogens. The
project will directly integrate bioaerosol research into new environmental
engineering microbiology courses as well as into courses offered in mechanical
engineering and public health. This project will serve to pilot the new arm in
its service as a "building as laboratory" function for teaching applied
environmental microbiology in a civil and environmental engineering context. ***