* 9702017
* CAREER: Linking Processing Practice to the Performance of   Materials in Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Matthew Miller, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 06/30/2001
* USD 310,000.00

9702017 Miller The overall objective of this project in materials processing /
mechanics of materials is to establish tangible links between the processing of
a material and its in- service performance. In general, the method which will be
employed in both the educational and research components of the project is to
use experiments to understand various aspects of material behavior and
microstructural evolution. Guided by these observations, models for in-service
performance which incorporate processing effects will be developed and
implemented. The research component of this project, An Investigation of the
Effects of Metal Forming Practice on In-Service Cyclic Performance, is motivated
by the need for a unifying constitutive model framework for small strain cyclic
plasticity which explicitly incorporates large strain processing-induced
effects. It is well known that flat rolling produces strong internal structure
gradients through the thickness of rolled plate material. In this project, the
dependence of small strain inelastic cyclic deformation on processing induced
initial structure (in the form of crystallographic texture and large strain
dislocation structures) will be investigated by taking uniaxial and planar
biaxial test specimens at various locations through the thickness of rolled
aluminum plate. Both the mechanical response as well as the microstructural
evolution will be monitored in these experiments and a determination made as to
which of the large strain effects have the most profound influence on the
subsequent small strain cyclic behavior. This information will then be
incorporated into unifying small strain cyclic models which explicitly account
for prior large strain metal forming episodes. While both involve inelastic
strains, the large deformations incurred during a metal forming episode differ
sharply from the small strain cyclic history which a component may encounter
during its service life. These differences produce a discontinuity with respect
to model structure. Large strain models place more of an emphasis on the
characterization of slowly evolving material behavior due to processes such as
crystallographic texture evolution while models for cyclic plasticity must
capture quickly evolving phenomena such as that related to the nucleation and
evolution of dislocation cells and lattice structures. Even though the internal
structure produced during forming is distinct from small strain cyclic
structure, the evolution of structure is continuous across the forming/service
interface. It is this continuity of state evolution which offers hope for
developing a unifying model framework. The initial model will build on a
currently-existing crystal plasticity framework while the final modeling effort
proposes an new micromechanical formulation. The educational plan, Designing
with processed materials, shares the overall goal of bridging the processing /
in- service design interface and focuses primarily on undergraduate and graduate
curriculum development as well as laboratory development and implementation. A
stronger emphasis on the effects of processing on design will be interjected
into existing materials processing courses. On the undergraduate level, students
will investigate experimentally what effects forming and thermal processing
practice have on the properties of the processed material and how the
microstructure evolves during processing On the graduate level, a new
experimental course in materials processing is being developed taking the
general theme of incorporating processing effects into design to a greater depth
by investigating issues such as effects of deformation- induced anisotropy, rate
and temperature dependence, instabiliti es, and superplasticity. Development of
the instructional laboratory which serves the materials processing curriculum in
Mechanical Engineering at Cornell consistent with the proposed curriculum
changes is also proposed.