* 9702860
* CAREER: Parameter Estimation for Ill-Conditioned Systems    with Application to Electric Drives and Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2004
* Miguel Velez-Reyes, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2004
* USD 500,000.00

ECS-9702860 Velez-Reyes The research plan is focused in the area of parameter
estimation for ill-conditioned dynamical systems and its application to electric
drives and power systems. Physical restrictions in electric drives and power
systems limit the quality of the data available for parameter estimation.
Therefore, making the associate parameter estimation an ill-conditioned one.
111-conditioning prevents uniformly good estimates of all system parameters from
being obtained. This research proposes to develop sound methodologies to deal
with ill-conditioned parameter estimation problems in electric drives and power
systems. We first, propose to develop methodologies to quantify the severity of
the ill-conditioning. Second, we propose the development of parameter estimation
algorithms that can be applied to ill-conditioned problems producing physically
meaningful parameter estimates, The importance of developing robust parameter
estimation algorithms that can deal with low quality data is evident from the
need of accurate power system parameters for system simulation, stability
analysis, optimization, state estimation, and control. This is becoming even
more important with deregulation and the need of operating power systems near
their full capacity with lower safety/reserve margins. In the area of electric
drives, the strong growth of sensorless control have prompted the need to
develop robust parameter estimation algorithms since most approaches to
determine mechanical position or speed depend heavily on accurate machine
parameters. An important focus of this work is the computational efficiency of
algorithms to be developed for condition assessment and for parameter estimation
because of the large scale of power systems and the constraints in real-time
implementation in electric drive applications. Efficient algorithm development
for large scale problems has been a focus of the High Performance Computing
(HPC) initiative under the Puerto Rico NSF-EPSCOR program in the past and HPC is
still a main trust area of scientific development in the island. The addition of
this research program to the HPC effort will strengthen the applications
component of this area contributing to the attainment of PR-EPSCOR program
goals. The activities proposed in the educational plan will impact
undergraduate, graduate, and high school students. Four major activities will be
undertaken as part of the educational plan: Revision and creation of courses at
the graduate and advanced senior level in the areas of modeling and control of
electric drives and power systems, Revision of the Undergraduate Power Systems
Laboratory and its integration into undergraduate courses in power systems.
Mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students and their engagement in
graduate and undergraduate level research projects. Enhancement to the
Introduction to Power Systems Workshop offered by the PI to high school students
participating at the pre-engineering summer program at UPRM. The curriculum
development component of the education plan builds on activities in skill-based
and practice-based education including the use of the cooperative learning and
teaching methodologies and novel assessment techniques in which the researcher
has been involved as part of the NSF-funded Manufacturing Engineering Education
Partnership. The courses will be revised to integrate the research work into the
classroom. The pre-engineering workshop will be revised in format and content
and the materials developed will be disseminated to other institutions and high
school teachers. The workshop and high-school teacher activities will be done in
collaboration with the UPR Resource Center for Science and Engineering partly
funded by NSF.