* 9702632
* CAREER:  Low Loss, Tunable Ferroelectric Thin Films by      Pulsed Laser Deposition
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,11/30/2002
* Xiaoxing Xi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 11/30/2002
* USD 336,000.00

9702632 Xiaoxing Xi The research of this CAREER project studies the dielectric
nonlinearity and microwave losses of ferroelectric thin films deposited by
Pulsed Laser Deposition. Compared to bulk single crystals, the nonlinearity of
ferroelectric thin films is smaller and the loss is higher, the cause of which
is not well understood. This project aims to address these problems by focusing
on the effects of four factors: (1) Stoichiometry; (2) Crystallinity; (3)
Interface layers and space charges; and (4) Soft-mode phonons. The goal of the
research is to reveal the fundamental mechanisms so as to reduce the losses
while maintaining a high nonlinearity in ferroelectric thin films. The education
plan is to develop a "Ferroelectric Thin Films" experiment for the Physics
undergraduate laboratory course, which includes film deposition, structural and
electrical characterizations and data analysis. %%% This integrated CAREER
research and education project focuses on ferroelectric thin films used in
voltage-tunable microwave devices. Such application requires large dielectric
nonlinearity and low microwave losses in ferroelectric thin films. This research
aims to reveal the fundamental mechanisms that determine these properties in
order to improve them thus impacting the development of ferroelectric tunable
microwave device technologies. The education plan attempts to incorporate
research experience into the physics undergraduate curriculum. A "Ferroelectric
Thin Films" experiment will be developed and included in the regular laboratory
course so that students can get real-life research experience in this course.
***