* 9702275
* CAREER:  Biomechanical Analyses of Balance Recovery During  Falls in Young and Old Adults
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Darryl Thelen, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2002
* USD 155,719.00

9702275 Thelen The issue addressed in this research is to determine why elderly
adults are not capable of arresting a fall that they likely would have arrested
when they were young. It is estimated that approximately one-third of persons
over 65 fall each year and one-quarter of elderly fallers sustain serious
injuries such as wrist and hip fractures. While all humans are bound to
encounter disturbances such as trips while walking, avoiding a fall requires one
to sense a loss of balance, process, plan and implement a reaction using the
central nervous system, and then execute the movements by the muscular system.
This study will use both experiments and computer simulations to investigate how
age-related changes in these systems (sensory, central nervous or muscular)
contribute to balance difficulties in elderly adults. In the experiments, young
and elderly adults will be released from a leaning posture and will have to step
rapidly to regain balance. Forces, muscle electrical activities and movement
will be recorded on a computer during these tasks. These data will be used to
compare reaction times, muscle coordination and muscle strength development of
old adults with young adults. These comparisons will provide a better
understanding of the underlying physiological differences that put older adults
at risks for falls. In addition to the experiments, computer simulations will be
conducted to further estimate how changes in physiological factors affect
balance abilities. The simulations consist of a mathematical representation of
the human body in which muscle electrical signals are inputted and the resulting
human movement is predicted. Physiologic factors, such as muscle strength and
reaction time, can be easily adjusted in the computer simulations and the
effects on the stepping movement determined. The computer simulations can thus
be used to predict how reductions in strength and slowing of movement speed
(traits often observed in elderly) a ffect balance recovery abilities. The
primary objective of the education plan is to enhance the continuing development
of a quality engineering program, at a science strong liberal arts college,
which prepares students for direct entry into engineering graduate school. A
combination of innovative instruction techniques and research projects will be
used to accomplish this objective. One important component of the education plan
is the use of collaborative learning in the classroom. Collaborative learning
involves instituting extensive efforts to actively engage students in classroom
discussion and problem solving, thus making the classroom a stimulating learning
environment. Another important component is the educating and challenging of
undergraduate students by involving them in summer research projects. The
ultimate goal of the education plan is to create an atmosphere in which students
experience the excitement of intellectual challenge, gain a thorough
understanding of engineering concepts and have a wording ability to solve real
engineering problems creatively. ***