* 9702158
* CAREER: Control of Sexual Reproduction in Marine Diatoms:   A Molecular and Genetic Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2005
* E. Virginia Armbrust, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2005
* USD 411,092.00

P.I.: Armbrust Proposal Number: 97-02158 Institution: University of Washington
Title: CAREER: Control of sexual reproduction in marine diatoms: a molecular and
genetic approach This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project focuses
on the development of molecular genetics in the unicellular algae known as
diatoms. Diatoms are one of the most abundant groups of aquatic eukaryotic
microorganisms found in nature, with a wide distribution in both marine and
freshwater habitats. Due to their dominance in oceanic upwelling zones and in
regions over the continental shelves, diatoms play a critical role both in
generating the earth's oxygen and in removing carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere. The research described in this CAREER project is designed to
dissect, at a molecular level, how marine diatoms perceive and respond to
environmental change. Environmental stress frequently induces a transition from
essentially "immortal" vegetative growth to the terminally differentiated sexual
stages. The change in patterns of gene expression that accompanies this
transition will be identified. The methods and logic of molecular genetics will
also be incorporated into a graduate course on the use of molecular techniques
to address ecological questions and an undergraduate fieldwork and research
course. Additionally, a short, "hands-on" laboratory course on the use of
molecular techniques to study marine organisms will be provided for high school
teachers.