* 9702773
* CAREER: The Effect of Surface Roughness of Colloidal Forces: Prediction and Measurement
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2002
* John Walz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Cyrus K. Aidun
* 04/30/2002
* USD 281,503.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9702773 John Walz The effect of surface roughness on the
interaction forces between colloidal particles and surfaces is a subject of
great interest. Surface roughness is frequently given as a possible cause of the
discrepancy between predicted and measured deposition rates in packed bed
filtration experiments. Although numerous roughness models have been developed,
no direct experimental measurement of the specific effect of roughness on the
van der Waals or electrostatic interaction forces between surfaces has been
obtained. The objectives of this research are to, (1) develop a general
theoretical model for predicting the interaction forces between rough surfaces
in which the mathematical description of the roughness is consistent with
surface characterizations (e.g., SEM micrographs, AFM profiles); (2)measure
experimentally the interaction energy profile between well-defined rough
surfaces; and (3) measure the effect of surface roughness on the capture rate of
particles flowing through a packed bed. The energy profile measurements will be
obtained using the optical technique of total internal reflection microscopy
(TIRM). Measurement of the effect of roughness on both the long range secondary
energy minimum as well as the primary energy barrier will be made. The latter
experiments are extremely useful since it is the height of the primary energy
barrier which controls the rate of particle deposition in transport through
porous media. The experimental procedure to be used will allow measuring
specifically the effect of roughness on surface forces both with and without
hydrodynamic effects. The educational objective is to improve the relationship
between Tulane's chemical engineering department and the local oil and chemical
industry. Such an improved relationship will, (1) provide better employment
opportunities for our students; (2) provide increased financial support for our
department; (3) improve the engineering education provided to our students; and
(4) provide a valuable resource for supporting the local chemical engineering
community.