* 9702188
* CAREER:  Principles and Practices of Program Instumentation
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Steven Reiss, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 08/31/2001
* USD 205,000.00

The instrumentation and measurement of systems is vital for them to be
understood, debugged, tuned, refined, tested, validated, or made reliable. This
project will investigate the principles and practice of program instrumentation.
Principles include a theoretical understanding of the dynamic measurement and
observation of various structures in parallel, distributed, and sequential
systems, such as acyclic or cyclic graphs for representing parallel executions
and families of finite automata for tracking information about variable
accesses. The complexity of computing and analyzing such structures will be
explored, including tradeoffs between time, space, accuracy, and completeness.
The practice of instrumentation implements measurement techniques at a cost
acceptable to users, using on-line algorithms to dynamically decide what to do
and when it is best done and by fully exploiting the semantics of the problem at
hand. Techniques will be developed, especially for debugging and programming
tools, for problems whose best-known solutions are currently prohibitive because
of instrumentation costs. An arsenal of practical techniques usable in many
areas, all of which are based on theoretical underpinnings, will also be
developed. This research will result in a deeper understanding of the cost of
solving various types of instrumentation problems and an array of techniques for
their solution. This project will introduce undergraduates to research by
involving them in independent study seminars together with "project sets"
partially specified mini-research problems which require as much work in problem
formulation as solution. This project will escalate the undergraduate-outreach
effort at Brown. The tools this project will produce will be suitable for use by
students in their research projects.***