* 9702717
* CAREER: Design and Simulation Tools for Networked Control of Nonlinear Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2003
* Greg Walsh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2003
* USD 235,000.00

ECS-9702717 Walsh The objective of the research project is to create both
simulation and design tools for the control of nonlinear systems. The
educational objective is complementary, as it seeks to integrate the use of such
tools, in the form of design and laboratory experiences, into the undergraduate
and graduate curriculum where appropriate. The research will focus on two areas
which lack unified procedures, The first area centers on controllable nonlinear
systems with uncontrollable linearizations. Problems to be solved include path
planning, tracking, and regulation. The second area is aimed at an emerging
control system architecture in which the feedback loop is passed through a
network. Such systems contain both asynchronous discrete events as well as a
continuous nonlinear plant, and are best described as hybrid. Tools required
include accurate simulation environments and design methodologies for tracking
and regulation. Space-based robots, wheeled vehicles, underwater vehicles, and
underactuated satellites (satellites with a reduced number of thrusters) are
examples of controllable nonlinear systems with uncontrollable linearizations.
Established techniques fail to stabilize such systems due to their underlying
nonholonomic velocity constraints. A systematic procedure for solving the, path
planning, tracking, and regulation problems is presented. Such procedures depend
on the identification of a system with a normal form, where the problems are
solved generically. Solutions involve optimal control for path planning, time-
varying linear control about trajectories for tracking, and periodic forcing for
regulation. While the author's previous work solves many example systems like
the wheeled vehicles and some space-based robots, many important examples, for
example the underactuated satellite and robots reorienting objects by rolling
them between their finger tips, do not fit into the existing framework. The
project concentrates on expanding the framework so that systems s uch as those
mentioned above may be included in the generic theory. The second part of the
research proposal focuses on networked control, which has emerged as a cost-
effective architecture for large multiple-input, multiple-output control
systems. Networked control technology has been applied with great economic
benefit to automated manufacturing plants, process control, automotive control,
and building environmental control systems. The author is currently studying the
networked control of a blast furnace control system and a novel three-DOF
translational platform. These control systems are inherently hybrid,
consequently basic design and simulation tools are lacking. The project's
objective is to develop a simulation environment and design tools,
experimentally verified, which address this emerging industrial need.