* 9702762
* CAREER:  Molecular Engineering of Catalytic Surface         Chemistry Through First-Principles Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1997,10/31/2001
* Matthew Neurock, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 10/31/2001
* USD 310,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Title: Molecular Engineering of Catalytic Surface Chemistry
Through First-Principles Simulation Proposal Number: CTS-9702762 Principal
Investigator: Matthew Neurock Institution: University of Virginia,
Charlottesville Density functional theory (DFT), transition state theory (TST),
and Monte Carlo simulation (MC), are combined to study the mechanism of chemical
reactions on metal surfaces. In particular, this proposal is focused on the
synthesis of vinyl acetate on Au-promoted Pd catalyst. The reaction is of
relevance in the plastics industry. Some fundamental issues, such as the effects
of surface structure and adsorbed oxygen, are not completely understood. This
selective oxidation chemistry is analyzed in terms of metal cluster structure
and composition, adsorbate bonding, oxygen coverage and possible pathways.
Energetics of adsorption and energy barriers of intermediate formation are
calculated with DFT, intrinsic kinetics of the many possible steps are computed
from TST, and macroscopic kinetics are calculated from MC simulations. The
experimental validation of energetics and kinetics involves temperature-
programmed desorption at UHV and reaction both at UHV and ambient pressure
conditions, in work to be carried out by collaborators at DuPont. At the
educational level, the PI will strengthen the chemical engineering curriculum in
the area of computational chemistry. Two new courses in computational chemistry
for undergraduate and graduate students and a course in molecular modeling for
industry will be developed.