* 9702532
* CAREER:  Dynamics of Gas-Phase Persistent Organic Chemicals:  An Investigation of the Effect of Climate Using a         Controlled Chamber
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1997,08/04/1998
* Keri Hornbuckle, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 08/04/1998
* USD 110,250.00

9702532 Hornbuckle Deposition of persistent organic chemicals (POPS) from the
atmosphere to plant surfaces may control their fate and residence time. POPS,
which include polychlorinated biphenyls, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and
organochlorine pesticides have an affinity for plants due to the lipophilic
nature of the compounds and the waxy, lipid-like surfaces of leaves and needles.
Because of this affinity, plants may act as sinks for atmospheric POPS. Plants
may also act a temporary 'resting points' for long-range transport of the
compounds from warmer regions to cooler regions of the globe. Whether vapor-
phase POPs are taken up or released by plants is expected to depend on
characteristics of the compound, the plant, and the local climate.
Theoretically, it has been predicted that temperature and POP hydrophobicity
should dominate vapor exchange. In addition, field data for ambient levels of
POPs has indicated that relative humidity and plant stomatal behavior may also
play a role. Research objectives in this study are to quantify the effect of
local temperature on POP vapor-plant surface exchange; to quantify the
importance of relative humidity on POP vapor-plant surface exchange; to
determine to effect of UV radiation on sorption of POPs to plant surfaces.
Experiments will be performed under controlled environmental conditions in an
environmental chamber populated with Ficus benjamina, a common tree-like house
plant. Because of the size of the chamber and its ability to reproduce
environmental conditions, the study provides a link between traditional
laboratory concentrations as a function of the three climate surrogates. The
test chamber provides a unique facility for atmospheric simulation, air
pollution, cloud physics, and aerosol research studies. The effect of climate
surrogates on exchange of gas-phase persistent organic chemicals with plant
surfaces will be examined in this chamber. Climate surrogates include
temperature, relative humidity, and ultra violet radiation. Gas phase POPs will
be introduced from ambient air, in order to measure, model and predict the
dynamics at low concentrations, and introduced via a gas-stream generation
column. ***