* 9702589
* CAREER--Metalorganic Molecular Structure as a Template for  Anisotropic Thin Film Ceramics:  An Interdisciplinary       Approach to Materials Processing and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2003
* Paul Fuierer, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2003
* USD 377,795.00

9702589 Fuierer The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development project
is to advance the state-of-the-art and understanding of sol-gel chemistry routes
to functional ceramic thin films by investigating the effects of the molecular
structure of oligimers, derived from metalorganic precursors, on the ultimate
crystallographic structure (orientation) of ceramic films upon heat treatment.
Bismuth titanate will be used as the model ceramic material, due to its
intrinsic structural anisotropy and its useful ferroelectric and piezoelectric
properties. The experimental techniques employed will test the prediction that
the homocondensation of Ti-O-Ti-O type molecular species and their subsequent
deposition by spin coating on the surface of the substrate can lead to strongly-
axis oriented films due to the similarity in atomic bonding in the a-b plane of
crystalline bismuth titanate. These experiments will attempt to go beyond recent
studies that illustrate the effect of oligomer molecular structure on other
sintered microstructural features such as porosity and grain size. This will be
accomplished primarily by two main ideas: (1) by taking a somewhat unorthodox
approach of promoting homocondensation in mixed systems and allowing solutions
to age for long periods of time, and (2) utilizing a new experimental technique
of oxygen isotope nuclear magnetic resonance to determine the composition of the
oligimer backbone by analyzing the chemical environment of the oxygen. The
principal investigator intends to incorporate an increasing amount of chemical
principles into classroom instruction of both undergraduate- and graduate-level
materials courses. The principal investigator's long term career goals are to
become an expert in the area of solution processing of anisotropic ceramic
films, and to continuously strive toward effective teaching of the
multidisciplinary field of materials science and engineering. %%% Proof of this
phenomenon in sol-gel processing wi ll have significant implications by
providing a means of obtaining textured films of other technologically important
anisotropic materials without relying on special substrates for epitaxial
growth. In addition, the research will yield important information about the
kinetics of hydrolysis and condensation reactions in solution and
crystallization processes in chemical thin films. Thus, the project is expected
to contribute to the advance of improved materials for useful electronic,
optical, and magnetic devices. The project is also aimed at helping to bridge
the gap between chemistry and materials science and engineering by emphasizing
the multidisciplinary aspects of these disciplines in the classroom. ***