* 9702161
* Collaborative International Research: Investigation of      Structures, Structural Fabrics and Metamorphic Associations in Northern Victoria Land
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Christine Siddoway, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 07/31/1998
* USD 17,969.00

9702161 Siddoway Abstract This award allows a US investigator to join an Italian
Antarctic Program geological field team in northern Victoria Land, Antarctica.
The overall goal of the field program is to obtain detailed structural,
petrographic, isotopic, and geochronological information that bears on the
history of early Paleozoic magmatism in northern Victoria Land (NVL), and to
relate this information to plate convergence during the Ross Orogeny. The group
will test the hypothesis that high temperature-low pressure metamorphism in NVL
occurred within the regional contact metamorphic aureole of fundamentally arc-
related plutons, within a structural regime related to convergence. Detailed
structural studies by the PI are expected to help characterize the dynamic
setting in which the plutons were emplaced and correlate structural fabrics in
host rock with changes in pressure- temperature conditions of metamorphic
recrystallization in host rocks. The work will be used to verify the polarity of
the magmatic arc during plutonism and establish the relationships with early
Paleozoic plutons to the south. The results of this work will be used to infer
the configuration of AntarcticaOs early Paleozoic active margin in NVL, for
comparison with models developed in other parts of the Transantarctic Mountains.
Interpretations developed in the course of this work will be integrated with
tectonic and structural interpretations for other parts of the proto-Pacific
margin of Gondwana. Methods used in the study will include structural mapping,
structural and metamorphic petrology, and fluid inclusion analysis. The field
program in \centered on the Deep Freeze Range, with an additional possibility of
examining sites in the vicinity of the Lanterman Range. The specific
contribution supported by this award will be study and interpretation of the
relations between deformation, magmatic pulses, and high temperature-low
pressure metamorphic recrystallization.