* 9702752
* CAREER:  Control Through Molecular Design in Engineering:   Molecular Order and Function from Ionic Multilayers of      Liquid Crystal Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Paula Hammond, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2001
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract CTS-9702752 This Career project addresses a research and teaching
career plan based on the idea of molecular design and structure into basic
engineering principles and curricular. The molecular self-assembly, molecular
order and processing to ultimately control material properties is the focus of
the work described. Ionic multilayer assembly (also known layer-by-layer
assembly) is a new means of forming ultrathin organic films by the sequential
absorption of monolayers of polyions or bipolar organic molecules of alternating
positive and negative charge. This method has won favor over traditional
Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) techniques for forming films with complex supramolecular
architectures because the layer-by-layer techniques are simpler, considerably
inexpensive, and highly versatile. Unfortunately, this technique has been
limited thus far, because, unlike LB methods, there is no consistent means of
introducing molecular scale ordering within the layers of the adsorbed films. In
this project liquid crystalline polymers are used to introduce order in the
ionic multilayer assembly process. The ability to create films with a specific
desired molecular orientation opens the ionic multilayer technique to a broader
range of electrical, optical, and sensor applications. Furthermore, if switching
induced by an electrical or magnetic field is possible in such films, a number
of novel smart materials may result from this approach. The educational aspect
of the project includes the development of a new course in the chemical
engineering curriculum which addresses the role of intermolecular interactions
and self-assembly with respect to basic chemical engineering problems. Changes
in the teaching, approach and scope of an undergraduate polymer science
laboratory and a polymer synthesis course are also addressed with emphasis on
the issues of molecular scale phenomena and structure-processing-property
relationships. Finally, general community outreach and a specific program for
the men toring of undergraduate and graduate minority and women students is
included in the Career project.