* 9702081
* CAREER: Synthesis, Characterization and Catalytic Evaluation of Novel Dealuminated Zeolite-based Catalysts for the      Alkylation of i-Butane with 2-Butene
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Panagiotis Smirniotis, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 05/31/2002
* USD 310,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Title: Synthesis, Characterization and Catalytic Evaluation of
Novel Dealumination Zeolite-based Catalysts for the Alkylation of i-Butane with
2-Butene. Proposal Number: CTS-9702081 Principal Investigator: Panagiotis
Smirniotis Institution: Univ. of Cincinnati Dealuminated ZSM-12, a large-pore,
one-dimensional, high-silica, 12-member ring zeolite, will be studied for the
alkylation of i-butane with 2-butene. High stability is expected as a
consequence of low coking formation, and it is the goal of this research to
understand the coking mechanism and the zeolite features leading to stability.
Dealumination of structurally selected Al will be studied as a means to improve
anti-coking behavior. For this purpose, zeolite L, which contains long channels
connecting large cavities, will be utilized. Selective dealumination of Al at
channel-to-cavity connections will be effected by the dimer of 5-bromomethyl-m-
phthalic acid produced inside the zeolite cavity. The dimerization will be
initiated by a suitable radical initiator. Characterization of the zeolite will
involve X-ray diffraction, 27Al NMR to distinguish framework from non-framework
Al, SEM, infrared spectroscopy of adsorbed bases to determine Bronsted and Lewis
acidity, XPS to distinguish types of framework Al, ammonia TPD to measure their
acidity, and EXAFS to investigate Al coordination and location. The removal of
Al from channel-cavity intersections in zeolite L will be assessed with
cyclopentane isomerization. The coking mechanism will be studied by gravimetry
and by mass spectrometry of soluble coke, and the alkylation mechanisms will be
studied kinetically. The research is significant to the fuel industry and leads
to environmentally benign processes.