* 9702702
* CAREER: Multi-Variable Optimality-Guided Robust Adaptive    Control Design - A Game Theoretic Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Zigang Pan, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2001
* USD 210,000.00

ECS-9702702 Pan One of the most important current research directions in control
theory is the study of robust controller and filter designs for uncertain
dynamical systems. It is a challenge to obtain controllers for systems with
significant uncertainties, that would lead to achievement of good tracking and
disturbance attenuation. A realistic attempt to resolve this challenge calls for
an adaptive control design that would learn from the system output to identify
the underlying system and improve the control accuracy as learning progresses. A
prominent topic in adaptive control today is robust adaptive control, which
deals with the design of controllers that are robust to model uncertainties, and
insensitive to exogenous disturbances. There are three general approaches to
address the design and analysis of robust adaptive control systems: certainty-
equivalence based adaptive control design, nonlinear design based adaptive
control design, and worst-case adaptive control design. The third approach was
introduced very recently. The main motivation for this approach has been the
need to address the transient performance and system robustness of adaptive
control systems simultaneously in a unified framework. Identifying the
correspondence between the objectives of H( optimal control with those of robust
adaptive control, and the close relationship between H(optimal control and zero-
sum dynamic games, this approach poses the adaptive control problem as a
disturbance attenuation problem for nonlinear systems with imperfect state
measurements. A game-theoretic solution methodology of cost-to-come function has
been developed to cope with this general problem. In this proposal, we propose
to broaden the third approach identified above to a more general setting, which
we call "optimality-guided robust adaptive control design." It is motivated by
the established relationships between nonlinear H( optimal control, zero-sum
dynamic game, risk-sensitive optimal control, risk-neutral optimal co ntrol, and
stochastic dynamic game problems, and the similarity between their respective
solutions. These relationships suggest that the two most general problems, are
the risk-sensitive optimal control problem, and the stochastic dynamic game
problem. If we can develop a general theory of existence, uniqueness, and
characterization of a solution to the risk-sensitive optimal control problem,
then we can reconstruct the solution to the zero-sum dynamic game problem with
the large deviation limit, which in turn constitutes the solution to the
nonlinear H( optimal control problem. Also, we can reconstruct the solution to
the risk-neutral problem by taking the limit as the risk-sensitivity parameter
goes to zero. On the other hand, a general theory of existence, uniqueness, and
characterization of a solution to the stochastic dynamic game will offer a
design solution to the nonlinear H( optimal control problem, as well as a design
solution to the risk-neutral problem, as special cases. The significance and
relevance of these problems can be best illustrated by the immensely popular
active noise cancellation applications, where the underlying system may be
deterministic, stochastic, or mixed. These research effort will yield
fundamental advancement on the theoretical front for stochastic dynamic games
with imperfect state measurement. At the same time, they will yield novel robust
adaptive control designs that are capable of handling both deterministic (worst-
case) and stochastic disturbances. The direct impact of this research on the
practical applications lies in the immensely popular field of active noise
cancellation, by offering robust adaptive control laws that have superb
transient performance, and asymptotical tracking of any number of unmeasured
sinusoidal exogenous disturbance inputs of unknown frequency. On the education
side, the research development and course innovation will contribute to the
graduate curriculum, in terms of providing simple but comprehensive solutions to
si gnificant engineering problems ill control systems.