* 9702389
* CAREER: Application Performance Guarantees in High          Speed Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Sujata Banerjee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 06/30/2002
* USD 205,000.00

Rapid advances in computer communication technology will soon enable a global
information network that will have an unprecedented impact on our daily lives.
Two key issues will need to be addressed for this to be successful: integration
of services, and guarantees of service quality. High speed networks will carry
audio, video, and data traffic from many diverse applications; unlike
traditional networks, they will need to provide guarantees of Quality of Service
(QoS) to applications, as required. However, application-level QoS requirements
are best specified in terms meaningful to the application, while network level
QoS requirements are best specified in terms meaningful to the network. The
problem is to map between the two. This problem is further exacerbated by the
existence of multiple intermediate protocol layers between the application layer
and the network layer, as well as the specification of service quality using
different parameters at the various layers. Thus a key challenge in the
deployment of high speed networking systems is the understanding and development
of accurate QoS transformation algorithms that request the minimal network
resources to satisfy a specific application requirement. Without such an
integrated, holistic treatment of the QoS issues, application users will not see
the projected performance increases and may end up requesting more network
resources than necessary. This research project will address several fundamental
questions on application performance in high speed networks that provide QoS
guarantees, and study the relationship between network level QoS and application
level QoS in general. Results obtained by simulation and theoretical analysis
will be validated empirically. The education component of the career development
plan will include mentoring activities for women and minority graduate and
undergraduate students with the objective of encouraging them to pursue research
and higher education in the networking and communications area. Further, a new
course on QoS issues for applications will be developed with the first offering
as a research seminar. A final component of the education plan will be to
develop innovative laboratory exercises on wide area networking technologies to
enhance classroom understanding of concepts. WWW: http://www.pitt.edu/~sujata