* 9702123
* CAREER:  Structure/Property Relationships for Dendritic     Macromolecules Containing Stereogenic Centers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,10/05/1998
* Dominic McGrath, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/05/1998
* USD 130,000.00

9702123 McGrath Research: This CAREER award presents the design, synthesis, and
study of dendrimeric materials containing interior chiral moieties and the study
of the fundamental relationships between chirality and conformational order in
these materials. The primary goal of this research is to develop an
understanding of the effect that chirality has on the conformational order of
three-dimensional dendritic microstructures. The ultimate goal of this research
is the development of new materials for asymmetric catalysis and chiral
separations technologies. The initial phases of this research are a systematic
study of the structure/property relationships of a large family of dendrimers of
the same basic structure in an effort to elucidate the factors governing
conformational asymmetry and chiral microenvironments in this class of synthetic
macromolecules. The dendrimer systems proposed for study are based on
enantiomerically pure 1,2-diol linkages and benzyl aryl or alkyl aryl ethers.
These materials with asymmetrlc interior cavities and functional groups capable
of attractive interactions (hydrogen bonding) should be able to selectively
clathrate guests of a certain shape and functional group arrangement. Hence,
host-guest interactions between the dendrimers and small molecules will be
studied. These materials will then be tested for chiral discrimination in high
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and micellar electrokinetic capillary
chromatography (MECC). Selective encapsulation and guest binding will also be
the basis for the development of these materials as multi-site reactors for
asymmetric catalysis. Reaction rate acceleration will result from either (a)
hydrophobic binding of reactants in the dendrimer interior or (b) reaction at
transition metal catalytic centers anchored on the 1,2-diol linkages of the
dendrimer. Teaching: Fewer women than men embark on c areers in the physical
sciences. A woman's decision not to enter the sciences is rarely made at the
graduate, undergraduate, or even high school level. Research has shown that very
early social and cultural influences, rather than biological factors, steer
girls away from science, with a sharp disparity in attitude towards science
between boys and girls occurring between grades 4 and 8. It is proposed to
address this problem by developing an outreach program to local elementary
schools (grade 3 and 4) based upon providing encouragement of curiosity, hands
on scientific experiences, and positive male and female role models with the aim
of portraying science as an attractive activity/career opportunity for girls and
young women to pursue. It is hoped that this heightened interest in science will
help overcome the social, cultural, and curriculum factors which currently
contribute to girls' declining attitudes towards science through the junior high
years. %%% This research program will result in an understanding of the effect
of chirality on the onformation of dendritic macromolecules and a new paradi gm
for the design of chiral dendrimers which can provide asymmetric envir onments
to encapsulated guest molecules. In addition, a new generation of materials with
applications in chiral chromatographic separations and asymmetric catalysis will
be prepared. ***