* 9702277
* CAREER:  Influence of Unsteady Stretch on Premixed Flame    Kernel Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1997,10/31/2001
* William Roberts, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 10/31/2001
* USD 255,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9702277 This is study of the interactions of a spark-generated
flame kernel at various stages of growth with a single, well-defined eddy of
known velocity and length scale in order to identify the optimal hydrodynamic
flowfield for the fuel-air mixture in a modern internal combustion (IC) engine.
It is intended to identify which eddies are most beneficial and which are most
beneficial and which a re most destructive in terms of kernel growth for various
kinetics parameters such as equivalence ratio and Lewis number. It is known that
at low to moderate turbulence levels there is a marked increase in the burning
rate and in the flammability limits of the premixed reactants, but that this
reverses as turbulence intensity increases and the length scale of the eddies
become small compared to the reaction zone, since the eddies are now able to
locally quench the flamefront. Advanced laser diagnostics are used to measure
temperature, velocity field, and state of reaction. Hydroxyl and methylidine
radicals are detected to locate the reaction zone and to indicate the state of
the reaction; their absence indicates a quenched flamefront. Temperature is
measured by Rayleigh scattering and by seeded nitric-oxide planar laser-induced
fluorescence (PPLIF), while particle-image velocimetry (PIV) is used to measure
the two-dimensional velocity field and thereby determine the local,
instantaneous strain executed on the flame kernel by the local flowfield. In an
internal combustion engine, the spark generates a flame kernel that may transfer
its energy to the fuel-air mixture resulting in a vigorous, self-sustaining
flame front, or, alternatively, may be quenched (extinguished) by a combination
of hydrodynamic strain and curvature, collectively termed stretch. In the case
of localized extinction, the kernel may survive but exhibit a severe degradation
of ovepall combustion efficiency and in increase in pollutant emissions.
Perturbation of kernel growth rate is the major cause of cycle -to-cycle
variations in engines. Thus understanding of this phenomenon is the key to
engines that give smooth, efficient, and clear performance.