* 9702974
* CAREER:  Managing Schematic Heterogeneity in Database       Management Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Renee Miller, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/1999
* USD 77,369.00

Schematic heterogeneity arises when information that is represented as data
under one schema, is represented within the schema in another, for example as
relation or class names. Schematic heterogeneity is an important class of
heterogeneity that arises frequently in multimedia databases, semi-structured
data and in integrating legacy data for data warehousing applications.
Traditional query languages and view mechanisms are insufficient for reconciling
and translating data between schematically heterogeneous schemas. The goal of
this research project is to permit the cooperative use of schematically
heterogeneous schemas and the data structured under these schemas. The project
addresses the development of novel languages and techniques for: (1) the
transformation and integration of schematically heterogeneous schemas; (2) the
integrated querying of data from schematically heterogeneous schemas; and (3)
the efficient evaluation of queries over integrated views. The techniques are
analyzed for efficiency, correctness and completeness. In addition, the
techniques are implemented within a heterogeneous repository of medical data. An
evaluation of this implementation is used to refine and extend the results. The
educational component of this project aims to enhance undergraduate and graduate
participation in research, particularly among women and minority students. This
is accomplished through curriculum enhancement, expanding undergraduate research
opportunities and establishing academic enrichment programs for graduate
minority students.