* 9702521
* "CAREER:  The Stellar Phase Space and Abundance             Distributions of the Stars of the Milky Way"
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2003
* Steven Majewski, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 01/31/2003
* USD 454,991.00

Abstract - Majewski The research to be carried out involves the creation of the
deepest survey of positions, absolute proper motions, multi-color charged-
coupled-device (CCD) photometry, and spectroscopy for a complete, magnitude
limited survey of Galactic stars. The study builds upon the results from earlier
work in a single field at the North Galactic Pole (NGP) to assemble high quality
proper motions, photometric parallaxes, photometric abundances and radical
velocities as a means to explore the combined dimensional phase space and
metallicity distribution of stars in the Galactic halo, disk, and Intermediate
Population II thick disk. Among the discoveries of this earlier, high precision
proper motion survey at the NGP were: (1), the large scale height and local
normalization of the ubiquitous Intermediate Population II (IPII) thick disk
stars; (2), an apparently smooth kinematical gradient between the population I
disk and IPII field stars; and (3), a retrograde rotation for the Galactic halo
stars. The addition of spectroscopy data to the deep proper motions has
confirmed the additional discovery of a retrograde moving group of halo stars
4.5 kpc above the Galactic plane, and this result has allowed the elucidation of
this kinematical structure as just one of several large scale, stellar streams
in this part of the sky. The implications of these findings are: (1) the halo is
not a dynamically relaxed system, but rather seems to contain streams of
coherently moving debris from the break-up of stellar agglomerations, (2)
differences among halo survey results might be attributable to differences in
lines of sight, each characterized by local streaming motions rather than by
global descriptions, and (3) the bulk of the halo field star population appears
to be derived from the accretion of stellar systems, most likely Galactic
satellites. This conclusion has apparently been confirmed with the discovery of
the Sagittarius dwarf spheroidal galaxy, a Galactic satellit e in the process of
tidal disruption by the Milky Way. The aim is to carry out similar astrometric,
photometric and spectroscopic analyses in nine other fields that lie along two
orthogonal, meridional planes of the Galaxy. Photographic plates from the Kitt
Peak 4-m telescope will be scanned with the University of Virginia PDS
microdensitometer to construct stellar catalogues and for the measurement of
proper motions. Multifiber spectroscopy with the HYDRA system on the WIYN 3.5-m
telescope will provide the third dimension of velocity as well as spectroscopic
abundances. This survey, the deepest in situ study of field dwarf stars ever
carried out, will allow systematic probing of the thin disk, Intermediate
population II and halo without the selection biases that affect other types of
Galactic structure surveys. By mapping the halo phase space distribution along
the two meridional planes, it will be possible to (a) constrain the halo stream
angular correlation scale, by looking for similar structures in adjacent fields,
(b) measure the volume overfilling factor of streams (found to be ~3 in the NGP
field) in the halo, and c look for correlations between the field star streams
and Galactic satellites, globular clusters, and the alignment planes of these
objects. The research program involves extensive involvement of both
undergraduate and graduate students, who are involved, indeed critical, to all
phases of the astrometric, photometric and spectroscopic analysis. To increase
understanding Galactic structure and astrometric research that has been
conducted at the University of Virginia throughout its long history in these
endeavors, three additional efforts of educational outreach will be initiated
for the benefit of both University students and the general public. Each effort
centers on conversion of the McCormick Observatory to a unique, first class
educational facility: (1) New instrumentation for the historic 26" Clark
refractor telescope will provide a quick c onversion from eyepiece to CCD
observation, as a means to broaden the scope of both course- related and "Open
to the Public" night instruction with the astrometric telescope. The CCD will
increase the efficiency of telescope viewing by large groups of visitors,
provide the basis for new kinds of undergraduate laboratory exercises,
demonstrate modern methods in astronomy, allow classroom instruction via
computer display of live telescope images, and provide easier access to
telescope viewing for elderly, disabled or very young visitors. (2) The addition
of a teaching spectrograph will fill an important gap in the present astronomy
majors program. (3) Finally, we will take advantage of McCormick's long
tradition of astrometry to create a one of a kind museum of astronomical
measuring devices. On the order of 5,000 people per year will take advantage of
these improvements to the McCormick Observatory.