* 9702885
* Galois Representations and Modular Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Richard Taylor, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 06/30/2002
* USD 300,708.00

Taylor 9702885 This award provides funds for the principal investigator to
continue his research into the relationship between representations of Galois
groups and automorphic forms. There is, of course, an extensive conjectural
framework in this area (Langlands' conjectures, supplemented by other
conjectures such as Serre's conjecture and the Mazur-Tilouine conjecture). In a
sense there are two problems here. The first problem is attaching Galois
representations to modular forms and, and the second is attaching modular forms
to Galois representations. Until recently, most work, including the
investigator's, focused on the first problem. Taylor worked on constructing
Galois representations for Hilbert modular forms, genus 2 Siegel modular forms
and modular forms for GL(2) over an imaginary quadratic field. He made heavy use
of ``congruence techniques''. There are still fascinating open questions on this
problem, but the PI's present interest has now shifted to the second problem.
Until recently there was only really one isolated result on the second problem
--the Langlands-Tunnell theorem. The situation changed when Andrew Wiles
initiated, and he and the PI completed, a proof that a suitable l-adic lift of a
modular mod l representation was itself modular. Combined with the Langlands-
Tunnell theorem this proved the Shimura-Taniyama conjecture for semi-stable
elliptic curves and hence (by the Frey-Serre-Ribet argument) Fermat's Last
Theorem. Also using this work, Nick Shepherd-Barron and the PI have recently
managed to show that many mod 5 and mod 2 icosahedral representations are
modular. In the immediate future, the PI will look at extensions of these
arguments. One extension is to relax the conditions on the ramification of the
lift at l. Another direction to extend the argument to higher dimensional
representations and automorphic forms on unitary groups. In the medium term, the
PI will investigate whether or not this result can shed light on the Artin
conjecture for 2-dimensional odd ic osahedral representations. This project
falls into the general area of arithmetic geometry - a subject that blends two
of the oldest areas of mathematics: number theory and geometry. This combination
has proved extraordinarily fruitful - having recently solved problems that
withstood generations. Among its many consequences are new error correcting
codes. Such codes are essential for both modern computers (hard disks) and
compact disks.