* 9703712
* Strong Mixing Conditions for Random Sequences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Richard Bradley, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2000
* USD 60,000.00

9703712 Bradley Strong mixing conditions for random sequences and random fields
have been useful in modeling phenomena in the real world in which observations
that are ``far apart'' in time or location have only slight influence on each
other. In this research, several questions are studied in connection with
strongly mixing random sequences, and connections with random fields are
discussed briefly. Question 1 deals with a possible ``trichotomy'' for the
asymptotic behavior of the partial sums from a strictly stationary, strongly
mixing sequence of random variables taking their values in a Banach space.
Question 2 deals with the exact location of a part of the ``borderline'' of the
central limit theorem under the (Rosenblatt) strong mixing condition. Question 3
deals with the spectral density of random sequences under a certain strong
mixing condition. Question 4 deals with a possible connection (or lack of one)
between two strong mixing conditions; the relevance of this question to an old
conjecture of I.A. Ibragimov is discussed. In the real world, there are many
phenomena which appear to be ``weakly dependent,'' in the sense that
observations that are ``close'' in time or location may have considerable
influence on each other, while observations that are ``far apart'' in time or
location have only slight influence on each other. For example, the annual
unemployment rate for the year 1998 may have considerable influence on the
unemployment rates for the years 1999 and 2000, but will presumably have almost
no influence on the employment rate in, say, the year 2050. Similarly, the
fluctuations in the wind currents at a given location may be highly correlated
with the (wind current) fluctuations ten miles away, but perhaps have no
discernible correlation with the fluctuations 3000 miles away. For the modeling
of such phenomena, much attention has been devoted in probability theory to a
broad type of weak dependence known under the name ``stron g mixing
conditions.'' An understanding of ``structural'' properties of strong mixing
conditions can help in assessing their appropriateness for the modeling of a
given real world phenomenon, and ``laws of averages'' connected with such
conditions can provide the foundation for the statistical inference for the
given phenomenon. This research deals with several questions concerning both
``structural'' properties and ``laws of averages'' in connection with various
strong mixing conditions.