* 9703207
* CAREER:  Molecular Interfacial Engineering for Advanced     Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Paul Nealey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2002
* USD 310,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9703207 This Career project is an investigation of a variety of
material issues associated with the use of high resolution lithographic
processes (electron beam writing, extreme UV lithography, and X-ray lithography)
to fabricate structures with lateral dimensions less than 100nm. One issues is
the determination of the physical properties of thin films of polymers
(photoresist), and the diffusion behavior of solvents and other low molecular
weight agents in these films in order to develop a more fundamental
understanding of current photoresist processing and its limitations_ Another is
the development of new polymers for use in extreme UV and x-ray lithography.
Some of the work targets new strategies for micro- and nanofabrication that will
involve, for example, the use of patterned self-assembled monolayers and/or
multiple layer resist systems. A new manufacturing process will be investigated
for the efficient integration of dissimilar materials. The process relies on two
levels of self-assembly. At the molecular scale, functionalized self-assembled
monolayers (SAMS) control wetting and adhesion interactions of surfaces, At the
scale of chips, modules, or panels, fluidic self-assembly (enhanced by
predetermined interactions between surfaces covered with SAMS) delivers
structures of micron dimensions of one material (Si, for example) to as many as
10 million receptor sites on a substrate of another material (plastic, for
example). Fundamental studies of the interactions and frictional properties of
surfaces modified with SAMs will be made using a modified atomic force
microscope (AFM) in which 20 (m glass spheres are attached to the AFM tip. These
mesoscale studies will guide the macroscopic process development and will make
significant contributions to the field of tribology. The use of non-Fickian
diffusion of plasticizers in limited supply will be investigated as a strategy
to control the morphology and materials properties of glassy polymers,
specifically for opt ical applications. The investigators will fabricate and
test the cross-sectional area of transmission is defined by refractive index
gradients that correspond to gradients in plasticizer concentration. They will
also films fabricate flat diffraction gratings and flat lenses in glassy polymer
films using patterned SAMS, preferential wetting, and non-Fickian diffusion. In
addition to the optical applications, the proposed research will make
significant contributions to our knowledge of non-Fickian diffusion mechanisms
in glassy polymers. Through a State Grant of $340,000, the polymer laboratory in
the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Wisconsin has
recently been renovated with state-of-the-art equipment A unique opportunity
exists to develop a polymer laboratory course that emphasizes polymer synthesis
and characterization. The lab will be taught to seniors and first year graduate
students in two formats: 1) weekly labs and lab reports, and 2) semester long
group projects that are consistent with the teaching methodology of problem
based learning. This laboratory course will compliment a lecture course in
polymer science and technology. At the graduate level, a new course in the
physical chemistry of polymers will be introduced. These curriculum improvements
are synergistic with our educational and research initiatives to offer research
activities at the undergraduate level, to prepare and mentor graduate students
to perform innovative research in the field of polymers, and to unite the
polymer community on campus. The investigator will also develop a short course
to be offered during the summer primarily for scientists