* 9703044
* CAREER:  Simulating the Evolution of Advanced               Microstructure
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Yunzhi Wang, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/2001
* USD 218,000.00

9703044 Wang This is a CAREER grant to a new faculty member. In the research
component advanced simulation techniques will be developed and used to study the
formation and evolution of complex microstructures during thermal processing of
high- temperature oxide-based sensor materials, nanostructured ceramic
composites and titantium-based intermetallic alloys. The research should reveal
the fundamental mechanisms, morphology and kinetics of the microstructure
development; provide a means to predict microstructure formation during
processing; and suggest novel processing schedules to improve material
performance for a wide range of applications. The methodology to be used is the
field computational approach to nonlinear pattern dynamics. The proposed
research will form the basis of new courses at the undergraduate and graduate
level in which students can design alloys and see how microstructure evolves
during processing and how it determines materials properties. The course will be
embedded in world-wide web and CD-ROM technology. %%% This is a CAREER grant to
a new faculty member. In the research component advanced simulation techniques
will be developed and used to study the formation and evolution of complex
microstructures during thermal processing of high- temperature oxide-based
sensor materials, nanostructured ceramic composites and titantium-based
intermetallic alloys. The research should reveal the fundamental mechanisms,
morphology and kinetics of the microstructure development; provide a means to
predict microstructure formation during processing; and suggest novel processing
schedules to improve material performance for a wide range of applications. The
methodology to be used is the field computational approach to nonlinear pattern
dynamics. The proposed research will form the basis of new courses at the
undergraduate and graduate level in which students can design alloys and see how
microstructure evolves during processing and how it dete rmines materials
properties. The course will be embedded in world-wide web and CD-ROM technology.
***