* 9703789
* Mathematical Sciences:  Structure of Vector-Valued          Function Spaces and Non-Commutative Function Spaces
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Narcisse Randrianantoanina, Miami University
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 59,250.00

9703789 Randrianantoanina The proposer intends to focus on two lines of
research: (1) Banach space structures of C*-algebras and related spaces; (2)
studies of vector-valued function spaces. In (1), he will study some connections
between the two fields: Banach space theory and operator algebra theory. The
primary goal of this direction of research is to show that some classical
results from Banach space theory and harmonic analysis are still valid for the
non-commutative setting. One important direction is the investigation of
symmetric spaces of measurable operators associated with semi finite von Neumann
algebras. The basic permanence question is whether or not a given property can
be preserved from a given function space to its non commutative version. For
instance, the classification of (non commutative) spaces of finite type
(respectively of finite cotype) is not known; there is the question of which
spaces have the Radon-Nikodym properties associated with Riesz-subsets of a
given discrete group. Another direction is the study of non commutative Hardy
spaces associated with maximal finite subdiagonal algebras of finite von Neumann
algebras. For example, it is unknown if Szego's theorem from classical analysis
is valid for the general non commutative setting. It is still open if the
predual of such maximal subalgebras are of finite cotype. The same kind of
investigation will also be considered for non commutative Hardy spaces and the
non commutative disc algebras introduced by Popescu. Our knowledge of Banach
space structures of non commutative C*-algebras (despite some recent intensive
studies) is still less than satisfactory; the proposer also will tackle some of
the questions that arise naturally from the classical case. For instance, the
behavior of different classes of bounded operators on C*-algebras are far from
being well understood. Several intermediate results, such as factorizations of
absolutely summing operators and compactness of absolutely summing operators,
were already obtained, hinting that in general non commutative C*-algebras
should behave (in many ways) like their commutative counterparts. The main
motivation for this part is that certain problems related to these algebras
become more transparent when formulated in Banach space language. Part (2) can
be viewed as close connections between measure theory and Banach space theory.
Many questions remain unresolved on permanence properties preserved by Bochner
spaces. The proposer will concentrate on properties of spaces containing
classical function spaces, uniqueness of preduals, and strong regularity. The
purpose of this project is to improve the understanding of the connections
between different field of analysis: Banach space theory, harmonic analysis, and
operator algebra theory. C*-algebras turn out to be one of the most important
structures in mathematics. They have significant applications to other parts of
sciences (for examples, mathematical physics, geometry, quantum mechanics), so
it is important to view them from many different angles.