* 9703835
* Japan STA Program:  Dissecting the Molecular Mechanisms of  the Signal Transduction Pathway Leading to Ethylene         Dependent Transcription
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Susan Fujimoto, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 3,000.00

Fujimoto 9703835 This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency of
Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Susan Y. Fujimoto at the National
Institute of Bioscience and Human Technology, Tsukuba, Japan. Dr. Fujimoto will
work with Dr. Masaru Takagi, Senior Researcher in the Plant Molecular Biology
Laboratory, on a research project entitled, "Dissecting the Molecular Mechanisms
of the Signal Transduction Pathway Leading to Ethylene Dependent Transcription."
The goal of the proposed research is to identify molecular components of the
pathway leading from the perception of the plant hormone ethylene to a
physiological response. How this gas acts as an important growth regulator in
plants is not yet well understood. Elucidation of this pathway would not only
offer fundamental insights for basic science but would also provide a
significant impact to plant biotechnology. Using the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana, factors that are involved in the transmission of signals necessary to
initiate transcription of genes responsive to ethylene will be investigated.
Ethylene responsive genes have already been isolated from Arabidopsis and a
group of proteins termed AERBs (Arabidopsis Ethylene-Responsive Binding
proteins) that interact with these genes have been characterized. In the
proposed research, AERB gene expression will be analyzed and compared with
expressions in Arabidopsis mutants affected in their response to ethylene. In
addition, the possibility of protein modification and identification of factors
interacting with the AERBs in response to ethylene will be examined. By using
ethylene responsive genes in conjunction with known ethylene response mutants,
one can dissect and possibly order the genes comprising this important and
complex pathway. ***