* 9703451
* CAREER:  Benthic Boundary Mixing and Dissolved Oxygen       Transfer at the Sediment Water Interface in a Stratified    Lake
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Miki Hondzo, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John F. Foss
* 04/30/2000
* USD 159,859.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Number: CTS-9703451 Principal Investigator: Hondzo This is a
CAREER grant to study benthic boundary mixing within thermally stratified lakes.
Field measurements will be conducted in five freshwater lakes. Turbulent
properties of the benthic boundary layer will be investigated using a self-
contained microprofiler augmented with the acoustic Doppler velocimeter. The
internal wave characteristics within the lake basin will be measured with
thermistor chains. Several issues will be addressed such as: (1) The primary
mechanism for generating turbulence within the sloping boundary layer (2) The
magnitude of the up slope volume flux and associated cycling time scales within
the benthic boundary layer. (3) Determination of whether the turbulent boundary
layer thickness is determined by the turbulent entertainment or by the internal
wave characteristics near the sloping boundaries. and (4) Whether the vertical
eddy diffusivity within the benthic boundary layer can be correlated with the
dynamic stability (Lake Number) of the entire lake? Laboratory experiments will
focus on the details of the interfacial gas transfer mechanism at the sediment-
water interface. Near-bed liquid turbulence and dissolved oxygen (DO)
concentrations will be also be measured in a laboratory channel over a wide
range of Reynolds number, for a variety of bottom sediments. The determination
of DO microprofiles in conjunction with characterization of near-bed turbulence
will address a wide range of questions concerning the distribution of DO. The
research results will provide an opportunity to validate the existing conceptual
models, as well as enhance the development of new models which can improve our
ability to predict water quality and transport related parameters in lakes,
reservoirs, and coastal waters.