* 9703285
* Topics in Abstract Gambling Theory, Stochastic Games, and   Predictive Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,06/30/2001
* William Sudderth, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2001
* USD 72,000.00

9703285 Sudderth Basic research is proposed in four areas:(1)abstract gambling
theory, (2)two- person, zero-sum stochastic games, (3)strategic market games,
and (4)predictive inference in statistics. The first three areas all involve
agents controlling stochastic processes either alone or jointly. Abstract
gambling theory is a particular formulation of one-person stochastic control
theory, whereas two-person, zero-sum stochastic games have two controllers with
opposing interests. Strategic market games typically have many agents and are
used to model features of an economy such as price formation and loan markets.
In the fourth area, predictive inference, research is proposed on two criteria
that seem natural to require of any statistical prediction. Most of the proposed
research is on questions of how one or more individuals should act when faced by
a series of successive choices that must be made with considerable uncertainty
about their consequences. An example is the problem of how much of one's income
should be spent on current consumption and how much should be saved (or
invested) for the future. This problem, when formulated for a single individual,
fits into the framework of abstract gambling theory. If two individuals are in
direct competition for resources, the problem can be viewed as a two-person
stochastic game. Finally, if the problem involves all the individuals in a large
economy, it can be viewed as a many-person, strategic market game in which the
individuals as a group determine, or at least influence, prices and interest
rates. If a central bank is added to the game as another player that has the
power to set interest rates, the question arises as to how the bank should set
interest rates so as to minimize inflation or improve the general welfare. This
is likely to be a difficult problem for our models just as it is in the real
world.