* 9703725
* Multi-Objective Reliability-Based Optimum Design and        Upgrading of Seismic-Resistant RC Structures for Cost-      Effectiveness
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2000
* Franklin Cheng, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* John Scalzi
* 04/30/2000
* USD 309,995.00

This project will develop a systematic approach to integrating optimization
algorithms, seismic reliability engineering and scio-economics for determination
of target reliabilities and formulation of cost-effectiveness design and
upgrading of earthquake-resistant reinforced concrete structures. Cooperative
research will be carried out at the University of Missouri-Rolla (UMR) and the
University of California, Irvine (UCI). The following tasks will be conducted at
UCI. (1) Approach for determination of optimal target reliability to revise and
extend a platform for the systematic integration of the technical and scio-
economic aspects of earthquake engineering: (2) Appraisal of current seismic
criteria to examine the cost-effectiveness of specific existing criteria for
earthquake-resistant design from the standpoint of minimum expected life-cycle
cost; and (3) Critical examination and development of cost models to review and
examine the available scio-economic models and information, including
calibration and validation with recent earthquake damage data, and develop new
or revised models for the proposal of reliability-based optimum design and
upgrading of seismic resistant structures. At UMR the following five tasks will
be considered. (1) Development of multi-objective optimization with fuzzy logic
and genetic algorithm for target reliability constraints; (2) Development of
computer program with building code requirements such as UBC 1994 for optimum
design and upgrading of reinforced concrete structures; (3) Numerical studies of
typical low-rise and high-rise office and apartment buildings for various
seismic zones and target reliabilities; (4) Damage control of optimal-designed
structures through nonlinear analysis; and (5) Assessment of design building
code requirements and recommendations. Through collaboration and integration the
joint effort is expected to establish a systematic procedure for determining
optimal target reliability or acceptable risk for the design or upgrading of a
specific structure or class of structures; (2) advance optimization technique
with multi-objective function, robust and global convergence, target reliability
as well as minimum expected life-cycle costs; and (3) make recommendation of
optimal building code requirements to the professional community and building
code writers.