* 9703307
* CAREER/EPSCoR:  Cooperative Agents for Conceptual           Search and Browsing of World Wide Web Resources
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2002
* Susan Gauch, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2002
* USD 208,095.00

The goals of this project are four-fold: (1) to investigate ways to support
distributed searching agents for the Web; (2) to evaluate the effectiveness of
ontology-based Web browsing agents; (3) to study the use of of visualization
agents for the Web; and (4) to keep a record of changes to the ontology to study
how information changes on the Web. This approach has the following advantages:
First, distributing the search process makes more equitable use of computing and
network resources and allows search agents to be customized to reflect local
interests and preferences. Second, an ontology-based browsing agent allows for
more serendipitous access to Web resources. Unlike the current browsing
structures (e.g., Yahoo), these browsing agents associate appropriate resources
with each concept automatically. The ontology may adapt over time at individual
sites, allowing the browsing structure to evolve as the Web itself evolves.
Third, the ability to visualize large portions of the Web in a more abstract way
allows users to quickly get an impression of what type of information is
available. Fourth, by keeping a history of changes to the local ontologies, the
ebb and flow of the importance of concepts locally and globally can be
presented. Finally, undergraduate and graduate students are being exposed to a
truly interdisciplinary research through their involvement in a long term
project that combines expertise from several fields, primarily computer
graphics, artificial intelligence, distributed processing and information
science. The World Wide Web (WWW) offers the promise of unlimited access to
electronic information. However currently, the reality is electronic access to
unlimited anarchy. This project is addressing the use of conceptual ontologies
to bring order to the chaos.