* 9703392
* CAREER:  Vibrational-State Selected Studies of Gas-Surface  Reactions: Strategies for Chemical Control of Gas-Surface   Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Arthur Utz, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 08/31/2001
* USD 344,800.00

In this CAREER project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Arthur Utz of Tufts University will use supersonic
molecular-beam techniques, infrared laser excitation of gas-phase reagents, and
ultrahigh vacuum surface characterization to elucidate the role of vibrational
energy, both alone and in combination with translational energy, in promoting
the reactivity of gas-phase molecules incident on a solid surface. Experiments
will probe the dissociative chemisorption of methane on a Ni(111) surface. The
educational goal of this project is to stress the importance of active learning.
For chemistry majors this will be accomplished through student participation in
original research, providing a hands-on experience that should lead to a deeper
and more lasting understanding of important concepts and skills. Cooperative
learning methods and open-ended laboratories incorporated into the curriculum
should produce a similar result for all the students enrolled in chemistry
courses. Other educational methods, such as public information forums targeted
at the non-scientist, will help convey the importance of chemistry outside of
the classroom. Comparing the reactivity of methane excited with different
amounts of vibrational energy will identify the nuclear motions most effective
at promoting chemical reaction and will help explain the molecular basis for the
dissociation of methane following adsorption on an ordered metal surface. These
results have practical importance in understanding materials deposition,
semiconductor device fabrication, and heterogeneous catalysis processes used in
the chemical industry, and will help understand how to improve the yields of
desired products and reduce the levels of unwanted byproducts. The educational
component of this work should increase the level of understanding of chemistry
for both specialists and the general public and demonstrate the effectiveness of
such approaches to scientists in other fields.