* 9703610
* Mathematical Sciences: Streghtening the Linkage Between the Sciences and Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2000
* Norman Metzger, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 04/30/2000
* USD 525,000.00

The National Research Council will examine means to strengthen linkages between
mathematics and the natural, behavioral, and engineering sciences, thereby
supporting the continuing productivity and quality of the research enterprise in
a time of constrained resources. Toward that end, a committee will be formed to
examine mechanisms for enriching the dialogue between the fields, with the
principal efforts of the committee being to suggest what are likely to be the
most effective mechanisms for collaboration, and to implement them through the
Internet, widely circulated reports, and other dissemination activities, such as
campus workshops convened by committee members. The committee will also examine
implications for graduate education in the sciences and mathematics, and suggest
changes in graduate training intended to reinforce efforts to strengthen the
dialogue among the sciences. Funding for this activity will be provided by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities, and also by DARPA. Committee activities will include several
meetings, two workshops, and an examination at doctorate-granting institutions
of the role of graduate education in fostering linkages of science and
mathematics. For further information, please contact: Norman Metzger Executive
Director Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications National
Research Council 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20418
202/334-2154 (fax) NMETZGER@NAS.EDU http://www2.nas.edu/cpsma/