* 9703475
* Workshop on Visual Cognition and Decision-Making in the     Spatial Domain to be held in the Spring of 1997 in          Solomons, Maryland
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Michael Marefat, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/1999
* USD 34,337.00

The primary purpose of this workshop is to create a broad research summary and
planning report on the topic of visual cognition to guide research in the
interdisciplinary field. Visual cognition integrates visual perception with
higher level domain knowledge, and serves as the interface to high-level
reasoning, planning, communication, learning, and other cognitive abilities.
Many diverse, practical areas, such as automated manufacturing and robotics,
mechanical design, transportation planning, education, and the representation
and storage of spatial information stand to benefit from research in visual
cognition. A fuller understanding of higher-level cognitive processes and their
development may hinge on an understanding of their relation to perception. There
is already a body of relevant work in computer science on these issues,
categorized variously as diagrammatic reasoning, qualitative physical reasoning,
geometric reasoning, and the formal logic of spatial reasoning, and there have
been other meetings on visual cognition. But the field is of necessity strongly
interdisciplinary (the three workshop organizers come from psychology, computer
science, and electrical engineering, for example), so this meeting will attempt
to be more comprehensive and integrative in nature, in order to accomplish its
stated purpose.