* 9703732
* Acquisition of a SQUID Magnetometer
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1998
* Peter Schiffer, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1998
* USD 87,995.00

9703732 Schiffer This award provides partial support for a SQUID magnetometer to
be located on the campus of the University of Notre Dame, where no equivalent
device currently exists. Such a magnetometer can measure the magnetization of
samples as a function of temperature and magnetic field. The proposed instrument
is extremely sensitive and therefore is appropriate for measuring both bulk and
thin film samples. Its operation is almost completely computer-controlled, so
that it is capable of a high throughput of samples, and the operating costs are
rather low. Several research groups at Notre Dame and one at Western Michigan
University will be the primary users of this magnetometer. In each case, the
measurement capabilities of the magnetometer will greatly enhance currently
existing research and make new experiments possible. The research areas are
quite diverse, including: Intermetallic cluster compounds, high temperature
superconductivity, metalloporphyrim chemistry, colossal magnetoresistance
materials, geometrically frustrated magnets, and diluted magnetic semiconductors
(including thin films and superlattices). This instrument will truly be used in
an interdisciplinary fashion since the above research involves groups in three
different departments. Several other research groups on the Notre Dame campus
also have occasional use for such a magnetometer and will be given access. %%%
This award provides partial support for a SQUID magnetometer to be located on
the campus of the University of Notre Dame, where no equivalent device currently
exists. Such a magnetometer can measure the magnetization of samples as a
function of temperature and magnetic field. The proposed instrument is extremely
sensitive and therefore is appropriate for measuring both bulk and thin film
samples. Its operation is almost completely computer-controlled, so that it is
capable of a high throughput of samples, and the operating costs are rather low.
Several research gr oups at Notre Dame and one at Western Michigan University
will be the primary users of this magnetometer. In each case, the measurement
capabilities of the magnetometer will greatly enhance currently existing
research and make new experiments possible. The research areas are quite
diverse, including: Intermetallic cluster compounds, high temperature
superconductivity, metalloporphyrim chemistry, colossal magnetoresistance
materials, geometrically frustrated magnets, and diluted magnetic semiconductors
(including thin films and superlattices). This instrument will truly be used in
an interdisciplinary fashion since the above research involves groups in three
different departments. Several other research groups on the Notre Dame campus
also have occasional use for such a magnetometer and will be given access. ***