* 9703773
* Log Domain Filtering For Low-Voltage High-Frequency         Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Douglas Frey, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2000
* USD 168,000.00

The wireless and high speed data communications industry is driven by the
ability to achieve high levels of integration in electronics. The ever
increasing circuit complexity and demands to reduce power consumption have
pushed available technology to its limits. These limits have been acceptable in
the case of the circuitry needed to realize the digital signal processing
functions, but these same limits are not at the threshold of compromising the
performance of the necessary analog signal processing circuitry which must be
exist at the front end of most systems. The research here involves the
development of a new concept in the design of this analog circuitry that allows
very low voltage operation of high frequency circuits. The "Log Domain" filters
studied here permit the development of next generation electronics that will
operate using less power, which translates, for example, to fewer batteries in
portable equipment. Log Domain, and more generically Exponential State Space
(ESS), filters are the result of a new paradigm in linear filter synthesis.
Specifically, the nonlinearity of the transistors which comprise the active
circuitry is designed explicitly into the circuit formulation. The investigators
are studying the mathematics of this design approach more fully so as to improve
our understanding of these circuits. This research effort explores the effects
of transistor parasitics, such a finite beta, Early effect, and bulk resistance,
on Log Domain filter performance. In addition, the state space mappings used to
generate the design equations for these filters are being studied to generalize
the formulation to include both class A and class AB filters. Results on noise
and distortion performance of these filters is also being examined. Finally, the
practical performance of these filters is being investigated using a test IC
fabricated by Analog Devices, Inc.