* 9703466
* CAREER:  Model Systems for Flavoenzyme Activity. Recognition and Catalysis within Sol-Gel Matrices
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Vincent Rotello, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 04/30/2001
* USD 240,000.00

Professor Rotello's research focuses on three objectives: (1) incorporating
flavin derivatives into transparent, silica-based, sol-gel matrices; (2)
exploiting the electronic spectroscopy of flavins to probe sol-gel
microenvironments; and (3) exploring the thermal redox and photocatalytic
chemistry of bound flavins. Spectral properties of the incorporated flavins are
correlated with viscoelastic measurements of the gel to identify changes in the
flavin microenvironment during gelation and drying. The electrochemical and
spectroelectrochemical behavior of the flavin incorporated in the matrix is
compared with that in fluid solution to ascertain matrix induced changes in
redox potential, while medium effects on redox activity are explored through
stoichiometric oxidations of representative thiols and other biologically
important functional groups. Educational activities include developing a
molecular modeling component for large organic chemistry courses, continuing an
outreach program designed to enhance high school students' interest in pursuing
undergraduate degrees in the physical sciences, and mentoring undergraduate
physical science majors in an integrated program designed to sustain and promote
their interest in the physical sciences. With this CAREER award, the Organic
Dynamics Program supports the research and educational activities of Professor
Vincent Rotello of the Chemistry Department at the University of Massachusetts.
Professor Rotello explores the incorporation of reactive molecules into glass-
like environments, essentially forming artificial enzymes wherein the matrix
plays the role ordinarily taken on by the amino acid backbone of a natural
enzyme and the reactive molecule serves as the active site of the enzyme. These
artificial enzyme systems offer the opportunity to probe various features of the
processes effected by the natural enzymes and may also lead to the discovery of
unique reaction chemistry distinct from that of the enzymes. Professor Rotello's
educational activities include the development and integration into
undergraduate organic chemistry courses of computer-assisted investigations of
molecular structure. Through outreach programs, Professor Rotello encourages
high school students to major in the physical sciences, and, once they are in
college, he enhances and sustains the interest of undergraduate physical science
majors through an integrated program of faculty seminars, field trips and
interactive laboratory experiences.