* 9703390
* CAREER:  Algorithms and Tools for Fault Tolerance and       Migration in Distributed Computing Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* James Plank, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 07/31/2001
* USD 205,000.00

This research project focuses on two important areas in tolerating resource
dynamicism: architecture- independent checkpointing (AIC) and primitives for
high availability. Architecture-independent checkpointing is the ability to save
the execution state of a program in a machine independent manner so that it may
be restored on a different processing platform. This could be on a different
machine, or for a parallel program, a different parallel processing environment.
The PI is attacking AIC from different angles. These are applicationspecific AIC
in ScaLAPACK, semi-transparent to transparent AIC for C and Fortran programs,
AIC of Java applications, and AIC of HighPerformance Fortran applications. The
result will be a collection of methods for and implementations of AIC for a
variety of widely used computing tools. The second portion of this research
project is to design and implement primitives for high availability in three
currently popular tools for distributed computing: ScaLAPACK, MPI, and Java.
Currently, each is limited in its support. Occurrences such as failures,
processor revocation and subsequent availability, network partitions, and
planned shutdowns are not accommodated. The PI plans to address these
deficiencies. The result will be more robust tools for distributed computing,
plus methodologies that may be incorporated into the design of future tools.