* 9703961
* CPMSA -- TEAMS - Teachers Emphasizing Achievement in Mathematics and Science
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Linda Abbott, Springfield Public Schools
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/2003
* USD 2,641,684.00

PI: Peter Negroni TEAMS (Teachers Emphasizing Achievement in Mathematics and
Science) is an integrated, research based and systemic five year plan designed
by the Springfield (MA) Public Schools to increase the number of minority
students enrolling in and successfully completing precollege courses which will
prepare them to pursue undergraduate degree programs in the sciences,
engineering and mathematics. The project objectives have been developed to meet
this primary goal. 1 . To increase each year and by the end of the five year
project to increase by a factor of three the number of minority students who
successfully complete Algebra in the 9th grade; 2. To increase each year and by
the end of the five year project period to increase by a factor of two the
number of minority students taking advanced science, mathematics and technology
course work, including honors and advanced placement courses; 3. To increase the
number and percent of minority students electing to enroll in the High School of
Science and Technology by 5% per year for each of the five project years; 4. To
begin tracking the number of students electing to major in SMET courses of study
beyond high school with the first project year as baseline data and to increase
the number each subsequent year; 5. By the end of the five year project period,
to increase the number of minority group teachers in mathematics, science and
technology; 6. To reduce the academic achievement gaps between minority and non-
minority students in science and math by 5% per year for five years (with a
total reduction of 25% by the end of the five year project period); 7. For each
project year, to improve the instructional methods of math and science teachers
who receive training; and 8. To develop SMET pac kets of math/science
activities. The TEAMS strategy complements the district's dual philosophy of
increasing minority college enrollment and increasing the number of students
excelling in math, science and technology. TEAMS will involve all 42 Springfield
schools and will capitalize on the strong partnerships established by the
Springfield Public Schools with the business, higher education, social services
and minority neighborhood communities. Working with faculty from nearby
Hampshire College and the Five College Partnership (Amherst, Mt. Holyoke, Smith,
Hampshire and U/Mass Amherst) , major project activities will involve: Upgrading
teacher knowledge and skills in summer workshops and with continuous support
throughout the year; Working with students to develop their own science and math
projects which they will conduct in the manner of authentic researchers;
Providing mentors, speakers and field trips to encourage more minority students
to enter math and science career fields; Establishing neighborhood Math/Science
Education Centers to assist all students to be successful in their Disseminating
summer math/science booklets to assist all students to be successful in these
courses and to courses by offering tutoring, help with homework and SAT
Preparation; reinforce what has been learned during the previous school year as
well as prepare for the upcoming year; Instituting Math/Science Expositions
where students will present the results of their extended projects. This will be
City-wide and follow a format of authentic research presentations; Placing
advertisements/PSA's on local television stations to showcase what students are
doing in math and science and featuring people employed in careers requiring
math and science; Exposing students to real-world math and science with projects
at local college laboratories and exposure to career options in SMET fiel ds:
Increasing parental involvement by assisting with summer projects/activities,
increasing attendance at the Expositions and attendance at Family Math and
Science nights; Educating administrators and counselors to encourage and assist
minority students in participating in higher level math and science courses and
providing the necessary help in enrolling in college in SMET fields; and
Providing a summer experience for students at the end of Grade 5 and Grade 8.