* 9703217
* CISE Research Infrastructure:  A Facility for Cross         Disciplinary Research on Sensorimotor Development in Humans and Machine
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2004
* Andrew Barto, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/2004
* USD 1,019,018.00

CDA-9703217 Grupen, Roderic A. University of Massachusetts A Facility for Cross
Disciplinary Research on Sensorimotor Development in Humans and Machines This
award is for supporting research activities in Computer Science and Psychology
at UMass in assembling an infrastructure for experimental work on the
development of conceptual structure from sensorimotor activity. An
interactionist theory is advanced in which the origin of knowledge is
interactive behavior in an environment. By this account, the nature of the
environment and the agent's native resources (sensors, effectors, and control)
lead directly to appropriate conceptual structures in natural and artificial
systems. The central claim of this research is that the first task facing an
intelligent, embodied agent is coordinated sensory and motor interaction with
its environment and that this task leads to policies and abstractions that
influence the subsequent acquisition of higher cognitive abilities. An
interdisciplinary team specializing in robotics, cognitive development, and
motor development, learning, planning and language lead the effort. The
infrastructure incorporates robot hands and arms, binocular vision, binaural
audition, haptic and kinesthetic information in a common framework to provide a
rich sensory and motor encoding of interaction with the world. In addition to
the robotics facilities, the infrastructure includes tools for gathering
precise, quantitative observations of postures and rates of movement in human
subjects. These facilities are designed to support analogs of nontrivial human
processes so that computational models of development may be compared to data
from infant subjects.