* 9703299
* PECASE:  Mechanical Function of Residual Stresses in Anulus Fibrosus
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Lori Setton, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2002
* USD 521,100.00

9703299 Setton Cartilaginous tissues, such as the intervertebral disc, articular
cartilage and meniscus, have a limited blood supply and low cell density and so
are particularly susceptible to degeneration induced by aging and daily wear.
Current treatment options for degenerating tissues include fusion of the joint
to prevent further motion, or replacement of the joint with an artificial
prosthetic. These treatments are limited in their effectiveness, however, and
are appropriate only for repair of end-stage disease. There is a great need for
new methods of restoring the mechanical function in these cartilaginous tissues.
Our long- term interest is in developing a tissue-engineered approach to
controlling function in the intervertebral disc with a focus on inhibiting or
reversing progressive degeneration. In this 4-year plan, we propose a
comprehensive research activity and complementary educational program focused on
biomechanics and tissue engineering with application to the intervertebral disc.
Our research plan is focused on studies of a mechano-chemical coupling mechanism
in the intervertebral disc which influences tissue function through biochemical
composition. This coupling mechanism gives rise to swelling-induced residual
stress and strain fields in the anulus fibrosus of the intervertebral disc which
may be important in contributing to the load-bearing functions of the
intervertebral disc. The primary objective of this research plan is to determine
the function of these residual stress and strain fields in the anulus fibrosus,
as well as in synthetic biomaterials with potential for disc repair. The
motivating hypothesis is that these residual stresses and strains significantly
contribute to the mechanical function of the intervertebral disc by improving
its ability to provide for compressive load-bearing in the spine. A set of
design criteria based on residual stresses, residual strains, and compressive
behavior will be defined for the anulus fibrosus, and used to engineer a novel
biomaterial for tissue repair in the intervertebral disc. The proposed research
plan is organized about four specific aims. First, new experimental methods will
be developed to quantify the residual strain fields in the native anulus
fibrosus. Second, theoretical model advancements will be pursued to calculate
the residual stress fields in the native anulus fibrosus. Third, experiments
will be performed to directly test the hypothesis that residual stresses and
strains modify the compressive load-bearing behavior of the anulus fibrosus.
Fourth, these methods will be applied to evaluate synthetic biomaterials
supplied through industrial collaborations for their utility in intervertebral
disc repair. Teams of industrial and academic collaborators will work together
to develop and evaluate new biomaterials for restoring mechanical function in
the intervertebral disc. A complementary educational plan in biomechanics and
tissue engineering has been designed for students at the high school,
undergraduate and graduate levels. First, an internship program will be
organized for second-year undergraduate students from underrepresented minority
backgrounds. The broad objective of this aim is to maintain interest in a subset
of students who suffer from low retention rates in the undergraduate engineering
education. Second, the undergraduate and graduate engineering curriculum will be
revised to expand course offerings in biomechanics. The broad objective of this
aim is to provide a direct channel for incorporating applied research in
educational programs at the undergraduate and graduate level. Third, a new
hands-on biomechanics laboratory will be developed for high school students as
part of the Women in Engineering Outreach Program at Duke. The broad objective
of this aim is to provide female high school students with a problem- solving
and confidence-building experience in engineering, and expose them to female
faculty and engineering graduate students in leadership roles. The integration
of these research and education plans is expected to promote partnerships for
the transfer of engineering research to the industrial sector, to increase the
numbers of underrepresented minorities and women in engineering, to better
prepare these students for achieving excellence in engineering in an academic or
industrial setting, and to expose a broad base of students to the excitement of
discovery and learning that is characteristic of research in engineering. ***