* 9703311
* CAREER:  Conjugated Ionomers:  Synthesis, Self-Doping, and  New Device Architectures
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Mark Lonergan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 08/31/2002
* USD 352,088.00

9703311 Lonergan The research program in this CAREER award targets the
development of a new concept in conjugated polymer interfaces: the use of
conjugated ionomers to form stable interfaces between dissimilarly doped
conjugated polymers. The realization of this concept will open a new avenue in
the study of conjugated polymer interfaces. An avenue that has great promise for
the fundamental study ofthe electronics of conjugated polymers at interfaces and
that may lead to a number of exciting new device technologies. The research
program has three major elements: (1) a synthetic effort to develop ring-opening
polymerization techniques for the synthesis of conjugated ionomers with a
controlled density of ionizable functionalities, (2) the development of
innovative doping methodologies for the preparation of truly self-doped polymers
and for the preparation of multilayer structures in which each layer has
different doping characteristics, and (3) the fundamental study of interfaces
between differentially doped conjugated polymenrs, such as the polymeric pn
junction, to test traditional models of current flow and depletion at
semiconductor interfaces. In this CAREER award, activities in support of
chemical education at a variety levels are also detailded. At the undergraduate
level, a program of implementing tested innovations into the general chemistry
curriculum at the University of Oregon is described; these include an emphasis
on the concepts of learning through inquiry and of learning from peers. The goal
is to better involve students in their own education and go beyond the facts of
science to teach how science is done. On the graduate level, the projects works
toward improving Oregon's ability to better meet the educational and career
goals of individual students while maintaining the scientific rigor and high
standards befitting an Advanced degree in chemistry. %%% The primary outcomes of
this work will be: (1) self-doped polymers where the leve l of injected charge
is precisely balanced by the density of covalently bound ionic centers, (2) a
general approach to all polymeric pn junctions and other device structures
involving contacted differentially doped conjugated polymers, (3) a systematic
study of depletion in conjugated polymers, and (4) a clearer picture of the
promise for conjugated polymers in semiconductor device applications. ***