* 9703319
* CAREER: Optimizing the Selection of Added Capacity Trans-   portation Infrastructure Improvements
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2003
* Debbie Niemeier, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Heller
* 06/30/2003
* USD 299,500.00

Abstract Proposal: CMS 97-03319 PI: Debbie A. Niemeier, U. California at Davis
"Career: Optimizing the Selection of Added Capacity Transportation
Infrastructure Improvements " The increasing complexity of transportation
systems demands that engineers provide theoretical guidance on the issue of
program-specific resource allocation. Program-specific models in use seek to
optimize resources within an engineering-based funding category without linkage
to other funding categories. This research will address this theoretical gap and
will provide the necessary framework to optimize future infrastructure
investments in such a way that the overall transportation system productivity,
including both longevity and performance, is enhanced. Specific objectives of
the workplan include to: 1) develop a new theoretical optimization model to
dynamically allocate funds between transportation infrastructure programs; 2)
specify and evaluate an empirical model for validation; 3) develop new
performance measures that relate funding allocation to performance; and 4)
develop new guidelines to better link infrastructure funding policies and system
performance optimization. Educational opportunities will be enhanced by
including opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate researchers, and by
directly utilizing the results in undergraduate and graduate transportation
courses. The new theoretical model will allow transportation agencies to work
within a framework that optimizes total infrastructure performance. The
theoretical and empirical models will be used to develop new policy guidelines
for 1) assessing the amount of funding required to maintain a specified level of
total system performance, 2) optimizing resource allocations among spending
programs, and 3) to assist in the development of appropriate data bases to
monitor long-term infrastructure performance. These results will play a crucial
role in advancing the concept of evaluating and maintaining tota l
infrastructure system productivity as opposed to concentrating on discrete
infrastructure performance. ***