* 9703472
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research:  Telecommunications   and the Future of Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1997
* David Tebaldi, Massachusetts Foundation for the Humanities
* Fixed Amount Award
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 12/31/1997
* USD 15,000.00

The Massachusetts Foundation for the Humanities and three institutional partners
are co-sponsoring a Pilot Citizens' Panel on `Telecommunications & the Future of
Democracy` at Tufts University in April 1997. Based on the `consensus
conference` process pioneered in Europe, a Citizens' Panel provides a context
for non-experts to deliberate effectively on issues of public policy that are
both technically complex and socially controversial. Substantively, the goal is
to offer non-expert citizens an opportunity to develop and publicize informed
judgments on emerging telecommunications technologies and policies that promise
to profoundly affect the future character of the American society and politics.
Procedurally, the goal is to demonstrate that: (a) notwithstanding greater
socioeconomic and cultural diversity in the US, non-expect Americans can
deliberate as successfully as their European counterparts; and (b) the process
can be easily replicated and incorporated into the public policy-making process.
This project is exploratory and high risk in several respects. For example,
while experience has shown that a consensus conference works effectively within
relatively small, homogeneous populations such as Denmark's', there is no
guarantee that it can work within a much larger and more diverse population. The
urgency of the project derives from the opportunity to harness the talents of 12
highly motivated student volunteers from the Education for Public Inquiry and
International Citizenship (EPIIC) program at Tufts University. The key public
forum will be held at Tufts in early April in the context of a much larger
conference on the Future of Democracy, scheduled for April 4-7, 1997 and also
being organized by EPIIC. Dissemination of project results will occur by reports
and presentations to media, interest groups, and government agencies