* 9703750
* New Neural Architectures Based on Fuzzy Models
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Ronald Yager, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/2001
* USD 263,656.00

Hybrid neural-fuzzy modeling is an important technology for the development of
intelligent systems. Recent developments, especially in control, have shown the
benefits of joining these technologies. both technologies provide vehicles for
modeling the human thought processes: fuzzy set theory can be seen as being
extremely useful at representing the macro-level while the neural technologies
provide a unique tool for dealing with the micro-level. Particular benefit will
come from a symbiotic relationship in which fuzzy logic structures are used in
crafting of neural systems and use the resulting neural networks for the
learning and actual implementation. In this spirit the overriding objective of
this research is to use the structures provided by fuzzy logic to help guide in
the discovery of new neural architectures to better model the sophisticated
modes of human reasoning. Motivated by this the basic focus of this project is
to investigate some specific fuzzy modeling paradigms and provide for their
neural implementation. The first part of the research will look at an extension
of the pervasively used fuzzy systems modeling technology, one which allows for
a hierarchical representation of the rule base. The goal here is to provide for
a neural architecture to implement this modeling and in doing so, among other
objectives, get a deeper understanding of the possibilities of representing
hierarchical know in a neural framework. The next part will look at the problem
of multi-criteria decision making and focus on the neural modeling of complex
relationship between criteria. The fist part will investigate a new paradigm for
learning called participatory learning which can be seen as a type of critic
learning approach.