* 9703388
* CAREER:  Mesoscopic Interacting Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1997,04/30/2002
* Dmitrii Maslov, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/2002
* USD 200,000.00

9703388 Maslov This is a CAREER award which combines theoretical research with
education innovation. The research part of the award will focus on mesoscopic
systems in which electron-electron interactions play a crucial role. Analytical
and numepical techniques will be used to study Luttinger liquid effects in
quantum wires and quantum Hall systems, concentrating on such issues as the
coupling to the Fermi liquid reservoirs, paraconducting effects in inhomogeneous
Luttinger liquids, Luttinger liquid to Fermi liquid crossover, electron-phonon
scattering in Luttinger liquids, AC transport and noise in inhomogeneous
Luttinger liquids and quasi-one-dimensional effects in strong magnetic fields in
the presence of long range Coulomb interactions. Mesoscopic superconductivity
will also be investigated. A special emphasis of the research will be to look at
qualitative features of the effects under consideration. This part of the
research will be incorporated in the educational activities. Qualitative methods
in physics will be used as a basis for courses at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels. These courses will teach students how to use simple techniques
to gain insight to complex physical phenomena. %%% This is a CAREER award which
combines theoretical research with education innovation. The research part of
the award will focus on mesoscopic systems in which electron-electron
interactions play a crucial role. Mesoscopic systems are ones in which various
submicroscopic quantum effects become apparent on size scales of everyday
phenomena. Examples include many microelectronic devices. Analytical and
numerical techniques will be used to study a variety of phenomena. Mesoscopic
superconductivity will also be investigated. A special emphasis of the research
will be to look at qualitative features of the effects under consideration. This
part of the research will be incorporated in the educational activities.
Qualitative methods in physics will b e used as a basis for courses at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels. These courses will teach students how to use
simple techniques to gain insight to complex physical phenomena. ***