* 9703979
* Development of an Aberration Corrected X-ray Photoemission  Microscope for Nano-XAFS
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,10/23/1998
* Brian Tonner, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 10/23/1998
* USD 101,210.00

9703979 Tonner This award provides support for a new type of microscope to be
developed, that has surface sensitivity, very high spatial resolution, and
performs spatially resolved x-ray absorption fine- structure spectroscopy
(XAFS). This instrument will use the recently invented methods of aberration-
corrected electron optics to improve the performance of x-ray photoelectron
emission microscopy (X-PEEM) by an order of magnitude. The aberration- corrected
X-ray PEEM, or AX_PEEM, will be used in a number of different research programs.
These include element-specific magnetic domain microscopy, polymer-metal
interface studies, surface reactions on mineral substrates, and surface
reactions on single-crystal substrates. These applications will use the
technique of nano-XAFS, which the AX-PEEM makes possible. %%% This instrument
will perform core-level "spectro-microscopy," a new technique for the non-
destructive mapping of chemical domains at surfaces. Specifically, it will be
able to take a sequence of images as a function of the energy of the incident
radiation. The resultant data can be interpreted as a set of XAFS spectra from
individual areas on the sample, or as images of the chemical composition of the
near-surface region of the sample, as derived from the spatially varying XAFS
spectra. The new instrument will combine high voltage electrostatic electron
microscope lenses with an electron-mirror aberration correction scheme. The
completed instrument will be a compact, ultra-high vacuum compatible assembly,
that will be installed in a portable surface science chamber. The nano-XAFS
technique is of interest to a widely interdisciplinary research community,
ranging from surface science to biophysics. To meet these varied needs, the
system is designed to be easily installed on a number of different synchrotron
beamlines in the U.S. ***