* 9703694
* Stochastic Processes with Applications to Ecology and       Theoretical Population Genetics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Claudia Neuhauser, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/2001
* USD 88,758.00

9703694 Neuhauser The projects are divided into two primary research areas, the
theoretical investigation of ecological models in the context of interacting
particle systems, and genealogical processes in theoretical population genetics.
Interacting particle systems are continuous time Markov processes on the integer
lattice in which each site is in one of several states. Local rules determine
the dynamics of the systems. They provide an ideal framework to investigate the
role of the spatial structure in models in ecology. In joint work with Dr.
Stephen Pacala (Princeton University) the principal investigator will consider
the consequences of spatial structure in classical models in ecology, such as
the Lotka-Volterra model of interspecific competition. The nonspatial version is
very well understood. Including a spatial component will likely yield new
phenomena. In joint work with Dr. Stephen Krone (University of Idaho) the
principal investigator will study the spread of a population in a heterogeneous
environment by using the two-dimensional contact process in a random
environment. In theoretical population genetics, Dr. Neuhauser plans to study
genealogies under various selection schemes, for instance, frequency-dependent
selection and overdominant selection. It is planned to rigorously derive
genealogies and to use them to investigate sample properties in both spatial and
nonspatial settings. The causes and effects of spatial structure have long been
central topics in population and community ecology. In joint work with Dr.
Stephen Pacala (Princeton University) the principal investigator will study the
effects of competition on the spatial structure of communities. Local
interactions and competition in spatial communities can cause clumping of
individuals of the same species which can lead to a reduction in biodiversity.
In joint work with Dr. Stephen Krone (University of Idaho) the principal
investigator will consider the spread of populations in heterogeneous
environments and how habi tat destruction and subsequent restoration affects the
ability of populations to recover. Genealogies are an important tool in
population genetics to investigate properties of samples of genes. Dr. Neuhauser
plans to investigate frequency-dependent and overdominant selection. Both modes
of selection are known to be able to maintain a high degree of genetic
diversity. Little is known about genealogies under such selection schemes which
are important, for instance, in plant breeding systems or in the major
histocompatibility complex.