* 9703736
* Evaluating Ground Liquefaction Potential by Piezovibrocone
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1998,09/30/2000
* Glenn Rix, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 09/30/2000
* USD 74,978.00

9703736 The objectives of this research program are to develop new
instrumentation, test methodology, data acquisition, and field procedures for
the direct in-situ and site-specific assessment of soil liquefaction potential
by cone penetration testing. The program consists of a collaborative group
effort between Georgia Tech and Virginia Tech, and is being co-funded with the
United States Geological Survey. It includes the assembly of a vertically-
vibrating piezocone penetrometer (piezovibrocone), laboratory calibration
chamber testing, a companion series of laboratory cyclic triaxial and simple
shear testing, and field trials at geotechnical experimentation sites. Current
methods of assessing the liquefaction susceptibility of loose sands and silts
during earthquake shaking rely strongly on empirical correlations and
methodologies. Present state-of-practice procedures for liquefaction evaluation
include both in-situ and laboratory test methods that require correction factors
which are not fully understood, nor well defined. The vibrocone consists of a
cone penetrometer coupled with a vibrating shaker mechanism that induces
liquefaction of the soil in the vicinity of the probe during penetration into
the ground. Vertical penetration tests are conducted under both static and
dynamic excitation in paired side-by-side soundings. Comparisons of cone tip
resistance values, sleeve friction values, and penetration pore water pressures
from adjacent soundings are made to ascertain the liquefaction potential and
other properties of the subsoils. The penetration test is designed to allow a
rational interpretation by analytical theories which incorporate important soil
behavioral aspects such as dynamic loading, cyclic pore pressure generation,
initial stress state, and residual undrained steady- state strength. As
envisioned, the piezovibrocone will thus offer an improved and systematic
framework for evaluating the liquefaction susceptibility of loos e ground in
seismically-active regions. Additionally, it should have value for assessing the
applicability and effectiveness of ground modification techniques such as
vibroflotation, vibro-replacement, and densification by blasting.