* 9703419
* CAREER:  Research and Education in Materials Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Frank Tsui, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9703419 Tsui The CAREER plan seeks to enhance both research and education in
materials physics at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The
research component explores atomic scale synthesis and characterization of
metallic thin films and multilayers grown by molecular beam epitaxy techniques.
It focuses on three main objectives: (1) to elucidate diffusion processes during
epitaxial nucleation and growth, and to develop techniques for producing
tailored epitaxial structures and morphologies, (2) to understand the nature of
spin-dependent scattering responsible for the oscillatory magnetic coupling and
giant magnetoresistance effects in metallic multilayers, and (3) to shed light
on low- dimensional penomensa by exploring monolayer and submonolayer systems.
The education component seeks to make positive impact on the intellectual
climate of the community. It employs a two pronged strategy. First, it focuses
on improving teaching effectiveness in the classroom by transforming traditional
lecture presentations into participatory, discovery-based courses. Second,
research and education opportunities in artificially structured nano- materials
are developed for high school teachers and students in the Chapel Hill-Durham
area. Outreach activities toward the local community include mentor programs,
lab tours, and journal clubs. %%% The CAREER plan seeks to enhance both research
and education in materials physics at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill. The research component focuses on exploring novel electrical and magnetic
properties of synthetic metallic nano-structures. It seeks to elucidate the role
of artificial constraints on material properties, and to enhance our ability to
produce tailored electronic and magnetic sturctures. It is pursued by systematic
studies of atomic scale materials synthesis and ma terials properties using
state-of-th-art techniques including molecular beam epitaxy and scanning probe
microscopy. The education component seeks to make positive impact on the
intellectual climate of the community. It employs a two pronged strategy. First,
it focuses on improving teaching effectiveness in the classroom by transforming
traditional lecture presentations into participatory, discovery-based courses.
Second, research and education opportunities in artificially structured nano-
materials are developed for high school teachers and students in the Chapel
Hill-Durham area. Outreach activities toward the local community include mentor
programs, lab tours, and journal clubs. ***