* 9703652
* Synthesis and Conformational Analysis of Novel Carbohydrate and Polypeptide Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Daniel O'Leary, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 04/30/2001
* USD 92,700.00

The Organic Synthesis Program supports Professor Daniel J. O'Leary, of the
Department of Chemistry at Pomona College, with a Research in Undergraduate
Institutions award for his studies of the synthesis and conformational analysis
of novel carbohydrate and polypeptide structures. Working with undergraduate
researchers, Professor O'Leary investigates the pattern of hydrogen bonding
networks in partially isotopically exchanged diols designed to form
intramolecular hydrogen bonds, using NMR isotopic perturbation techniques and
appropriate theoretical analysis to reveal hydrogen bonds and their arrays. In
order to probe the extent to which long-range interactions help stabilize or
destabilize carbohydrate conformations in solution, Professor O'Leary
synthesizes oligosaccharides as models for hyaluronic acid and examines their
conformational preferences. Synthesis of carbocyclic analogs of malformin A1, a
bicyclic pentapeptide containing a cyclo-cystine structural element, helps to
address the unusual conformational behavior of this naturally occurring
substance. Professor Daniel J. O'Leary, of the Department of Chemistry at Pomona
College, is supported by the Organic Synthesis Program with a Research in
Undergraduate Institutions award for his studies of the three-dimensional shapes
(conformations) of biologically relevant molecules in solution. Through the
synthesis of comparatively simple model compounds and the use of nuclear
magnetic resonance techniques, Professor O'Leary probes the factors controlling
the specific shapes adopted by these molecules and, by inference, the larger
molecules for which they serve as models. These studies, carried out by
undergraduate researchers, are expected to answer questions regarding the
effects of various groupings of atoms within molecules on their conformational
behavior, an issue of fundamental importance in a wide range of fields, from
biology to physical chemistry.