* 9703032
* CAREER:  Bistatic and Mobile Multiple-Doppler Technique     Development and Educational Laboratory
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2004
* Joshua Wurman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 06/30/2004
* USD 549,379.00

9703032 Wurman Under the Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER), the
Principal Investigator will pursue research and educational activities
associated with two new and innovative uses of Doppler radars for meteorological
research. Single or multiple Doppler radars at fixed sites have been utilized
for many years in meteorological research and some aspects of their use are very
mature. Due to technological advances, research Doppler radars have evolved to
the state where they can be mounted in mobile ground-based and airborne
platforms. Under other support, the Principal Investigator has begun to develop
two mobile ground-based Doppler radar systems which provide many advantages over
fixed sites. Primary among these are the ability to acquire many more data sets
and to obtain data at much higher spatial resolution. Along with these
advantages, however, also comes special problems in data analysis/synthesis. For
example, higher elevation angles than normally encountered with fixed radar
sites may cause some potential problems. Additionally, the possibility of
collecting data while moving also provides special challenges in developing
optimal experimental designs and in analysis of data. The second area of
research the Principal Investigator will pursue is the use of bistatic multiple
Doppler networks. This is a network consisting of one transmitting radar with a
network of many, distributed receivers. This is very new technology that has the
advantage, among many others, of providing relatively inexpensive mapping of
wind fields over large areas. The Principal Investigator will continue research
into the best design and utilization of such networks. Under the educational
component of this CAREER award, the Principal Investigator will incorporate the
mobile Dopplers and bistatic networks into graduate courses as well as host
Summer workshops for students. This will integrate students into research that
is at the very cutting e dge of development of new meteorological radar
technologies. ***