* 9703805
* Studies of An Innovative Nonlinear Actuator for the         Semiactive Control of Dispersed Civil Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Sami Masri, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 09/30/2001
* USD 237,843.00

9703805 Masri Presently used actuators to generate control forces are generally
inadequate for limiting the response of civil structures under strong earthquake
shaking. There is a critical need for a new generation of actuators that have
the capability of adequately performing under strong ground motion which may
induce significant nonlinear deformations in structures. The objective of this
research is to develop an innovative semi- active damping augmentation device
for controlling the seismic response of dispersed civil structures. The control
procedure uses nonlinear auxiliary mass dampers with adjustable (adaptive)
motion-limiting stops, located at selected positions throughout the structure,
to inject an optimum amount of "chaos" in the structures dynamic response by
disorganizing the orderly process of amplitude buildup. The degree of the
structure's oscillation in the vicinity of each semiactive nonlinear actuator
determines the actuator's actively-controlled gap size and activation time. By
using control energy to adjust the actuator's critical parameters instead of
directly attenuating the motion of the structure (which conventional active
control methods do), a significant improvement is achieved in the total amount
of energy expended to accomplish a given level of vibration control. A sequence
of analytical and experimental studies by means of a bridge model to be provided
with several innovative nonlinear actuators and subjected to multiple-support
earthquake excitation by seismic shakers will also be conducted. ***