* 9703315
* CAREER:  The Folk Theory of Behavior:  Implications for     Social Perception and Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2002
* Bertram Malle, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/2002
* USD 253,313.00

One of the basic problems that people face as social beings is to make sense of
each other's behavior. This research project investigates how people solve this
problem. The approach is to understand people's `folk theory of behavior,` which
refers to the conceptual framework within which people describe, explain, and
influence human behavior. By studying this `folk theory,` it is expected that
regularities inherent in communication, interaction, and social relationships
will be better understood. The theoretical model relies on two propositions:(1)
that people distinguish between intentional and unintentional behavior, and (2)
that people explain unintentional behavior by mere causes (e.g., inside the
person, in the situation), whereas intentional behavior is explained with
reasons (e.g., beliefs, desires). Initial evidence for these propositions has
led to an integrative model of folk explanations. This model generates numerous
implications that are tested in the present research program, grouped under four
questions:(1) How do people judge intentionality? (2) Which behaviors do people
attend to? (3) How do people evaluate behavior? and (4) How do people explain
behavior? To answer these questions the research employs multiple methods,
including questionnaires, interactive audio-visual computer presentations,
detailed coding of existing texts (e.g., novels, diaries), and observations of
dyadic interaction. The aim of this research program is to identify key
components of people's folk theory of behavior and to examine their substantial
implications for social perception and social interaction. The aim of the
associated educational activities is to increase awareness, among students and
the public, of social perception and interaction phenomena and of the principles
that govern them.