* 9703543
* Studies of Model Systems in Statistical Mechanics and       Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1997,11/30/2000
* Barry McCoy, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/2000
* USD 258,000.00

9703543 McCoy This grant to a senior, distinguished mathematical physicist is to
support research in statistical mechanics. His contributions to exact solutions
are widely known. In a two pronged attack, he is planning to study the
integrability conditions of a given problem and also look for insights into non-
integrable problems. In particular, he is examining the properties of time
dependent correlation functions of integrable spin XXZ chains, of the energy
spectra of conformal models in 2-d, i.e. the features which are important in the
study of fractional statistics, theory of combinatorics and the mathematical
study of q-series and the Rogers-Ramanujan identities. In non-integrable
systems, the project includes a study of the Ising model in a nonzero magnetic
field and ZN symmetric spin chains. %%% This grant to a senior, distinguished
mathematical physicist is to support research in statistical mechanics. More
specifically, this PI is well known for his contributions to several exactly
solvable problems. He will continue his search for exact solutions. He will also
continue to look for some understanding of what makes a problem exactly solvable
(also called integrable). Finally he is planning to consider ways of applying
the insights gained from exact solutions to cases where exact solutions are
either not known and perhaps are not possible. ***