* 9703847
* Mathematical Sciences:  Hamiltonian Systems of Infinite     Dimensions
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Thomas Kappeler, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 69,162.00

9703847 T. Kappeler 1. Hamiltonian systems of infinite dimension: The analysis
of the symplectic structure of the phase space of completely integrable
Hamiltonian systems of (in)finite dimension is very useful in the study of
Hamiltonian perturbations. The investigator plans to apply prior work on action-
angle variables for the Korteweg-deVries equation (KdV) to contribute to the
investigation of the problem of the existence of analytic, quasiperiodic (in
time) solutions of Hamiltonian perturbations of KdV or of any of the equations
in the KdV hierarchy (KAM type theorem) and to study longtime stability of
solutions of perturbed KdV equations (Nekhoroshev-type estimates). Further, the
investigator plans to prove, in a generic situation, local existence of
(generalized) action-angle variables for a large class of completely integrable
Hamiltonian systems of infinite dimension. 2. Regularized determinants of
elliptic operators: They appear in modern physics (functional integrals) as well
as in geometry and topology (torsion, eta-invariant). The investigator plans to
continue his work on techniques for analyzing regularized determinants and their
applications to geometry and topology: Torsions for bordism and relative torsion
(in the usual and the L2-setting); numerical computations of regularized
determinants via a deformation; manifolds of determinant class and
representation of the L2-torsion of a closed manifold M as a limit of a sequence
of appropriately normalized torsions associated to a sequence of finite covers
of M. 3. Smoothing of dispersive waves: Dispersive waves appear in many
instances, e.g. in the study of water waves. The investigator plans to analyze
microlocal smoothing properties for a large class of linear and nonlinear
systems of dispersive evolution equations of Schroedinger type. In many
different applications, such as propagation of signals along optical fibers
(telecommunication), analysis of water waves and currents, and theoretical
physics (celestial mechanics, quantum field theory), the basic underlying ideal
models turn out to be integrable systems of finite or infinite dimension. To be
useful for applications, perturbations of these ideal models have to be studied.
Whereas integrable systems of finite dimension and their perturbations are
relatively well understood, much remains to be done in the infinite dimensional
case.