* 9703080
* CISE Research Infrastructure:  A Networked Computing        Environment for The Manipulation and Visualization of       Geometric Data
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2003
* Michael Goodrich, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 07/31/2003
* USD 1,226,381.00

CDA-9703080 Wolf, Lawrence Johns Hopkins University A Networked Computing
Environment for the Manipulation and Visualization of Geometric Data This award
is for the acquisition of an infrastructure for geometric computing providing a
unified environment for five research laboratories in the Department of Computer
Science at Johns Hopkins University (and one researcher at Brown University)
having a large commonality in interests. This infrastructure will be used
primarily as follows: The Center for Geometric Computation will be developing an
interactive interface for geometric computation over the internet which will be
used by the participating research laboratories and made available to other
laboratories; the Computer Graphics Laboratory will focus on interactive
visualization of large and complex geometric environments which also includes
efficient utilization of network and distribute computing resources; the
Computer Vision Laboratory is working on computational techniques for the
visualization of the differential geometry of surfaces, visualizing and matching
of signatures for Automatic Target Recognition, and real-time image
understanding techniques for medical imaging; The Computer Integrated Surgery
Laboratory will be conducting a number of projects in medical robotics including
the development of techniques for minimally invasive surgery using navigation
and guidance during neurosurgery and lung surgery, and, image and model
registration techniques that use various 2D imaging modalities. The Natural
Language Processing Laboratory will be studying document-space visualization in
a high-dimensional space for information retrieval as well as clustering
algorithms for high-dimensional word and document spaces.