* 9703720
* Expanding the Spectral Envelope
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* David Stoffer, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 150,000.00

Stoffer DMS-9703720 The concept of the spectral envelope was recently introduced
as a general statistical method for the frequency domain analysis and scaling of
qualitative-valued time series. In the process of developing the technology,
many other interesting extensions became evident. This research involves the
extension of the fundamental concept in various directions. The first extension
involves matching two categorical sequences in an effort to discover whether
they contain similar patterns and is motivated by the problem of matching of two
DNA sequences. The approach builds on the ideas used in defining the spectral
envelope and focuses on what could be called coherency envelopes for measuring
the similarity between two categorical time series. Estimation is based on the
fast Fourier transform so that the methods are computationally simple and fast,
and can be applied to long sequences. In another direction, the technology is
extended to the analysis of qualitative spatial data. The applications that
motivate this project are automated image retrieval and pattern recognition with
potential use in computer vision. Specifically, this part of the research will
focus on the analysis of categorical random fields via optimal scaling and the
wave number spectral envelope. Since many of the applications where the spectral
envelope methodology has been an asset are situations where the assumptions of
stationarity and homogeneity are not realistic, this research will explore the
benefits of wavelet-based analysis over dynamic Fourier analysis. Another
extension of this research is to apply the concept to the analysis of real-
valued time series collected in an experimental design where the primary
interest is whether any, and how many, have common cyclic components. This
problem is motivated by numerous applications in the medical and behavioral
sciences. A statistical concept called the spectral envelope was recently
introduced as a general method to study patterns in long seq uences of letters
or symbols (such as codes). The most well known application of this methodology
is in biotechnology, specifically in the analysis of DNA. In the process of
developing the concept, many other practical extensions became evident. This
research involves the extension of the fundamental concept in various
directions. The first extension involves matching two non-numeric sequences in
an effort to discover whether they contain similar patterns and is motivated by
the biotechnical problem of finding similarities in two otherwise different
genetic codes. Another direction is to extend the technology to qualitative
spatial data (such as images) with applications in automated image retrieval,
automated pattern recognition, and computer vision. This research will have an
impact on robotics and automation technologies that will be useful, for example,
in industrial manufacturing processes. Moreover, the methodology used in
matching sequences could have applications in computer vision and robotics where
the problem is to automatically and quickly align two pictures of the same scene
taken from different camera angles. In addition, this research will focus on
ways to incorporate this new technology into current medical applications such
as understanding changes in biorythms in stressful situations.