* 9703770
* Rigidity of Actions of Higher Rank Lattices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Gregory Margulis, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 86,717.00

Actions of connected semi-simple Lie groups and their discrete groups on compact
manifolds reflect in many ways the properties of the groups. When the groups are
of higher real rank, local rigidity and superrigidity of the groups often
contribute to the corresponding properties for actions of the groups. It is
conjectured that to some extent, all ergodic, volume-preserving actions of
higher rank lattices can be built up from a list of standard actions: (a)
actions by isometries on Riemannian manifolds, (2) actions on compact
nilmanifolds by automorphisms, and (3) actions on homogeneous spaces by left
translations. In particular, Anatole Katok, James Lewis, and Robert Zimmer
conjectured that for any higher rank lattice action, there is a smooth invariant
connection on an open dense set. The objectives of this research are to
establish the local rigidity of the standard actions and to establish the
algebraicity of group actions under favorable conditions. The investigator will
employ Zimmer's cocycle superrigidity to establish the rigidity properties of
the actions in measurable tangential level. Then he will apply dynamical systems
techniques to obtain the rigidity properties in topological tangential level.
The transition from topological tangential level to smooth level -- which is the
key step to his objectives -- will rely on the use of techniques from dynamical
systems, Lie theory and representation theory, ergodic theory, harmonic analysis
and differential geometry. Another goal of his research is to find smooth
invariant connections for the group actions. A group action, when preserving
some appropriate structures, is a part of the group of symmetries of the object
on which they act. One anticipates that the object is in some sense regular if
there are sufficiently many symmetries of the object. One may further imagine
that if the symmetries have many relations, there is no way to deform the object
and keep those symmetries. The proposed research takes the objects to be
manifolds. T he researcher investigates essentially two problems. The first is
to find the structure for the symmetries when there are many symmetries. The
second is to identify the symmetries for which the manifolds cannot be deformed.
The significance is to provide unified approaches to the research of the
rigidity of group actions, develop new methods to tackle the often encountered
problems in this field of research, and ultimately establish that under certain
conditions, a higher rank group action must be a part of the group of symmetries
for a structure (so-called connection).