* 9703989
* Dissertation Research:  Precolumbian Maya Terracing in the  Xunantunich Area, Belize, Central America
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Wendy Ashmore, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1999
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Wendy Ashmore, Mr. L. Theodore Neff will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue his examination of terraces
associated with the Mayan site of Xunantunich which is located in lowland
tropical west-central Belize. The site is large - it covers an area exceeding 10
km. in maximum diameter - and was occupied during the height of Classic Mayan
development. Therefore it serves as an appropriate location to study how the
Mayans integrated thousands of individuals into highly organized societies which
sustained themselves in a relatively unproductive environments. In recent years
archaeologists have come to recognize that Mayan peoples developed complex
agricultural systems significantly different from the slash and burn technique
which is applied in many lowland areas today. Researchers have focused
particular attention on widespread series of raised fields which were formed by
mounding earth in swampy waterlogged environments. Less attention has been paid
to other approaches and Mr. Neff will examine a terracing system which was
widely used at Xunantunich and is present at other Mayan sites as well. In
particular he is interested in the articulation between agriculture and social
organization and he has noted correlations between different arrangements of
terraces and the number of associated house mounds. He believes that it is
possible to reconstruct the social organization at the site and determine the
extent to which variations in group organization affected specific agricultural
practices. To accomplish this he needs first to understand more about the
terraces themselves and this award will allow him to collect the necessary
information. He will conduct test and then larger scale excavation in a
carefully selected number of terraces. On this basis he hopes to determine when
in the site's history they were built, how they were constructed and what crops
were grown on them. This requires careful stratigraphic excavation and the
analysis of soil, cultural and plant remains. Radiocarbon dates will also be
obtained. The Mayan peoples developed a complex society using technologically
simple means in environmental contexts which today can support only low
population densities. Mr. Neff's research will provide additional insight into
the adaptations which allowed this success. He will collect data of interest to
many archaeologists and the project will assist in training a promising young
scientist.