* 9703973
* Acquisition of GPC/Static Light Scattering System for       Polymer, Membrane and Colloid Science Research Program
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Peter Kilpatrick, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1999
* USD 85,000.00

9703973 Khan The Chemical Engineering Department at North Carolina State
University (NCSU) will purchase a Gel Permeation Chromatography /Static Light
Scattering system to obtain critically needed information in polymer, membrane
and colIoid science research. The equipment will be used for several funded
projects, including (1) The Influence of Chain Configuration and Composition on
the Extraordinary Permeation Properties of Substituted Polyacetylene Vapor
Separation Membrane Materials; (2) Gas Transport and Barrier Properties of Novel
Aromatic Polyamides; (3) Enzymatic modification of water soluble polymers; (4)
Composite Polymer Electrolytes Using Fumed Silica; (5) Synthesis Rheology and
Microstructure of Polymer Grafted Latex Systems for Water-borne Inks; and (6)
Asphaltene and Discotic Mesogen Aggregation in Model Solvent System: Effect of
Aggregat on Emulsion Stability. To sustain these strong research program and
provide for new and innovative research, a modern gel permeation chromatograph
(GPC) / static light scattering system (SLS) is essential. The GPC/SLS system
would provide the capability to determine molecular weight, molecular weight
distribution and chain configuration of block copolymers substituted
polyacetylenes that are being developed as membrane materials, enzymatically
modified guar galactomannans for use in food and oil/gas applications, and graft
comb polymers that are being synthesized as low water-borne inks. The success
and completion of each of these projects hinges on information obtained using
the acquired instrumentation. A sensitive GPC/S is required to characterize
microstructures resulting from polymer-fumed silica-lithium ion interactions in
novel polymer electrolyte materials. This instrument will also have the
capability to measure the size, topology, and fractal dimension of asphaltene
aggregates. These new capabilities will provide crucial information for the
growing interdisciplinary research program in polymer rh eology, membrane, and
colloid sciences at NCSU and enable it to remain strong and vital in the years
ahead. The acquired equipment would also play a major role in training
undergraduates in the newly-created polymer and colloid science track in the BS
Chemical Engineering program. ***