* 9703775
* Quantum Integrability and Inverse Spectral Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Steve Zelditch, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2000
* USD 108,500.00

This proposal is concerned with the relations between the fine structure of the
spectrum of a compact Riemannian manifold and the dynamics of its geodesic flow.
On the one hand, the principal investigator is interested in the well known
inverse problem, can one hear the shape of a drum? Recent advances in the
analysis of the spectral invariants known as wave trace invariants allow one to
'hear' much more than has been previously possible, especially in the case of
certain real analytic metrics with completely integrable geodesic flow. The main
tool here is the construction and analysis of quantum analogues of the Birkhoff
normal forms for a Hamiltonian flow near a periodic orbit or invariant torus. On
the other hand, the principal investigator is also interested in problems of
mathematical physics having to do with quantum ergodicity and chaos or, at the
opposite extreme, with complete integrability. In particular, he wishes to
analyse pair correlation functions of the spectra of some model quantum maps
over compact symplectic manifolds and related fine structure invariants. The
motivation for these problems originated in physics. During the fifties, many
physicists were studying the forces which hold the nucleus together. These
forces were not known, but certain aspects of them were observable. In
particular, the spectrum of energy levels of the nucleus could be measured in
experiments. The 'inverse spectral problem' naturally arose- could the potential
energy of the nucleus could be determined from these energy levels? The answer
is still basically unknown. On the one hand, different systems with the same
spectrum have been constructed; on the other, these ambiguous systems have very
unusual features and it seems likely that typical systems are determined by
their spectra. Another problem posed by nuclear physicists in the fifties, most
famously by E. Wigner and L.D. Landau, was whether there was any pattern to the
spacings between high energy levels. Do they just occur randomly? This is now
known as the level spacings problem. Numerous computer studies of physical
systems and toy mathematical models indicate that the patterns are related to
the degree of predictability or chaos of the system. The reason why this should
be so remains a mysterious mathematical problem. However, the hope is that the
new tools and developments described above will lead to worthwhile gains in
insight into these fundamental problems.