* 9703181
* CAREER: Multiresolution-Based Adaptive Image/Video          Communications: An Integrated Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Kannan Ramchandran, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2001
* USD 210,000.00

The implementation of the National Information Infrastructure initiative will
require the efficient transmission and storage of voluminous amounts of
multimedia traffic, particularly image and video data. This project offers a
multidisciplinary attack on this challenging problem with the goal of providing
a system-wide optimized solution rather than a possibly mismatched collection of
efficient subsystem solutions. It advocates an integration, in both research and
education, of relevant aspects of three engineering subfields that have been
traditionally treated separately: Signal Processing, Communications, and
Networks. The primary educational goals are to help develop interdisciplinary
specialists, and to integrate research more heavily into engineering education.
This project promotes an adaptive and integrated approach to the algorithmic
design and architecture of next-generation visual communications systems for the
compression and reliable delivery, over noisy time-varying channels and
heterogeneous networks, of images and video. A unifying thread is the use of
flexible multiresolution-based frameworks for 1) source coding, 2) channel
coding and 3) joint source-channel coding, with the goal of maximizing the
delivered image/video quality using fast algorithms. In education, the primary
goals are to help develop multidisciplinary specialists, and to integrate
research more heavily into both undergraduate and graduate education.