* 9703399
* CAREER: Light: A Fundamental Primitive for Computer Graphics
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Steven Gortler, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 09/30/2001
* USD 235,000.00

The process of creating a virtual environment or object in computer graphics
typically begins with modeling the geometric and surface attributes of the
objects in the environment along with any lights. Great effort has been expended
to develop computer aided design systems that allow the specification of complex
geometry and material attributes. Similarly, a great deal of work has been
undertaken to produce systems that simulate the propagation of light through
virtual environments to create realistic images. Despite these efforts, it has
remained difficult or impossible to recreate much of the complex geometry and
subtle lighting effects found in the real world. The modeling problem can
potentially be bypassed by capturing the geometry and material properties of
objects directly from the real world using some combination of cameras,
structured light, range finders, and mechanical sensing devices. When
successful, the results can be fed into a rendering program to create images of
real objects and scenes. Unfortunately, these systems are still unable to
completely capture small details in geometry and material properties. Existing
rendering methods also continue to be limited in their capability to faithfully
reproduce real world illumination, even if given accurate geometric models. This
project will develop techniques for using a representation of light (radiance)
as a basic primitive for computer graphics. This primitive will augment the
traditional geometry-based primitives used in computer graphics. This framework
will provide a unified method for encoding the complete appearance of a complex
model, and allow the rerendering of an object at speeds independent of the its
geometric or lighting complexity. Moreover, this framework will allow one to use
a video camera to sample the radiance information of a real world scene or
environment. This sampled information can then be organized properly to allow
for redisplay of the scene interactively from any virtual camera at any
viewpoint. The research is fundamental in that it explores an entirely novel
primitive for computer graphics. This primitive is one of the most natural ways
to represent the complicated visual information present in a scene. The research
will facilitate the interactive viewing of captured real world scenes. No other
known method has the ability to directly represent the information captured by a
video camera, and use this information for interactive generation of new
realistic images. The success of this project will have impact in such diverse
fields as simulation, interactive virtual environments computer education, the
visual archival of objects, and the transmittance of the appearance of objects
in 3D catalogs.