* 9703850
* Nonlinear Wave Motion
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Mark Ablowitz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 111,000.00

9703850 Ablowitz Research involving a class of physically significant nonlinear
systems arising in the study of nonlinear wave motion is proposed. Included in
the studies are a new class of localized multidimensional solutions which can be
related to a topological number; i.e. an index or winding number. Associated
with the self dual Yang-Mills equations is a novel class of nonlinear ordinary
differential equations, referred to as Darboux-Halphen (DH) type systems. These
equations can be integrated by associating them with, and analyzing, certain
linear monodromy problems. The linear problems have monodromy data which are
evolving. The solutions of DH systems can be extremely complicated, exhibiting
natural boundaries and dense branching in the complex plane. In special cases
the solutions are expressed in terms of automorphic functions. Frequently
researchers use numerical simulation to obtain approximations to solutions of
nonlinear wave equations. Research by the PI and collaborators has demonstrated
that computational chaos can be induced from truncation and roundoff errors. Use
of integrable systems is extremely important since analytical results can be
compared with numerical simulation. The study of nonlinear wave equations has
wide ranging applications in physics and engineering. Intimately related to the
studies in this proposal is a class of equations, called integrable systems. The
mathematics of integrable systems and their solutions have been shown to play an
important and fundamental role in our understanding of a variety of real world
phenomena. Integrable systems usually admit a special class of extremely stable,
localized wave solutions, referred to as solitons, which arise frequently in
physical contexts. For example, in the study of fluid dynamics, huge soliton
internal ocean waves, sometimes a mile in length, and hundreds of feet in
amplitude, have been located in many parts of the ocean; e.g. near the coast of
Oregon. Such waves can be devastating to anything caught in their path, hence
knowledge of where such internal solitons are located in the ocean is of
interest. Another application of solitons is in the study and designing of
efficient long distance communication systems. Solitons eliminate the need for
electronic signal regenerators which can seriously inhibit data rates.
Researchers have used solitons successfully in the laboratory and currently they
are being used in prototype communication systems. It may well be that future
high data rate communications systems will be designed to propagate multiple
soliton waves.