* 9703769
* International Research Fellow Awards:  Nonlinear Waves and  Instabilities in Optical Fibers
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Jose Nathan Kutz, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/1998
* USD 26,502.00

9703769 Kutz The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a six-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr.
Jose Nathan Kutz to work with Dr. Ping-king Alexander Wai at the Hong Kong
Polytechnic University in Kowloon, Hong Kong. This project will involve the
investigation of a broad range of issues concerning nonlinear pulse dynamics in
optical fibers which have direct impact on current communication technologies.
Specifically, the PI will study dispersion management and NRZ (non-return-to-
zero) pulse dynamics, and the dynamics and stability of modelocked fiber lasers.
If time permits, he will go on to investigate the area of optical switching.
Kutz has studied the propagation of NRZ pulses in dispersion management systems,
which is a first step towards the understanding of current all-optical
transoceanic communication systems. He will combine his expertise with that of
Dr. Wai in the development of a general theory of the evolution of NRZ-formatted
pulses. To study these problems, Kutz will use scientific modelling, asymptotic
analysis, dynamical and nonlinear wave theory and numerical simulation. ***