* 9703294
* CAREER: Nonlinearity and Uncertainty in Control System      Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Randy Freeman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

ECS-9703294 Freeman A basic purpose of feedback is to reduce the effect of
uncertainty on the behavior of a system. When applied inappropriately, however,
feedback can also increase the risk of instability and other undesirable
phenomena. An obstacle to the successful design of feedback controllers has long
been the presence of nonlinearity in models and in real systems. The goal of
this project is to develop innovative methods for designing feedback controllers
for uncertain nonlinear systems and to educate future engineers and researchers
in their application. This project will build the foundation of an integrated
program of research and education in nonlinear and robust control theory in the
Robert R. McCormick School of Engineering and Applied Science at Northwestern
University. The educational goals of this project are to revise existing
undergraduate and graduate courses in systems and control and to develop new
graduate courses on nonlinear control system analysis and design. Selected
topics from the proposed research activities will be integrated into these
courses. These activities will contribute substantially to the educational
objectives of the Council on Dynamic Systems and Control, a new
interdisciplinary program at Northwestern with participating faculty and
students from five engineering departments. The research goals of this project
are to further develop the nonlinear control design techniques pioneered by the
PI and co-workers and to deepen the current understanding of fundamental issues
in nonlinear control theory. During the course of this project, the PI will
identify those flexibility's in new and existing nonlinear design methods which
can be exploited to obtain good controllers for practical applications. For
example, one task is to create new tools for incorporating nonlinear control
constraints ubiquitous in real systems into the control design procedure, a
departure from the traditional approach of ignoring such constraints during the
design. Another task is to analyze the effects of measurement error on the
behavior of nonlinear feedback loops and to develop design techniques for
reducing such effects. In collaboration with Rockwell Science Center in Thousand
Oaks, California, the new nonlinear design methods will be applied to problems
in automotive control, aircraft control, and industrial automation control. This
project will result in a significant contribution to the growing discipline of
nonlinear control theory, particularly in the area of robust nonlinear control.
Design guidelines developed during the course of this project will be invaluable
to the control engineer who is trying to apply the state-of-the-art methods to
real control problems. Furthermore, this project will make a substantial impact
on the interdisciplinary graduate program in systems and control at
Northwestern. Not only will students who take the proposed design courses be
exposed to the latest breakthroughs in the field of nonlinear control, they will
also develop an appreciation and basic understanding of the effects of
nonlinearity in feedback loops created by nature or designed by engineers.