* 9703102
* CAREER:  Monolayer Templated Growth of Organic Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2002
* Guangzhao Mao, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 04/30/2002
* USD 240,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9703102 This Career project investigates alternative interfacial
chemical approach to crystal growth using monolayer templates. Morphological
control is extremely important in the synthesis and processing of organic
crystals, especially those with anisotropic electronic, optical, conductive, and
electromagnetic properties. Molecular-level model compounds are largely lacking
in current approaches to crystal growth. One class of polymethine dyes is well
suited for such models, due to its (1) dichroic optical properties, (2)
morphological sensitivity to interfacial forces, (3) J-aggregates and energy
transfer within, and (4) functions in color photography and recording, as well
as in ultra-fast lasers and strongly enhanced nonlinear optics. The structure
and morphology of organic crystals are determined by a delicate force balance of
van der Waals, Coulombic, hydrogen bonding, and electron orbital forces.
Preliminary results have shown: (1) the polymethine crystal displays strong
optical anisotropy; (2) its structure is sensitive to minor steric changes; and
(3) its morphology is sensitive to substrate hydrophobicity. It is possible to
control crystal morphology by changing the nuclei attachment energy using
monolayer templates with varying affinities to different crystal faces. The goal
of the proposed research is to grow organic crystals with uniform optical
properties by controlling their microstructure and orientation at the substrate
surface. The principle of monolayer templated crystal growth is that the
interfacial energy and specific binding sites enhance the attachment of similar
crystal faces and inhibit the others. In the following figure, crystal
orientation can be achieved by using surface groups with different affinities to
the faces of the crystal, and the crystal size can be limited by lattice
mismatch and micro-domains in mixed monolayers. Solid-bound self-assembled and
liquid-bound Langmuir monolayers are used as crystal growth templates. Self-
assembly of silanes modifies the silica substrate by incorporating terminal
groups of different critical surface tensions and degrees of electrophilicity.
The charge resonance and electron donor/receptor interactions have been
suggested to be the origin of the spectral red-shift in J-aggregates. Monolayers
formed at the air/water interface of mixed custom-made chromophore-containing
amphiphiles and regular amphiphiles are used to study comparatively the specific
interaction between conjugated dye functional groups. A combined approach of
spectroscopic and microscopic methods is used to characterize the
monolayer/crystal complex at the molecular level and in situ. Real-time
investigation of the microstructure and interfacial bonding development of dye
crystals on monolayer templates will be carried out by atomic force microscopy
(AFM) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). In addition, the
monolayer structure and surface energy are determined by a combination of
contact angle, FTIR, AFM imaging and pull-off force measurements. The crystal
structure and optical properties are determined by AFM, polarized optical
microscopy, and UV-vis spectroscopy with the aid of computer-generated three
dimensional models. Experimental results from the proposed research are expected
to contribute to the field in the following ways: (1) functionalizing organic
monolayers for crystal growth; (2) obtaining uniform optical properties by
template-induced orientation of crystal faces; (3) understanding optoelectronic
properties of dye crystals and J-aggregates based on microstructural study; (4)
observing and understanding early stages of crystallization; and (5) assisting
the development of photographic sensitizing dyes with versatile and new
properties. In conclusion, this program proposes an alternative chemical
approach to rational design and assembly of organic thin films and crystals
based on molecular level interactions and characterization. It pursues the
functionalization of organic thin films as templates for crystal growth of an
important class of materials. It has the potential of understanding the
molecular principles behind the self-organization of ordered materials. In the
education plan, the PI plans to interface her research in interfacial materials
engineering with the undergraduate education through the integrated Advanced and
Materials Engineering Laboratory, and to bridge the gap between academia and
industry by incorporating the latest development in automotive related research
into the Graduate Certificate Program in Polymer Engineering.