* 9703693
* Dynamical Theory of Stochastic Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Ming Liao, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2001
* USD 61,845.00

9703693 Liao This project is concerned with the dynamical theory of stochastic
flows generated by stochastic differential equations on manifolds. The PI plans
to investigate the following problems. It has been shown in some examples that a
stochastic flow may be decomposed as an asymptotically deterministic flow
followed by a random "rotation". The PI plans to look into the possibility that
some general type of stochastic flows possess this kind of decomposition. If
this is understood, then a theory of random sources and sinks can be developed
for stochastic flows. It has been established for stochastic flows contained in
finite dimensional Lie transformation groups that the limiting stability of
stochastic flows is completely determined by the structure of the group. The PI
plans to investigate to what extent this holds for general infinite dimensional
stochastic flows. The dymanical theory studies the motion of a system, whether
this is a mechanical, a biological or an environmental system. An important
question is whether the system is stable or what kind of long time behavior the
system exhibits. The stochastic flows provide models for systems whose motions
depend on some random elements. Although one may not be able to predict with
certainty the path of a random system, the study of stochastic flows enables one
to project the long time behavior or pattern of the system with confidence. The
proposal is concerned with some basic problems in the dynamical theory of
stochastic flows.