* 9703840
* Structure-Property Relationships Based on Inorganic-Organic Host-Guest Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Timothy Porter, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

9703840 Porter The aim of this proposal entitled Structure-Property
Relationships Based on Inorganic-Organic Host-Guest Assemblies is to address the
synthesis and fabrication, characterization, and structure property relations in
novel nanomaterials obtained through inclusion chemistry. Systems to be studied
will include layered silicates such as hectorite and montmorillonite
intercalated with aniline, thiophene, and pyrrole guests in the intergallery
region of the smectic clays, followed by characterization by powder x- ray
diffraction, scanning force microscopy, differential scanning calorimetry,
electron spin resonance, and impedance spectroscopy. The inner arictecture of
the hybrid materials will be studied, and the synergism between architecture and
observed properties such as conductivity, magnetism, optical response, and
chemical sensing will be probed. The role of non-covalent host-guest and guest-
guest interactions will be delineated, and the knowledge used to synthesize and
optimize other novel materials. %%% The integration of organic and inorganic
molecular units into composite nanostructures provides many possibilities with
respect to both novel structures and property design. The design and
characterization of these types of nanostructured materials is a young field of
endeavor that presents exciting possibilities for designing functional materials
for applications such as sensors, molecular sieves, separations media, and
catalysts. ***