* 9703575
* Impurity Effects in Superfluid Helium Three
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* William Halperin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2000
* USD 330,000.00

9703575 Halperin High resolution nuclear resonance (NMR) experiments on helium 3
are proposed in order to study the normal and superfuid helium 3 states.
Temperature dependent NMR frequency shifts in the normal state will be
investigated as a function of magnetic field in order to identify their origin
which appears to be of fundamental significance. High resolution NMR experiments
and heat capacity measurements will be performed on superfluid helium 3 aerogels
to understand the effects of impurities introduced by the aerogel into this
important superfluid system. Close interaction with theoretical work should
allow us to establish the extent to which anisotropic scattering models can
account for our observations. The basic tools that we propose to use are low
temperature nuclear demagnetization techniques to prepare samples of helium 3
imbibed into highly porous silica aerogel. The transition to superfluidity and
the strength of the order parameter and energy gap will be determined mainly by
nuclear magnetic resoncnce methods, complemented by acoustic excitation of order
parameter collective modes, thermal conductivity, and heat capacity
measurements. %%% The proposed work will further our understanding of a broad
class of materials of considerable interest in condensed matter physics and of
importance to a wide range of applications involving superconductivity. The
study of impurity effects on the suppression of the transition temperature for
superfluidity in helium 3 will give important insight into the unusual
superfluid behavior in helium 3 as well as for other similar Superconducting
systems. New phases and unusual properties concerning the impurity helium 3
problem have recently been discovered by several groups including our own at
Northwestern. The impurities can be introduced in the helium 3 using very dilute
aerogel. The aerogel consists of tenuous strands of silica polymer of very high
porosity. The helium 3 impurity problem is a model for un derstanding the
limitations and basic properties of new classes of superconducting materials
including high temperature superconductors. The proposed work is also relevant
to the behavior of neutron matter in the cores of neutron stars. These systems
all have the common important characteristic of spontaneously broken symmetries
beyond gauge symmetry which is itself responsible for the superfluid behavior.
As such they are all extremely sensitive to impurity effects which must be
investigated if the basic behavior of these systems is to be understood and if
the potential for their application is to be realized. This situation is
particularly relevant to the case of the high temperature superconductors for
which the proposed work can be viewed as a paradigm. ***