* 9703948
* SBIR PHASE II: New Photogrammetry Data Acquisition and      Processing Technology for Highway Design and Maintenance
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/1997,11/30/1999
* David Manthey, CamSys Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 11/30/1999
* USD 309,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop an
innovative Photogrammetry Data Acquisition and Processing System for special
areas of highway design. To design and maintain transportation systems, three-
dimensional data on specific areas are collected by means of aerial photography,
manual surveys, and labor intensive data processing. The current aerial
photography methods, however, are not capable of collecting data on areas that
may not be seen readily from an aerial position, such as bridges and rock faces.
The goal of the proposed project is to develop a portable, easy-to-use, digital
camera-based system that used close-range photogrammetry techniques to
accurately model these areas. The proposed data acquisition system consists of a
high resolution digital camera, total station, and a photogrammetry calibration
target, as tested during the Phase I program. The feasibility of such a system
was also demonstrated by a highway experiment conducted while receiving
assistance from the New York State Department of Transportation (NYSDOT). A
novel feature of the proposed system is that it is tailored to the accuracy
desired for different applications through the use of a mathematical model. The
main research objectives focus on implementing, testing, and improving methods
to obtain accurate camera position and orientation data, and developing an
innovative method of automating 2D point correspondence in digital images. The
new prototype system offers significant labor and time savings in gathering
photogrammetry and ground survey data. Potential commercial applications of the
research include assessing bridge condition, modeling rock faces, reproducing
crime scenes and archeological objects.