* 9703946
* Acquisition of a Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Mass Spectrometer for the Analysis of Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Chrys Wesdemiotis, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1999
* USD 137,500.00

9703946 Wesdemiotis This award provides support for a time-of-flight mass
spectrometer equipped with matrix-assisted laser desorption / ionization (MALDI-
TOF-MS), for the analysis of polymeric materials. The instrument will support
ongoing and future studies within the Departments of Polymer Science and
Chemistry at the University of Akron, a leading center of polymer research for
over forty years. Many of the projects carried out in these departments
regularly require characterization of the mass, composition, integrity, and
purity of synthetic polymers. These issues can be addressed with high
specificity by MALDI mass spectrometry, a technique that is not currently
available at the University. Polymer research at the University of Akron is
focused on the synthesis of novel polymeric materials and the examination of
their physical and mechanical properties. Specific research areas will benefit
from MALDI-MS including (1) synthesis of new organic and silicon-organic
polymers, (ii) development of new methods for polymer functionalization, (iii)
new polymerization mechanisms including living cationic polymerization and
group- transfer polymerization, (iv) preparation of cyclic and radial star-
branched polymers, (v) evaluation of the relationship between structure and
properties of macromolecules, and (vi) biopolymer / synthetic polymer comparison
studies. The instrument will also be accessible to other researchers at the
University of Akron who need MALDI-MS to solve analytical problems. %%% The
University of Akron is an active participant in the Edison Polymer Innovation
Corporation (EPIC), a state-sponsored consortium with Case Western Reserve
University and local polymer corporations. Joint projects within this consortium
have fostered close ties between the Department of Polymer Science and
researchers in the EPIC community which, at present, lacks a MALDI mass
spectrometry capability for synthetic polymers. The planned MALDI-MS facility at
the University of Akron will provide this service to EPIC collaborators and to
other scientists in northeast Ohio requiring mass spectrometry for the solution
of structural problems. MALDI-TOF-MS is the method of choice for the analysis of
polymeric materials. It can supply rapidly and accurately the molecular weight
and molecular weight distribution of polymers. With lower molecular weight
polymers (&lt;10 kDa), the technique provides insight about the repeat units,
end groups, and other compositional properties. For polymers of reasonably low
polydispersity (Mw/Mn &lt; ~1.5), MALDI has the ability to determine directly
average molecular weight parameters. For polymers of higher polydispersity,
narrow fractions (obtained, e.g., via GPC separations) can be successfully
analyzed by MALDI. Such information is essential for giving definitive answers
to the challenging problems encountered in synthetic and mechanistic polymer
studies. ***