* 9703969
* CAREER: Lossless, Near-Lossless and Lossy Plus              Lossless Image Compression
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/1997,02/05/1999
* Nasir Memon, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 02/05/1999
* USD 204,422.00

This project involves a career development plan that incorporates a balance of
research and educational activities. The principal area of research proposed is
lossless image compression. The goal is to develop lossless image compression
techniques that integrate lossy and lossless compression in a single frame-work,
providing state-of-the-art lossy and lossless compression. Such techniques will
be of great value for specific applications like teleradiology and the World-
Wide-Web, and for applications in ``network-centric'' computing in general. Part
of this research will involve collaborative activity of an international nature.
Also proposed in the research plan is the development of near-lossless image
compression schemes that give quantitative guarantees about the loss in
reconstruction. Near-lossless compression techniques can result in significant
reduction in bit-rates while preserving the integrity of scientific images with
respect to the post-processing operations that are typically carried out on such
images. Collaboration with earth and space scientists will be an integral part
of this activity. The educational component of the proposal addresses the
broader field of multimedia communications. The main objective of the
educational plan is establish a multimedia communications laboratory that
supports education and research activities of a multidisciplinary group of
students and faculty. A sequence of multidisciplinary courses in multimedia
communications are proposed to be developed. Also proposed are a series of
activities like summer internships, departmental colloquia, research experience
for undergraduate site, etc. that go above and beyond the normal academic year
faculty responsibilities. The objectives of the educational plan are in tune
with department needs and priorities and well integrated with the research goals
of the PI.