* 9703347
* CAREER: Optimizing Fiber-Optic Communication Systems        Through Analytical Modeling of Linear and Nonlinear         Signal Degradations
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Maite Brandt-Pearce, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 05/31/2001
* USD 218,500.00

This research pursues the design and analysis of multiuser optical
communication systems to increase the performance, distance, and capacity of
existing and future systems. The focus is on the physical layer - i.e., the
actual single fiber links that connect the nodes of large. The intense demand
for more data, voice, and video in and out of every home and office has led to
multiuser systems that are typically broadband and high power, sometimes leading
to severe linear and nonlinear degradation in the signal due to properties
inherent to the fiber. Mastering these physical limitations can translate into a
hundred to thousand fold increase in capacity of existing infrastructure, with a
potential savings of billions of dollars. The goal of this research project is
to identify, characterize, and combat signal degradation in fibers, and to use
this information to design the highest capacity multiuser systems. While the
physical properties of fibers have been broadly measured and defined, the proper
design of fiber systems to optimize signal properties for communications has not
been fully considered. A tool has been developed that provides a method of
obtaining an analytical closed-form solution of a nonlinear differential
equation describing the propagation of optical signals through silica fiber. The
result is a Volterra model for the fiber which can be used to both quantify the
signal degradation due to the fiber and to design algorithms and devices to
combat this effect. The model will be used to analyze the performance of optical
TDMA, CDMA, and WDMA networks including realistic distortions such as
intermodulation products, intersymbol interference, and multiple user
interference. This same model will then be used to define signal processing
algorithms and corresponding nonlinear devices to combat signal degradation. The
possibility of creating a communication system that uses the soliton waveform in
multiuser systems will be studied. Solitons are hi ghly desirable in that they
take advantage of the nonlinear fiber effects to cancel pulse dispersion caused
by linear effects. Finally, effects such as nonlinear polarization on coherent
light communication systems will be analyzed using a modification of our
Volterra model. The education portion of this study includes three new courses
for improving the instruction of undergraduates and graduates in optical
communications and multiuser communication at the University of Virginia. Two
courses emphasize development of the optical communication system from the
ground up (without relying on the usual RF analog), followed by a third course
in multiuser communication, tied directly to this and related research. The
primary goal of an educational institution to prepare the new generations for
tomorrow can be accomplished only if the institution responds to the needs of
the current and future students. One important aspect of this goal is to respond
to the increased interest of women in the field of engineering. Following her
hypothesis that women are socialized to find importance in issues of human and
social concern, this researcher will be active in modifying the current methods
of teaching engineering to show the link between technical methodology and the
resulting products and services. Students will be encouraged to work within well
defined groups that echo the work place environment. Being a female in a field
that is in transition from being male dominated carries the responsibility of
being a role model. Female engineering students will be especially encouraged to
participate in a mentoring program instituted to promote success, a sense of
belonging and strong self esteem. World-Wide Web Link:
http://watt.seas.Virginia.EDU/~mb9q/