* 9703120
* CAREER: Probabilistic Knowledge Discovery and Data          Mining:  An Integrated Approach at the Interface of ComputerScience and Statistics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Padhraic Smyth, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2003
* USD 304,379.00

This project involves the integration of ideas from computer science,
mathematics, and statistics, in the context of their application to knowledge
discovery and data mining of very large data sets. The project has two general
research goals. The first involves the development of novel methods for
exploration and identification of structure in multivariate data, with
particular emphasis on clustering and density estimation. The second research
goal is the development of novel methods for modeling sequential structure in
data, in particular the use of graphical models to facilitate the process of
model construction and estimation. The technical approach is based on the
coupling of ideas from modern statistical modeling with computational
techniques. A key feature of this work is the use of large-scale scientific and
engineering data sets as testbeds, including upper-atmosphere spatio-temporal
data records, a large medical data set consisting of heterogeneous data types
for the study of Alzheimer's disease, planetary image data sets and associated
annotations and catalogs of geologic features, and multivariate engineering
sensor data from online system monitoring. The educational component of the
project consists of the development of new courses which emphasize a first-
principles understanding of model-exploration in the context of data analysis,
as well as opportunities for students to participate in inter-disciplinary,
large- scale exploratory data mining projects. This project can have a
significant impact on how large data sets are explored and analyzed across a
wide variety of scientific, medical, and business disciplines.