* 9703591
* Spectral Behavior of Two Classes of Large Dimensional       Random Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Jack Silverstein, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2001
* USD 75,000.00

9703591 Silverstein The principal investigator plans to work on the behavior of
eigenvalues of two classes of random matrices, both of sample covariance type,
where the vector dimension and the sample size are large and on the same order
of magnitude. The sampled vectors making up the first class are independent,
each a linear transformation of a vector containing i.i.d. elements, while the
second class models the result of perturbing a sample covariance (or
correlation) matrix with noise added to each sampled vector. For the latter case
independence is not assumed on the unperturbed samples. Although both classes
have a broad range of applicability, motivation for studying them comes from the
detection problem in array signal processing, when the number of (unknown)
sources, impinging on a bank of sensors in a noise-filled environment, is
sizable. For both classes the empirical distribution function (e.d.f.) of the
eigenvalues (as the dimension approaches infinity) converges to a nonrandom
limit. Using techniques and arguments recently developed to successfully analyze
the convergence of individual eigenvalues of the first class to boundary points
in the limiting support, the principal investigator plans to solve two remaining
open problems concerning this class, namely the rate of convergence of both the
e.d.f. and those individual eigenvalues, and relaxing independence assumptions.
He also intends to study completely the analogous properties of the second class
of matrices, beginning with understanding analytically the limiting e.d.f.,
which is described in terms of an equation satisfied by its Stieltjes transform.
The principal investigator plans to study properties of two classes of random
matrices of high dimension used in modeling multivariate random phenomena. The
motivation stems primarily from the detection problem in array signal
processing, that is, determining the number of sources impinging on a bank of
sensors in the presence of noise. Under certain conditions, when the number of
sources is sizable, known results on one of the classes of random matrices can
be used to reliably estimate the number of sources with the total number of
measurements much smaller than what is needed according to standard multivariate
analysis. The principal investigator intends to study a few remaining questions
pertaining to this class, and to mathematically analyze another class of random
matrices which allows for a broader range of applications.