* 9703312
* CAREER:  A Research, Education, and Technology Transfer     Proposal in Statistical Signal Processing with Emphasis     on Nonlinear System Identification
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Guotong Zhou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2002
* USD 230,000.00

While linear approximations and models possess simplicity and tractability in
analysis, most real life problems entail nonlinear effects. Nonlinear system of
current interest in signal processing and communications are encountered with
satellite links, high-speed telephone channels, power amplifiers, magnetic and
optical recording systems. This research is exploring novel techniques for
identification, performance analysis, and mitigation of nonlinear systems. The
goal is to use state-of-the-art statistical signal processing tools to analyze
long-standing issues in nonlinear modeling and applications to tele-
communications problems. The present approach is taking a fresh look at the
traditional Volterra model and exploiting carefully designed cyclostationary
inputs that result in closed-form kernel expressions with input-output data.
Such solutions will apply to finite memory Volterra models of any order, reduce
computational complexity and noise effects even with relatively short data
records, and allow for analytical performance evaluation using variance
expressions. The investigator plans to simulate and test the resulting
algorithms using real data received from satellite links where amplifiers are
driven to the nonlinear saturation region. She is also studying blind nonlinear
Volterra system identification that relies on single or multi-sensor data only.
The potential of blind nonlinear channel estimation and equalization is of
paramount importance when no training inputs are available, or when new
communicators join a multiport broadcast and transmission cannot be interrupted
for training.