* 9703237
* CAREER:  Gas Phase Cleaning of Semiconductor Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* Anthony Muscat, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/1998
* USD 127,562.00

9703237 Muscat The objective of this CAREER project is to understand how water
and other polar molecules initiate and sustain silicon dioxide etching in the
gas phase using hydrogen fluoride. Oxide etching is an important process in the
fabrication of microelectronic devices and is a paradigm for gas phase
adaptation of the aqueous solutions that are currently used to prepare
semiconductor surfaces between primary processing steps such as plasma etching
and deposition. A mechanism is proposed for gas phase etching of silicon dioxide
in HF/water mixtures to understand how water initiates and sustains etching and
how the strong HF bond is broken. Experiments in both the fast etching regime
where rates are industrially viable and the single layer regime where the
surface and gas phase can be controlled precisely in an ultra high vacuum
apparatus will be studied. Real time Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR)
spectroscopy and mass spectrometry done in situ will be complemented with
ellipsometric and Auger measurements made after etching to examine the
mechanistic details. Specifically, the rate of production and chemical bonding
of surface silanol (Si-OH) groups will be examined in the fast etching regime as
a function of pressure, surface temperature, and the fractional saturation vapor
pressures of HF and a hydroxyl-bearing molecule, such as water, alcohols,
glycols, and glycerol. Precise coverages of HF and a hydroxyl-bearing molecule
will be deposited on an oxide surface in an ultra high vacuum chamber to examine
chemical bonding, clearing of the final oxide layer, and a bifurcation in the
reaction when the dosing order is reversed. %%% The project addresses
fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
technological relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science
knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of microelectronics
materials and devices, in general. An important feature of the program is the
emphasis on education, and on the integration of research and education through
the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant
research area. ***