* 9703853
* Selective Consequences of Natural Hybridization in          Louisiana Irises
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Michael Arnold, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2000
* USD 219,995.00

9703853 Arnold We will test the role of natural selection in the production and
survivorship of hybrid Louisiana irises. Our analyses will include experimental
crosses within and between the species Iris fulva and Iris brevicaulis to
produce various hybrid and parental seeds. These seeds will then be placed into
both greenhouse and natural environments. The germination, survivorship, growth
to maturity and reproductive capacity of the hybrid and parental individuals
will then be monitored and compared. The hybrid plants will be assigned to
specific categories using numerous molecular (i.e., DNA) markers. These analyses
will thus allow an estimate of the fitness of both parentaland hybrid plants.
These estimates can then be used to predict the long-term effects that natural
hybridization between different iris species may have on the genetic diversity
and evolution of this plant species complex. Natural hybridization between
individuals belonging to different genera, species or subspecies has been
recognized as a fundamentally important process in the evolution of many plants.
Indeed, it has been estimated that over half of all flowering plant species
(i.e., Angiosperms) have originated from ancient or more recent hybridization
events. Furthermore, it has recently begun to be appreciated that natural
hybridization and subsequent exchange of genes between the hybridizing groups
can be equally important for animals as well. Our studies of the Louisiana
irises will allow a detailed examination of this fascinating and important
process. In particular, these studies will help define the role of natural
selection in determining the evolutionary consequences of natural hybridization.