* 9703252
* CAREER:  Studies in the Transition Control of Multi-Product Chemical Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1997,10/18/1999
* Karlene Hoo, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/18/1999
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract - Kosanovich - 9703252 The objective this research is the development
of a rigorous theoretical framework that can be used to design an effective
feedback control strategy for multi-product chemical reactors. The motivation is
provided by a global market economy which demands that the manufacture of
multiple grades of a single product be made efficiently using the same equipment
while simultaneously minimizing the production of off-spec material and
maintaining safety and environmental constraints. This project is a fundamental
approach to this problem that starts with modeling and analysis of the multiple
nature of the operations leading to a framework that permits the design of a
hybrid supervisory control strategy. Specifically: (1) local approximation
models will be developed to represent the multiple process operations and
constraints at each operating point, and (2) a dynamic supervisory controller
will be designed to select and to switch into operation, the best controller
from a set of possible controllers, that will provide superior setpoint
tracking. This research will provide new and fundamental insights into the
transition control problem, resulting in a new theoretical framework that
combines multi-resolution modeling and robust controller design with analysis of
stability and performance of the closed-loop system. The expected results will
enhance the education of chemical engineers at the graduate and undergraduate
levels. Examples of this include: the development of numerical programs in the
form of algorithms to introduce multi-resolution model identification; the
inclusion of transition control to the existing process control course; the
development of a laboratory experiment to provide active experimentation and
concrete experience of the proposed concepts; the collaboration with industry
through co-operative externship programs to expose students to multi-product
processes; and the use of workshops and thesis projects with industrial students
to facilitate technology transfer.