* 9703930
* Acquisition of a Dynamic Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer for Materials Research
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Edward Kramer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* None
* 07/31/1999
* USD 386,445.00

9703930 Kramer This award provides support for the acquisition of a dynamic
secondary ion mass spectrometer (SIMS) based on a quadrupole mass analyzer for
materials research. It will be installed in the Electron Microscope and
Microanalytical Facility of the University of California Santa Barbara (UCSB)
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) and will be open to
use by all qualified users at UCSB and the nationwide MRSEC system. The
instrument selected is optimized for depth profiling insulating samples such as
polymers and ceramics but will also serve the most of the depth profiling needs
for semiconductors. It is equipped with a rotation attachment, for improving
depth resolution at interfaces well below the surface, as well as a liquid
nitrogen cooled sample stage accessory, which will make it possible to depth
profile polymers that are molten at room temperature. In addition to the
standard duoplasmatron ion source (for oxygen or argon ions), a cesium ion
source will be acquired. While an O2+ or AR+ beam is ideal for polymer depth
profiling, a Cs+ beam is optimum for depth profiling many elements in
semiconductors. The acquisition of this instrument will provide important new
capabilities for investigating phase separation in polymer thin films, short
range diffusion in ordered block copolymer systems, the grafting of polymer
chains to polymer/polymer interfaces by chemical reaction, the structure of
surfaces of semifluorinated side group block copolymer surfaces that resist
reconstruction in water and of antifouling coatings made of copolymer consisting
of water soluble blocks and non-water soluble glassy blocks and for monitoring
the formation of molecular bridges between surfaces in hot melt adhesives. %%%
While this instrument will have an exceptional impact on research on polymer
surfaces and interfaces, it will also be of great value to researchers
investigating impurity levels in epitaxial thin films of oxides and diffusion i
n ceramics. Moreover the dynamic SIMS will enable much improved characterization
of nitrides grown by both metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) and
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), as well as multiple quantum well structures in
these systems for optoelectronic devices. SIMS depth profiling of Mn in Mn ion
implanted GaAs magnetic semiconductors will provide crucial information on the
nanostructure of these exciting materials. SIMS determinations will provide key
information on vertical cavity semiconductor laser structure grown by MBE, on
non-stoichiometry in compound semiconductor layers and on oxide distribution in
AlAs layers. In addition the dynamic SIMS capability will provide fundamental
understanding of the non-equilibrium diffusion, trapping, and activation of
impurities during silicon processing. The high interest shown in this instrument
by materials researchers at UCSB and elsewhere is a strong indication that it
will be fully utilized to do exciting materials science. ***