* 9703180
* CAREER:  Guiding Computer Systems Research, Development, andEducation with Real Applicatioms and Advanced Tools
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2002
* Rudolf Eigenmann, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Yuan-Chieh Chow
* 04/30/2002
* USD 204,992.00

Characterizing realistic high-performance computer applications with existing,
advanced tools will be a first thrust in this project. An information repository
will be created on the Web, documenting properties of application programs,
computer architectures, and their interrelations. A second project part will
improve the integration of tools and their user interaction. Compilers will be
enhanced to make available to the users the information gathered from their
source programs. Performance analysis tools will be integrated with compilation
tools and developed to the point where they can interpret performance and
present it to the user at several abstraction levels. The new tools will be made
available on the Web, serving as a "Remote Parallel Programming Lab". Third,
advanced capabilities of optimization and performance analysis tools will be
developed. Compilers will be enhanced to increase their understanding of
subscripted subscript patterns, found in many irregular applications.
Performance analysis tools will be enhanced to do "performance forecasting",
that is, predict the performance of future computer architectures running future
applications. New course material will be developed based on the results of
these projects. This material will be brought into the existing course framework
of parallel programming, advanced optimizers, and object- oriented programming
at Purdue/ECE.***