* 9703863
* Mathematical Sciences: Structured Deformations and the      Microgeometry of Continua
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* David Owen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 78,000.00

9703863 Owen The proposed research is part of an ongoing project to incorporate
into continuum mechanics in a systematic manner the effects of geometrical
changes at small length scales. The approach employed here differs from many
others, in that it enlarges from the outset the collection of deformations that
a body can undergo to include non-classical "structured deformations." The
present, "front-end" approach provides flexibility in modelling and gives simple
and direct predictions of important phenomena such as yielding, hysteresis, and
dissipation for a variety of microstructures. The key mathematical idea employed
is that the limit of a sequence of derivatives of functions may differ from the
derivative of the limit of the sequence of func- tions. The difference between
these two quantities gives a concrete measure of the amount of deformation due
to "disarrangements" at small length scales. Existing theories of crystalline
solids, liquid crystals, polycrystalline metals, and granular materials
introduce measures of such deformations via "internal variables" or "directors",
e.g., plastic deformation, molecular orientation, or void fraction. Although
these variables have natural physical interpretations, in standard approaches
they must be accepted as primitive objects within a theory; for structured
deformations, counterparts of these variables can be calculated directly as
limits of averages of geometrical changes at the microlevel. The proposed
research will provide precise definitions and useful formulas for kinematical
quantitities such as "velocity and stretching due to slip" and "velocity and
stretching without slip", will achieve new refinements of general balance laws
and dissipation inequalities, and will obtain parallel refinements of specific
constitutive relations that distinguish one material body from another. A
principal challenge faced by applied mathematicians who model complex phenomena
such as the bending of a metal bar, t he appearance of contrasting optical
fields on a liquid crystal display, and the flow of sand through a hopper is
that of incorporating into the mathematical equations the influence of the
microscopic structure of each substance. Considerable success has been achieved
in individual cases of technological importance, but there is lacking a clear
and useful language for systematically including microstructure. As a result,
shifting, say, from studies of deformations in a bar to studies of sand flowing
through a hopper requires starting nearly from the beginning of the modelling
process. The proposed research is part of an ongoing program to provide a new,
relatively simple mathematical language that will permit a more efficient and
economical procedure for modelling these and other phenomena. The initial
successes of this program help to provide simple and useful answeres to
questions such as why a paper clip springs back to a complex, curved shape when
removed from a stack of papers and does not spring back to the simple, straight
shape that it may have assumed early in its manufacture. The proposed research
will continue the quest for a more unified and efficient approach toward
understanding and predicting complex phenomena based on knowledge of
microstructure.