* 9703953
* CPMSA -- Gateway to the 21st Century:  Achieving Excellence in Mathematics and Science
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Deborah Jewell-Sherman, Richmond Public Schools
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/2002
* USD 3,714,714.00

PI: Smith, Searetha City Demographics The City of Richmond, encompassing 62.5
square miles, is the nucleus of a metropolitan area of approximately 865,000
people. The city, a blend of the old and historic with the new and modern, is
the corporate headquarters for nine Fortune 500 firms, a sophisticated arts and
cultural community, public and private institutions of higher education, and a
strong sense of community volunteerism. Richmond is considered to be at the "hub
of a learning community" where opportunities for mathematics, science, and
technological development abound. There are six institutions of higher learning
located in the Metro Richmond area, along with the Mathematics and Science
Center (MSC), the oldest example of a regional partnership. The MSC is a sphere
of discovery of approaches, abilities and interests that inspire lifelong
learning or a career choice. "Alumni" include astronomers, physicists, pilots,
and teachers, many of whom return to teach in Center programs. On a less
positive note, Richmond has the highest population in the state of youth living
in poverty (30 percent live in households receiving Aid to Families with
Dependent Children). This is four times higher than the state average, over
twice as high as any other urban area in the state. The percentage of Richmond's
youth under 17 in single parent households (43.2%) is more than twice as high as
the state average, and higher than any other urban area in the state.
Approximately 13 percent of youth ages 16 to 19 are not enrolled in school. The
higher skill levels required by many of the jobs available in Richmond, and a
dependence on public transportation by residents, have contributed to an
unemployment rate which is twice that of the surrounding counties. School System
Demographics During the Summer of 1996, Richmond City Public Schools completed
Phase I of its curriculum revision in the areas of mathematics and science.
Teams of teachers completed a framework that is aligned to Virginia's Standards
of Learning for Mathematics, Science, and Technology. Mathematics Curriculum The
elementary mathematics curriculum focuses on Number and Number Sense;
Computation and Estimation; Measurement; Geometry; Probability and Statistics;
and Patterns, Functions and Algebra. Middle school curricula extend the math
strands and students take pre-algebra and algebra at the 7th or 8th grade level.
High school courses include Algebra 1, Algebra 11, Geometry, College Algebra &
Trigonometry, AP Calculus, and SAT Mathematics. Other courses offered presently
include Basic Algebra, Geometry, and Consumer Mathematics. Science Curriculum
The science curriculum focuses on Scientific Investigation; Force; Motion and
Energy; Matter; Life Processes; Earth/Space Systems; and Cycles and Change.
Middle school curricula extend the science strands and students take General
Science, Life Science and Physical Science as an integrated course. High School
courses included Biology, Chemistry, Earth Science, Biochemistry, AP Physics and
AP Chemistry.