* 9703278
* CAREER: Multi-Rate Model-Based Control of Nonlinear  Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2002
* Masoud Soroush, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2002
* USD 312,500.00

Abstract CTS-9703278 The universal drive for more consistent attainment of high
product quality, more efficient use of energy, and tighter safety and
environmental regulations, has imposed far stricter demands on the control
system than can be met by linear control alone. The abundance of nonlinear
processes in the chemical/petrochemical and biochemical industries, the
inadequacy of linear control and state estimation for nonlinear processes, the
market pressure for operation of the processes at their maximum capacity where
optimum lies, and the multi-rate/delayed nature of many key process
measurements, are the motivations for the development of controller and state
estimators that can effectively deal with these process characteristics. The
research component of this project concerns multi-rate nonlinear control and
state estimation with real-time application to industrial and pilot-scale
processes. The specific research objectives are: (i) to solve directly the
fundamental problems of constraint handling and integral windup in discrete-time
input-output (IO) linearizing control, via a model predictive control
formulation of IO linearization, and to derive conditions for closed-loop
stability in the presence of active input constraints; (ii) to study the
fundamental problem of nonlinear state estimation from multi-rate, delayed
measurements with guaranteed asymptotically stable estimator error dynamics;
(iii) to develop a general and practical method of multi-rate nonlinear control
within the framework of IO linearization; and (iv) to implement in real-time,
the developed methods of multi-rate control and state estimation on an
industrial polymerization reactor and a pilot-scale biochemical reactor. The
real-time implementation on the polymerization reactor will be carried out in
collaboration with the E. I. duPont deNemours Company. The instructional
activities will include laboratory development, supervising high-school and
undergraduate students to participate in the resear ch, and outreach activities
for recruitment and professional awareness at Drexel. In addition, the PI plans
to focus on two activities, formulation of sets of open-ended industrial process
control problems (each to be assigned in undergraduate or graduate process
control courses as projects), and the development of interactive, media-rich
computer-aided instructional modules for the Process Control and Process
Modeling courses.