* 9703123
* Discovering the Underlying Mechanism of Snow Crystal Growth and Bringing Modern Laboratory Learning to the Classroom
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Benjamin Herman, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 08/31/1999
* USD 122,243.00

Nelson/Abstract 9703123 The goals of this project are: 1) to discover the
physical causes of snow crystal shape by the measurement of key surface
parameters used in crystal growth models, and 2) to improve instruction in
physical meteorology by introducing experiments into a required
undergraduate/graduate lecture course. A new method of controlled ice crystal
growth that was successfully developed to measure critical supersaturations for
vapor growth on both basal and prism faces of ice above -16 degrees Celsius. The
improvements are need to extend the range of conditions measured, but will also
increase control over the crystal environment. This method can be used for
related fundamental and applied studies in cloud physics with little or no
modification. Five to six research quality experiments will be added to our
existing physical meteorology course for seniors and first-year graduate
students. Each student would perform approximately 3 experiments per semester.
Experiments would be 2 hours long or more and treated like a homework
assignment. The experiments will be chosen to complement the lectures and
faculty research projects and therefore can be used for additional undergraduate
research with the appropriate professor when the equipment is available. For
example; a simplified version of our ice crystal growth apparatus could be used
both for a laboratory exercise to illustrate crystal growth and the different
snow crystal shapes, and for an undergraduate research project to measure the
effect of electric fields on the critical supersaturations for vapor growth of
ice.