* 9703267
* CAREER:  Structure, Defects, and Chemistry of Transition    Metal Oxide Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Ulrike Diebold, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol A. Haney
* 06/30/2001
* USD 243,500.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project,
supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, is the
characterization of the surface chemistry, structure, and defects of transition
metal oxide surfaces that have broad scientific and technological application.
Professor Diebold and her undergraduate and graduate students at Tulane
University will use a range of surface characterization techniques in this work
including scanning tunneling microscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, ion
scattering spectroscopy, and thermal desorption spectroscopy. The aim of this
CAREER research project is to probe the formation of defects and the reactivity
of these oxide surfaces at the atomic level to establish a foundation for
understanding the chemistry that occurs at these surfaces. Educational thrusts
beyond involvement of students in this research involve the development of a new
surface science course to complement the laboratory experience and an outreach
and mentoring program centered around the establishment of a mobile scanning
tunneling microscopy laboratory. Transition metal oxide surfaces are used in the
fabrication of gas sensors, catalysts, coatings for corrosion protection, and
environmental degradation systems. Professor Diebold and her students at Tulane
University will apply several surface spectroscopic methods that provide atomic
scale spatial resolution to the study of the chemistry, structure, and defects
of transition metal oxide surfaces with support of this CAREER research project.
The chemistry that occurs at the surfaces of these oxides is highly dependent on
the structures that exist there. Knowledge of how these structures control these
chemical reactions will be produced by this work. This hands-on experimental
program will have a positive educational impact on the undergraduate and
graduate students working on this project. Portable scanning tunneling
microscopy experiments and other surface science experiments will be developed
to bring the excitement of this work to high school students in the New Orleans
and Mississippi Delta areas. This activity will raise these students' awareness
of the excitement that can be experienced in a scientific career.