* 9703345
* CAREER:  Atomic Force Microscopy Studies of Transition Metal Chalcogenide Deposition Using Translationally Hot Atoms
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1997,02/29/2004
* Eileen Spain, Occidental College
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 02/29/2004
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, aims to understand the growth and
nucleation of thin films prepared by laser induced vaporization by back
illumination. Professor Spain and her undergraduate students at Occidental
College will prepare thin films of transition metal and transition metal
chalcogenides on silicon and ordered organic films anchored to a substrate.
These systems should yield unique and potentially useful microstructures at the
interface between these inorganic and organic phases. Students in this CAREER
research project will also use atomic force microscopy to characterize these
systems. Another aspect of the educational thrust of this project will be the
radical reorganization of a combined inorganic-physical chemistry laboratory
course that emphasizes the uses of lasers in science. The fabrication of
reliable semiconductor materials of every decreasing dimension requires improved
understanding and control of the synthesis of thin films on substrates. This
CAREER research project focusses on the synthesis and characterization of thin
films grown on silica and organic substrates. These films will be grown using
laser vaporization techniques and characterized by atomic force microscopy.
Professor Spain's undergraduate students will gain direct experience in each of
the aspects of this research as well as be exposed to new instructional
materials in lecture and laboratory formats that emphasize the use of lasers.
High school students will also be afforded opportunities to work in this new
laser laboratory facility. Advising and mentoring of all of these students
regarding opportunities in science are important parts of the educational
thrusts of this CAREER proposal.