* 9703265
* CAREER: Image Metrics for Computer Graphics
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Greg Turk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 02/28/2001
* USD 205,000.00

This project will investigate the use of perceptually-motivated image metrics
across a range of important applications in computer graphics. A wide variety of
tasks in computer graphics assume some measure of similarity in appearance
between two images. Such tasks include level-of-detail generation, raster font
design, cartographic element placement, texture synthesis and shape
transformation. Too often the metrics used in such work are poor at reflecting
what a human would visually perceive for the given task. This project will re-
visit several areas within computer graphics and will apply visually-based
metrics to a number of applications with the goal of producing better images.
Replacing the techniques that are used in existing applications with
perceptually-based measures of image similarity has the potential to improve the
results in a wide range of important applications. Applications that can benefit
from the use of image metrics include: - Simulators for pilot and driver
training. - Computer aided design of mechanical parts. - Automated map-making. -
Raster font creation. - Interactive walkthroughs of large building interiors for
architectural review - Comparison between "model" organs and the MRI or CT data
of a medical patient - Vector and tensor field visualization for applications
such as weather prediction and stress/strain simulations of mechanical and
architectural structures. This project will investigate using techniques from
image processing and computer vision to help define image metrics for particular
tasks. Some of the properties that these metrics may incorporate are:
sensitivity to edge strength and orientation, frequency responses at a number of
scales, relative rather than absolute measures of intensity and color within an
image, and the masking effects that noise has on perception. Once a metric is
defined, an optimization procedure will be used to minimize the differences
between the generated image or geom etry and the target object. The choice of
optimization technique will depend on the application and on the form of the
image metric. Computationally expensive optimization methods may be acceptable
for off-line tasks. Where speed is essential, heuristics may be suggested by
observations of the optimization routine while it is executing. The educational
goals of this project are to introduce both undergraduate and graduate students
to computer science research, to expose the community outside of academia to
important applications of computer graphics, and to disseminate the programs,
libraries and datasets that are developed by this project to other researchers
worldwide. Students will be involved in research both through the computer
graphics classes that are being developed and by working within a research
group. ***