* 9703864
* Moment Frame Connections Revisited: A Fundamental Fracture  Mechanics Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1998,07/31/2000
* Wai-Fah Chen, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 07/31/2000
* USD 196,839.00

9703864 Chen The 6.8 magnitude earthquake that shook California's San Fernando
Valley on January 17th in 1994, did not cause the collapse of any steel
structures but connections, confidently designed and constructed in the past
with traditional code simplifications and common site-welding techniques, were
discovered no to meet our expectations. This project will study the performance
of structures depends on the performance of connections. This will be
accomplished by analyzing the fracture strength and toughness of the moment
connection. The load effect as determined by a structure's global response, and
its performance as controlled by local material properties and geometric
configuration will be considered. The interaction and relative importance of
horizontal and vertical seismic forces will be evaluated. The effect of
composite action (concrete floor-slab on steel girder) and panel zone
deformation will be included. Locally, a detailed nonlinear finite element model
will provide the stress state information needed to perform a fracture analysis.
The fracture strength of the moment connection will consider the effect of
reduced toughness in the heat treated region; line and semi-elliptic cracks will
be used to simulate weld flaws; stress intensity factors at these locations will
quantify the effect these weaknesses have on the ultimate strength of the joint.
It has been recognized that the best means to describe the strength performance
of structural members, must now be followed by a similar "back to the basics"
approach to connection design. Fracture mechanics is proposed to provide that
foundation: empirical relationships based upon theoretical analyses will be
presented to estimate the ultimate strength resistance of moment connections to
seismic loads and brittle fracture ***