* 9703906
* GOALI:  Atomic Correlations in Disordered Materials Observed using Variable Coherence Transmission Electron Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Michael Treacy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2002
* USD 221,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9703906 Gibson This GOALI research project, which is
supported in part by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) of the MPS
Directorate, intends to develop a quantitative technique using the TEM to
characterize network structure in amorphous and disordered materials. Although
TEM has been highly successful in the study of defects in crystalline materials,
it has been less useful thus far in characterizing amorphous materials. The
present project is based on the premise that the high resolution TEM image,
nonetheless, contains a wealth of information about the microstructure in
disordered materials. An important aspect of the proposed new technique, which
will be pursued experimentally and theoretically, is the use of the three-body
correlation function to give new insight into medium range order. Theoretical
methods for extracting higher-order correlation functions directly from
experiment will be explored. Materials to be studied include amorphous
semiconductors, gate dielectrics, and ferroelectrics. This work will be carried
out collaboratively by two PI's , one from a university, one from an industrial
lab, and by a jointly supervised graduate student who will benefit from a
significant exposure to industrial research. %%% This GOALI research project,
which is supported in part by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA)
of the MPS Directorate, will be carried out by a team of materials scientists,
both experts in use of the Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM), one at a
research university, and the other at a leading industrial research laboratory.
An excellent graduate student will benefit from joint supervision by the two
PI's, and in the process of doing a significant portion of his/her thesis
research at the industrial laboratory, will gain valuable experience and
contacts in industry. The project is designed to extend the usefulness of the
TEM in assessing the degree of disorder present in real materials, including
gate oxides which are central in semiconductor transistor devices. Knowledge of
the degree of disorder in a given material can be useful in predicting its
performance in a given application. The outcomes of the project are expected to
include new knowledge concerning the use of the TEM, and an excellent training
experience with significant industrial exposure, for a graduate student. ***