* 9703282
* CAREER:  Application of Sloan Digital Sky Survey Data to    Gravitational Lensing Studies and the Enhancement of Science Education
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2003
* Timothy McKay, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Phelps
* 06/30/2003
* USD 510,241.00

Abstract - McKay A large amount of recent theoretical and experimental work has
shown that gravitational lensing effects afford our best opportunity to directly
measure the abundance and distribution of total mass in the universe. Recent
work has extended the measurement of mass distributions from the strong lensing
regime of multiple quasar images and giant arcs to the weaker lensing effects
seen in the periphery of massive clusters of galaxies. With the unique wide
field imaging system of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), it will be possible
to extend such lensing studies to very wide fields, and study density variations
in the universe independent of the bias between luminous and dark matter. The
weak lensing technique is the only way to directly probe large scale structures
in the mass density of the universe, and the SDSS offers the only opportunity to
do this over a large fraction of the sky. These methods will be used to measure
the surface density of matter over one fourth of the sky, to probe the evolution
of this density field using photometric and spectroscopic redshifts, to measure
directly the bias between the observed local distribution of luminous matter and
the underlying mass distribution, and to measure the lensing mass of nearby
clusters like the Coma cluster. This is a difficult program, requiring careful
control of systematic errors, but the SDSS is exceedingly well designed to meet
these challenges. A complementary program would search for quasar lenses within
the SDSS data for use in related studies. Data generated by the SDSS will be
used both for traditional graduate and undergraduate research, and also as a
tool for bringing current research into the introductory classroom. Advanced
undergraduate students will be involved in designing a set of tools, using the
SDSS data, to illustrate important scientific principles. These tools will be
used in a "hands-on" cosmology class for entering non-science majors, in large
standard intro ductory physics classes, and will be distributed through existing
teacher outreach programs. There will be continued efforts to improve the
quality of standard undergraduate teaching at the University of Michigan, and to
continue SDSS public information programs and a successful public lecture
series. This project is a five year program that will enable a faculty member at
the University of Michigan to develop further as an astrophysics researcher and
an educator. The grant will support the faculty member, a graduate student, and
a number of undergraduates in their analysis of gravitational lensing effects in
data to be obtained by the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. There is also support to
use the SDSS data in the development of new educational materials for use in a
variety of classroom situations.