* 9703036
* "CAREER: Excavating the Dynamical Fossil Record in Elliptical Galaxies: New Directions for Southeast Ohio"
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Thomas Statler, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* Kathleen D. Eastwood
* 08/31/2003
* USD 369,987.00

Abstract - Statler A four-year effort in research and educational activities in
the newly established astrophysics group in the Physics and Astronomy Department
at Ohio University (OU) will be carried out. Particular emphasis will be placed
on the new opportunities that will be made available to graduate and
undergraduate students and to K-12 students and teachers in the region around
OU. The focus of the research component is the origin of elliptical galaxies.
Whether they formed through late major mergers of spiral galaxies, by early
multiple mergers of many small protogalactic pieces, or by a combination of
processes is unclear. The evidence for or against any formation scenario is
ambiguous because it is not yet understood what observable dynamical properties
of the galaxies are necessary and unique consequences of the possible
mechanisms. But the distribution of stars (and, where present, gas) in position
and in velocity make up a "fossil record" of the structural layers laid down in
the galaxy over time. A variety of activities in observation, modeling, and
numerical simulation are described with the intent of reading and interpreting
this record. Among these are a groundbased observational program to map the
stellar kinematic fields of nearby ellipticals at unprecedented depth, spatial
resolution, and accuracy; a modeling program to determine the intrinsic shape
distribution; numerical simulations to identify the stellar dynamical
configurations implied by various formation processes and to study the origins
of kinematically distinct cores; searches for hidden disks or other
kinematically distinct components; and spectroscopic and photometric Hubble
Space Telescope studies of ellipticals at moderate and high redshift. The
educational component comprises graduate and undergraduate research, major
revisions to the undergraduate astronomy curriculum at OU, and two significant
K-12 outreach initiatives. A school visitation program will be carried out tha t
will bring OU scientists into classrooms in the region to foster science
involvement and science literacy. Visits will be coordinated with teachers to
blend the presentation into the existing lesson plans; supplemental materials
for teachers will be developed to assist in class preparation. A summer research
internship program that will bring K-12 science teachers to OU and involve them
actively in research will be initiated. One teacher applicant per summer, for
four summers, will be adopted as a junior member of one of the Physics and
Astronomy Department's research groups. Firsthand experience with real science
will contribute to better science teaching in K-12 classrooms.