* 9703724
* The Structure of Expanding Rational Maps as Holomorphic     Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,11/24/1998
* Kevin Pilgrim, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diamond
* 11/24/1998
* USD 73,357.00

The structure of expanding, or hyperbolic, rational maps as holomorphic
dynamical systems on the Riemann sphere will be investigated. The approach is
motivated by the analogy between the theories of rational maps and Kleinian
groups developed by McMullen and Sullivan. To an expanding, (equivalently,
geometrically finite without cusps) torsion-free Kleinian group one may
associate a topological object-the quotient compact three-manifold obtained by
quotienting hyperbolic space together with the domain of discontinuity on the
Riemann sphere at infinity by the action of the group. To an expanding rational
map one may also associate a topological object-the map viewed as a branched
covering of the sphere to itself, up to a homotopy-theoretic form of
equivalence. A characterization of those branched coverings which are equivalent
to an expanding rational map is known. However, in contrast to the case of
Kleinian groups, little is known in general about how combinatorial properties
of these branched coverings are reflected in the geometry and dynamics of the
corresponding rational maps and in their parameter spaces. Motivated by the role
played by the theory of incompressible surfaces in the study of hyperbolic
3-manifolds, the combinatorics of branched coverings will studied. This analysis
will be used to develop general combination and decomposition theories for
ratimnal maps and general characterizations of adjacencies and compactness
properties of hyperbolic components in parameter spaces of rational maps. A
dynamical system is a mathematical model now widely used in many disciplines to
describe biological, physical, and social phenomena. The main theme in the
subject is that even a very simple model can yield extremely complicated
behavior. Therefore one often simplifies the model first to make the problem
tractable. Next, one needs tools to attack these problems. Finally, one looks
for a reduction of the problem to a combinatorial one, i.e., one which, in
principle, a computer can sol ve. This project concerns reducing the dynamics of
one-dimensional holomorphic functions (which are the simplest dynamical systems
to which the powerful tools of complex analysis apply) to a combinatorial
problem. This problem, when formulated correctly, looks remarkably similar to
one in a different field whose solution is already known. The main goal of this
project is to take these known results and, reasoning by analogy, formulate and
prove new results in holomorphic dynamics.