* 9703352
* CAREER:  Sensor Management in Intelligent Motion            Control Systems and Learning About Intelligent Machines     Using a Problem Based Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2003
* Nicola Ferrier, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Junku Yuh
* 05/31/2003
* USD 499,960.00

This research explores sensor management in intelligent motion control systems
with the main objective of describing and evaluating a mathematical model of
what it means to pay attention to a sensor. A system model and control topology
that reflects properties of the hardware, such as computation delays and
communication limitations, is used. The amount of attention devoted to a device
can be interpretated through the selection of feedback gains and the degree of
communication bus access allocated to the device. Control synthesis with this
model will address questions such as which sensors should be used for a task,
what degree of coordination between devices is required, and is the system
stable? The control design methodology will be applied to robotic applications.
Successful completion of this research will enable designers of complex robotic
systems to utilize a formal procedure in selecting sensors and in determining
the required, or sufficient, coordination between motor subsystems, while still
ensuring system stability. The other objective of this project is to develop
curriculum in the area of intelligent machines, providing mechanical engineers
with interdisciplinary skills and improving students' engineering problem
solving skills. Both goals will be addressed through a hands-on undergraduate
course in Robotics using a problem based learning (PBL) teaching methodology.
Using PBL, students identify the theory required to solve a problem, learn the
theory, and apply it. Thus students explore the relevant subjects as they see
the need for them. A robotics course, with material from multiple disciplines,
is suited to this approach. A graduate level Intelligent Systems course will
also be developed.