* 9703714
* Integration of Endoscopic Imaging with Interactive,         Image-Guided Surgery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Robert Galloway, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 168,133.00

9703714 Galloway The objective of this research is the development of a process
for merging Interactive, Image-Guided Surgery (IIGS) with Minimally Invasive
Surgery (MIS). The IIGS is the display of present surgical position and
trajectory on preoperatively obtained tomographic images. The MIS is a technique
by which surgical exposures and damage to healthy tissues are reduced by the use
of endoscopes to allow surgical visualization through small openings in the
skin. These two techniques are complementary, MIS presents high magnification,
real-time imaging at the cost of a small depth of field and surface-only
imaging, while IIGS provides a wide field of view with three-dimensional
information but uses images which do not reflect anatomic changes since their
acquisition. By using the proposed merging process, both the tomographic
information and the video input will appear on the same computer screen allowing
the surgeon to use each imaging modality for its strength and mitigating the
disadvantages of each. The combination of these techniques would be accomplished
in three steps: (1) the creation of a device which allows the determination of
the visualization geometry of the endoscope and the tracking of that geometry in
three-dimensional physical space, (2) the design, programming and testing of
software to allow the display of high throughout image formation, and (3) the
development of alternatives to conventional IIGS display modes to allow
flexibility depending on the nature of the surgical situation. This process
could result in improved outcomes as measured by more complete resections and
reduced damage to healthy tissue. ***