* 9703550
* Domain Growth in PMN-type Relaxor Ferroelectric Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Peter Davies, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 08/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9703550 Davies Preliminary experiments that have been conducted on a member of
the PMN-relaxor family, PMT Pb(Mg1/3Ta2/3)03 indicate that the annealing
temperatures utilized in all the previous attempts to promote domain growth lie
in a range where the perovskite is kinetically inert. By taking special
precautions that inhibit the volatilization of PbO, higher temperature heat
treatments reveal that the size of the domains and degree of cation ordering can
be increased by more than an order of magnitude. These observations
unambiguously show that the currently accepted "space charge" models for the PMN
relaxors are invalid. In this model the fine-scale inhomogeneities in the
arrangements of the metal cations in the "B-sites" of the perovskite structure
are interpreted in terms of the formation of negatively charged ordered nano-
domains dispersed in a positively charged disordered matrix. The primary
experimental support for this interpretation comes from the apparent absence of
any growth of the domains or change in the degree of ordering with extended
thermal treatment. This project will explore several new avenues of research
that emanate from these results and focuses on the structure and properties of
selected niobate and tantalate relaxor systems. The goals of these studies are:
(1) to establish how the structural state of PMN-type relaxors respond to
different high temperature treatments; (2) to develop new crystal chemical
models for the cation ordering that are consistent with these observations; (3)
to characterize how the new variable of degree of order and domain size affects
the dielectric response of the PMN relaxers and; (4) to exploit these models to
develop new relaxor ceramics. %%% Since their discovery over 35 years ago,
relaxor ferroelectrics have attracted widespread interest for applications in
multi-layer capacitors, transducers, electro-optic devices, and thin film
memories. It is now well known that the dielectric properties of relaxor systems
are intimately linked to the localized disorder in their crystal structures.
However, a full understanding of the origins of the structural inhomogeneities
and their relationship to the physics of the relaxor response does not yet
exist. This is particularly true for the lead-based PMN (lead-magnesium-niobium
oxide) complex perovskite relaxors, the most well known and widely studied
family of relaxors, which are the focus of this exploratory study. The extensive
studies that have been conducted on the PMN systems have led to the
establishment and acceptance of one model as a basis for explaining their
structures and properties. Preliminary work by the Principal Investigator has
shown that this model may not be correct. The project will perform experiments
to confirm the PI's model that will then be used to develop new relaxor
materials. ***