* 9703595
* Japan JSPS Program:  Quantum Integrability and Strong-Weak  Coupling Quality of the Affine Toda Field Theories
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1997,09/30/1998
* ANDREW BORDNER, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/1998
* USD 3,000.00

Bordner 9703595 This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Andrew J. Bordner at the
Yukawa Institute for Theoretical Physics, Kyoto, Japan. Dr. Bordner will work
with Dr. Ryu Sasaki, professor, on a research project entitled, "Quantum
Integrability and Strong-Weak Coupling Duality of the Affine- Toda Field
Theories." The proposed research will examine the equivalence involved in a
quantum field theory that displays characteristics of strong interactions
between fundamental particles, yet, at the same time, indicates weak mutual
interactions. This equivalence would be useful in understanding how to calculate
physical quantities in a strongly coupled theory, such as that describing
nuclear forces. The proposed research will examine a particular class of
theories designated "Affine-Toda field", the rationale being that they are
hypothesized to exhibit not only strong-weak coupling equivalence, but are also
hypothesized to allow the calculation of all physical quantities without any
initial approximation methods. In the past, physical quantities have been
calculated only in theories with a weak coupling, and then only using
approximation methods. This solvability has led to a postulated form for the
S-matrix, a concept that describes the scattering of an arbitrary number of
particles as a result of coupling. The research will provide a valuable test of
how different quantum field theories are in fact different formulations of the
same theory, a finding that may eventually provide a solution for how to predict
properties of nucleons from a fundamental theory of quarks. ***