* 9703494
* Community Fissioning and a Resettlement:  A Study of the    Impacts of a Mennonite Migration
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Anne Parrish, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/1999
* USD 20,000.00

This project is one of a set of special awards to junior investigators, of small
amounts of money to allow them to initiative a new research agenda. The study
will involve twelve months of ethnographic research among Mennonite farmers
moving from diverse eastern locations (mainly Pennsylvania) into Wisconsin and
buying farms from local families who have given up on the struggle to make a
living from agriculture. The PI will conduct participant observation among
farming households, both Mennonite immigrants and local Wisconsin families who
are selling out. The point of the study is to explain why Wisconsin (non-
Mennonite) families give up farming while Mennonite families eagerly purchase
the same farms and make a go of it while facing the same markets. The role of
family labor in the presumed relative success of the Mennonites will be studied
by recording basic input and output data. The role of community organizations
and resources in the success and failure of family farms will be studied by
consulting local records (census records, commodity, livestock, cooperative and
extension reports) and through participant observation. The study will advance
our understanding of the role of local culture or ethnic background in economic
life, at the same time that it will illuminate our understanding the factors
impacting on the success and failure of family farms, a topic of great concern
in the US since Jeffersonian times.